Edited by
Valerie Masson-Delmotte
Co-Chair Working Group I

Panmao Zhai
Co-Chair Working Group I

Hans-Otto Portner 
Co-Chair Working Group II

Debra Roberts
Co-Chair Working Group II

Jim Skea
Co-Chair Working Group III

Priyadarshi R. Shukla
Co-Chair Working Group III

Anna Pirani
Head of WGI TSU

Wilfran Moufouma-Okia
Head of Science

Clotilde Pean
Head of Operations

Roz Pidcock
Head of Communication

Sarah Connors
Science Officer

J. B. Robin Matthews
Science Officer

Yang Chen
Science Officer

Xiao Zhou
Science Assistant

Melissa I. Gomis
Graphics Officer

Elisabeth Lonnoy
Project Assistant

Tom Maycock
Science Editor

Melinda Tignor
Head of WGII TSU

Working Group I Technical Support Unit

Tim Waterfield
IT Officer

Please use the following reference to the whole report:
IPCC, 2018: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and
related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change,
sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla,
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

(c) 2019 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
ISBN

The designations employed and the presentation of material on maps do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries.
Front cover layout: Nigel Hawtin
Front cover artwork: Time to Choose by Alisa Singer - www.environmentalgraphiti.org - (c) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
The artwork was inspired by a graphic from the SPM (Figure SPM.1).

ii

Foreword
and Preface

Foreword

Foreword
Foreword

This IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C was formally approved by the world's governments in 2018
- the year of IPCC's 30th anniversary celebrations.

During its three decades of existence, the IPCC has shed light on climate change, contributing to the understanding
of its causes and consequences and the options for risk management through adaptation and mitigation. In
these three decades, global warming has continued unabated and we have witnessed an acceleration in sealevel rise. Emissions of greenhouse gases due to human activities, the root cause of global warming, continue
to increase, year after year.

Five years ago, the IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report provided the scientific input into the Paris Agreement, which
aims to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by holding the increase in the global
average temperature to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature
increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels.

Many countries considered that a level of global warming close to 2C would not be safe and, at that time, there
was only limited knowledge about the implications of a level of 1.5C of warming for climate-related risks and
in terms of the scale of mitigation ambition and its feasibility. Parties to the Paris Agreement therefore invited
the IPCC to assess the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and the related emissions
pathways that would achieve this enhanced global ambition.

At the start of the Sixth Assessment cycle, governments, in a plenary IPCC session, decided to prepare three
special reports, including this one, and expanded the scope of this special report by framing the assessment in
the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty.

Sustainable development goals provide a new framework to consider climate action within the multiple
dimensions of sustainability. This report is innovative in multiple ways. It shows the importance of integration
across the traditional IPCC working groups and across disciplines within each chapter. Transitions, integrating
adaptation and mitigation for each sector, are explored within six dimensions of feasibility, showing both low
hanging fruits and barriers to overcome. It also provides scientific guidance on strategies to embed climate action
within development strategies, and how to optimize choices that maximize benefits for multiple sustainable
development dimensions and implement ethical and just transitions.

In his address to the UN General Assembly in 2018, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres quoted World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) data showing that the past two decades have included eighteen of the
twenty warmest years since record-keeping began in 1850.

"Climate change is moving faster than we are," said Secretary-General Guterres. "We must listen to the Earth's
best scientists," he added.

One month later the IPCC presented the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C, based on the assessment
of around 6,000 peer-review publications, most of them published in the last few years. This Special Report
confirms that climate change is already affecting people, ecosystems and livelihoods all around the world. It
shows that limiting warming to 1.5C is possible within the laws of chemistry and physics but would require
unprecedented transitions in all aspects of society. It finds that there are clear benefits to keeping warming to
v

Foreword

Foreword

1.5C rather than 2C or higher. Every bit of warming matters. And it shows that limiting warming to 1.5C can
go hand in hand with achieving other global goals such as the Sustainable Development Agenda. Every year
matters and every choice matters.

This Special Report also shows that recent trends in emissions and the level of international ambition indicated
by nationally determined contributions, within the Paris Agreement, deviate from a track consistent with limiting
warming to well below 2C. Without increased and urgent mitigation ambition in the coming years, leading to a
sharp decline in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, global warming will surpass 1.5C in the following decades,
leading to irreversible loss of the most fragile ecosystems, and crisis after crisis for the most vulnerable people
and societies.

The Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C supports efforts by the WMO and United Nations Environment
Programme for a comprehensive assessment of our understanding of climate change to help step up action to
respond to climate change, achieve climate-resilient development and foster an integrated approach to the
provision of climate services at all scales of governance.

The IPCC worked in record time to deliver this report for the 24th Conference of Parties (COP24) to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Talanoa Dialogue. We would like to thank
Hoesung Lee, Chair of the IPCC, for his leadership and guidance in the preparation of this Special Report. We
commend the work undertaken by the authors of this Special Report and the many contributing authors and
reviewers within a timeline of unprecedented severity; the leadership of the Co-Chairs of Working Groups I, II
and III: Valerie Masson-Delmotte, Panmao Zhai, Hans-Otto Portner, Debra Roberts, Jim Skea and Priyadarshi R.
Shukla; the oversight by the Bureau members of Working Groups I, II and III; and the implementation by the
Technical Support Unit of Working Group I, supported by the Technical Support Units of Working Groups II and
III. We are also grateful for the responsiveness of the international research community, who produced the
knowledge assessed in the report, and thank the reviewers of the report for the thousands of comments that
helped the authors strengthen the assessment.

Every bit of warming matters, every year matters, every choice matters

Petteri Taalas
Secretary-General
World Meteorological Organization

vi

Joyce Msuya
Acting Executive Director
United Nations Environment Programme

Preface

Preface
This Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C, an IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above preindustrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response
to the threat of climate change, sustainable development,
and efforts to eradicate poverty, is the first publication in
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth
Assessment Report (AR6). The Report was jointly prepared by
Working Groups I, II and III. It is the first IPCC Report to be
collectively produced by all three Working Groups, symbolizing
the new level of integration sought between Working Groups
during AR6. The Working Group I Technical Support Unit has
been responsible for the logistical and technical support for
the preparation of the Special Report. The Special Report
builds upon the IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
released in 2013-2014 and on relevant research subsequently
published in the scientific, technical and socio-economic
literature. It has been prepared following IPCC principles and
procedures, following AR5 guidance on calibrated language
for communicating the degree of certainty in key findings.
This Special Report is the first of three cross-Working Group
Special Reports to be published in AR6, accompanying the
three main Working Group Reports, the Synthesis Report
and a Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories.

Structure of the Report

Scope of the Report

Chapter 3 builds on findings of AR5 and assesses new scientific
evidence of changes in the climate system and the associated
impacts on natural and human systems, with a specific focus
on the magnitude and pattern of risks for global warming
of 1.5C above the pre-industrial period. It explores impacts
and risks for a range of natural and human systems, including
adaptation options, with a focus on how risk levels change
between today and worlds where global mean temperature
increases by 1.5C and 2C above pre-industrial levels. The
chapter also revisits major categories of risk (Reasons for
Concern) based on the assessment of the new knowledge
available since AR5.

The broad scientific community has also responded to the
UNFCCC invitation. New knowledge and literature relevant to
the topics of this report have been produced and published
worldwide. The Special Report is an assessment of the relevant
state of knowledge, based on the scientific and technical
literature available and accepted for publication up to
15 May 2018. The Report draws on the findings of more than
6,000 published articles.

Chapter 1 frames the context, knowledge base and assessment
approaches used to understand the impacts of 1.5C global
warming above pre-industrial levels and related global
greenhouse gas emission pathways, building on AR5, in the
context of strengthening the global response to the threat
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty. The chapter provides an update on the
current state of the climate system including the current level
of warming.
Chapter 2 assesses the literature on mitigation pathways
that limit or return global mean warming to 1.5C (relative
to the pre-industrial base period 1850-1900). Key questions
addressed are: What types of mitigation pathways have been
developed that could be consistent with 1.5C? What changes
in emissions, energy and land use do they entail? What do
they imply for climate policy and implementation, and what
impacts do they have on sustainable development? This
chapter focuses on geophysical dimensions of feasibility and
the technological and economic enabling conditions.

Chapter 4 discusses how the global economy and sociotechnical and socio-ecological systems can transition to
1.5C-consistent pathways and adapt to global warming of
1.5C. In the context of systemic transitions across energy,
land, urban and industrial systems, the chapter assesses
adaptation and mitigation options, including carbon dioxide
removal (CDR) measures, as well as the enabling conditions
that would facilitate implementing the rapid and far-reaching
global response.
Finally, Chapter 5 takes sustainable development, poverty
eradication and reducing inequalities as the starting point and
focus for analysis. It considers the complex interplay between
vii

Preface

In its decision on the adoption of the Paris Agreement, the
Conference of Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at its 21st Session
in Paris, France (30 November to 11 December 2015), invited
the IPCC to provide a special report in 2018 on the impacts
of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and
related global greenhouse gas emission pathways. The Panel
accepted the invitation and placed the Report in the context
of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate
change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty.

This report consists of a short Summary for Policymakers, a
Technical Summary, five Chapters, and Annexes, as well as
online chapter Supplementary Material.

Preface

sustainable development, including Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and climate actions related to a 1.5C warmer
world. The chapter also examines synergies and tradeoffs of adaptation and mitigation options with sustainable
development and the SDGs and offers insights into possible
pathways, especially climate-resilient development pathways
toward a 1.5C warmer world.

Preface

The Process
The Special Report on 1.5C of the IPCC AR6 has been prepared
in accordance with the principles and procedures established
by the IPCC and represents the combined efforts of leading
experts in the field of climate change. A scoping meeting for
the SR1.5C was held in Geneva, Switzerland, in August 2016,
and the final outline was approved by the Panel at its 44th
Session in October 2016 in Bangkok, Thailand. Governments
and IPCC observer organizations nominated 541 experts for
the author team. The team of 74 Coordinating Lead Authors
and Lead Authors plus 17 Review Editors were selected
by the Working Group I, II and III Bureaux. In addition, 133
Contributing Authors were invited by chapter teams to provide
technical information in the form of text, graphs or data for
assessment. Report drafts prepared by the authors were
subject to two rounds of formal review and revision followed
by a final round of government comments on the Summary for
Policymakers. The enthusiastic participation of the scientific
community and governments to the review process resulted in
42,001 written review comments submitted by 796 individual
expert reviewers and 65 governments.
The 17 Review Editors monitored the review process to ensure
that all substantive review comments received appropriate
consideration. The Summary for Policymakers was approved
line-by-line at the joint meeting of Working Groups I, II and
III; it and the underlying chapters were then accepted at the
48th Session of the IPCC from 01-06 October 2018 in Incheon,
Republic of Korea.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful for the expertise, rigour and dedication
shown throughout by the volunteer Coordinating Lead Authors
and Lead Authors, working across scientific disciplines in
each chapter of the report, with essential help by the many
Contributing Authors. The Review Editors have played a critical
role in assisting the author teams and ensuring the integrity
of the review process. We express our sincere appreciation
to all the expert and government reviewers. A special thanks
goes to the Chapter Scientists of this report who went
above and beyond what was expected of them: Neville Ellis,

viii

Tania Guillen Bolanos, Daniel Huppmann, Kiane de Kleijne,
Richard Millar and Chandni Singh.
We would also like to thank the three Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) Vice-Chairs Ko Barrett, Thelma Krug,
and Youba Sokona as well as the members of the WGI, WGII
and WGIII Bureaux for their assistance, guidance, and wisdom
throughout the preparation of the Report: Amjad Abdulla, Edvin
Aldrian, Carlo Carraro, Diriba Korecha Dadi, Fatima Driouech,
Andreas Fischlin, Gregory Flato, Jan Fuglestvedt, Mark Howden,
Nagmeldin G. E. Mahmoud, Carlos Mendez, Joy Jacqueline
Pereira, Ramon Pichs-Madruga, Andy Reisinger, Roberto Sanchez
Rodriguez, Sergey Semenov, Muhammad I. Tariq, Diana UrgeVorsatz, Carolina Vera, Pius Yanda, Noureddine Yassaa, and Taha
Zatari.
Our heartfelt thanks go to the hosts and organizers of the
scoping meeting, the four Special Report on 1.5C Lead
Author Meetings and the 48th Session of the IPCC. We
gratefully acknowledge the support from the host countries
and institutions: World Meteorological Organization,
Switzerland; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the National
Institute for Space Research (INPE), Brazil; Met Office and
the University of Exeter, the United Kingdom; Swedish
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI), Sweden;
the Ministry of Environment Natural Resources Conservation
and Tourism, the National Climate Change Committee in the
Department of Meteorological Services and the Botswana
Global Environmental Change Committee at the University of
Botswana, Botswana; and Korea Meteorological Administration
(KMA) and Incheon Metropolitan City, the Republic of Korea.
The support provided by governments and institutions, as well
as through contributions to the IPCC Trust Fund, is thankfully
acknowledged as it enabled the participation of the author
teams in the preparation of the Report. The efficient operation
of the Working Group I Technical Support Unit was made
possible by the generous financial support provided by the
government of France and administrative and information
technology support from the Universite Paris Saclay (France),
Institut Pierre Simon Laplace (IPSL) and the Laboratoire des
Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement (LSCE). We thank the
Norwegian Environment Agency for supporting the preparation
of the graphics for the Summary for Policymakers. We thank
the UNEP Library, who supported authors throughout the
drafting process by providing literature for the assessment.
We would also like to thank Abdalah Mokssit, Secretary of the
IPCC, and the staff of the IPCC Secretariat: Kerstin Stendahl,
Jonathan Lynn, Sophie Schlingemann, Judith Ewa, Mxolisi
Shongwe, Jesbin Baidya, Werani Zabula, Nina Peeva, Joelle
Fernandez, Annie Courtin, Laura Biagioni and Oksana Ekzarho.
Thanks are due to Elhousseine Gouaini who served as the
conference officer for the 48th Session of the IPCC.

Preface

Neogi and Joana Portugal Pereira from the WGIII Technical
Support Unit. A special thanks goes to Kenny Coventry,
Harmen Gudde, Irene Lorenzoni, and Stuart Jenkins for their
support with the figures in the Summary for Policymakers,
as well as Nigel Hawtin for graphical support of the Report.
In addition, the following contributions are gratefully
acknowledged: Jatinder Padda (copy edit), Melissa Dawes
(copy edit), Marilyn Anderson (index), Vincent Gregoire
(layout) and Sarah le Rouzic (intern).
The Special Report website has been developed by Habitat 7,
led by Jamie Herring, and the report content has been
prepared and managed for the website by Nicholas Reay and
Tim Waterfield. We gratefully acknowledge the UN Foundation for
supporting the website development.

Valerie Masson-Delmotte
IPCC Working Group I Co-Chair

Panmao Zhai
IPCC Working Group I Co-Chair

Hans-Otto Portner
IPCC Working Group II Co-Chair

Debra Roberts
IPCC Working Group II Co-Chair

Priyadarshi R. Shukla
IPCC Working Group III Co-Chair

Jim Skea
IPCC Working Group III Co-Chair

ix

Preface

Finally, our particular appreciation goes to the Working
Group Technical Support Units whose tireless dedication,
professionalism and enthusiasm led the production of this
Special Report. This Report could not have been prepared
without the commitment of members of the Working Group I
Technical Support Unit, all new to the IPCC, who rose to
the unprecedented Sixth Assessment Report challenge and
were pivotal in all aspects of the preparation of the Report:
Yang Chen, Sarah Connors, Melissa Gomis, Elisabeth Lonnoy,
Robin Matthews, Wilfran Moufouma-Okia, Clotilde Pean,
Roz Pidcock, Anna Pirani, Nicholas Reay, Tim Waterfield,
and Xiao Zhou. Our warmest thanks go to the collegial and
collaborative support provided by Marlies Craig, Andrew
Okem, Jan Petzold, Melinda Tignor and Nora Weyer from the
WGII Technical Support Unit and Bhushan Kankal, Suvadip

 Pour ce qui est de l'avenir, il ne s'agit pas de le prevoir, mais de le rendre possible. 
Antoine de Saint Exupery, Citadelle, 1948

xi

Contents
Front Matter

Foreword ......................................................................................................................................................................................................................... v
Preface ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................... vii

SPM

Summary for Policymakers ............................................................................................................................................................................... 3

TS

Technical Summary ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 27

Chapters

Annexes

Chapter 1

Framing and Context ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 49

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development ....... 93

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems ....................................................... 175

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response ................................................................................ 313

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities ....................................... 445

Annex I

Glossary ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 541

Annex II

Acronyms .................................................................................................................................................................................... 563

Annex III

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C ................................................. 573

Annex IV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C ...................................... 581

Index .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 601

Summary for Policymakers

Summary for Policymakers

SPM

SPM

SPM

Summary
for Policymakers
Drafting Authors:
Myles Allen (UK), Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Yang Chen (China), Heleen de Coninck
(Netherlands/EU), Sarah Connors (UK), Renee van Diemen (Netherlands), Opha Pauline
Dube (Botswana), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Francois Engelbrecht (South Africa), Marion Ferrat
(UK/France), James Ford (UK/Canada), Piers Forster (UK), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Tania
Guillen Bolanos (Germany/Nicaragua), Jordan Harold (UK), Ove Hoegh-Guldberg (Australia),
Jean-Charles Hourcade (France), Daniel Huppmann (Austria), Daniela Jacob (Germany),
Kejun Jiang (China), Tom Gabriel Johansen (Norway), Mikiko Kainuma (Japan), Kiane de
Kleijne (Netherlands/EU), Elmar Kriegler (Germany), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico),
Diana Liverman (USA), Natalie Mahowald (USA), Valerie Masson-Delmotte (France),
J. B. Robin Matthews (UK), Richard Millar (UK), Katja Mintenbeck (Germany), Angela Morelli
(Norway/Italy), Wilfran Moufouma-Okia (France/Congo), Luis Mundaca (Sweden/Chile),
Maike Nicolai (Germany), Chukwumerije Okereke (UK/Nigeria), Minal Pathak (India), Antony
Payne (UK), Roz Pidcock (UK), Anna Pirani (Italy), Elvira Poloczanska (UK/Australia), HansOtto Portner (Germany), Aromar Revi (India), Keywan Riahi (Austria), Debra C. Roberts
(South Africa), Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Joyashree Roy (India), Sonia I. Seneviratne
(Switzerland), Priyadarshi R. Shukla (India), James Skea (UK), Raphael Slade (UK), Drew
Shindell (USA), Chandni Singh (India), William Solecki (USA), Linda Steg (Netherlands),
Michael Taylor (Jamaica), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria), Henri Waisman (France),
Rachel Warren (UK), Panmao Zhai (China), Kirsten Zickfeld (Canada).

This Summary for Policymakers should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts
of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways,
in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development,
and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla,
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis,
E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

3

Summary for Policymakers

Introduction
This Report responds to the invitation for IPCC `... to provide a Special Report in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways' contained in the Decision of the 21st Conference
of Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to adopt the Paris Agreement.1

SPM

The IPCC accepted the invitation in April 2016, deciding to prepare this Special Report on the impacts of global warming of
1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty.
This Summary for Policymakers (SPM) presents the key findings of the Special Report, based on the assessment of the available
scientific, technical and socio-economic literature2 relevant to global warming of 1.5C and for the comparison between global
warming of 1.5C and 2C above pre-industrial levels. The level of confidence associated with each key finding is reported using
the IPCC calibrated language.3 The underlying scientific basis of each key finding is indicated by references provided to chapter
elements. In the SPM, knowledge gaps are identified associated with the underlying chapters of the Report.

A.

Understanding Global Warming of 1.5C

A.1

Human activities are estimated to have caused approximately 1.0C of global warming5 above
pre-industrial levels, with a likely range of 0.8C to 1.2C. Global warming is likely to reach 1.5C
between 2030 and 2052 if it continues to increase at the current rate. (high confidence) (Figure
SPM.1) {1.2}

A.1.1

Reflecting the long-term warming trend since pre-industrial times, observed global mean surface temperature (GMST) for
the decade 2006-2015 was 0.87C (likely between 0.75C and 0.99C)6 higher than the average over the 1850-1900
period (very high confidence). Estimated anthropogenic global warming matches the level of observed warming to within
20% (likely range). Estimated anthropogenic global warming is currently increasing at 0.2C (likely between 0.1C and
0.3C) per decade due to past and ongoing emissions (high confidence). {1.2.1, Table 1.1, 1.2.4}

A.1.2

Warming greater than the global annual average is being experienced in many land regions and seasons, including two to
three times higher in the Arctic. Warming is generally higher over land than over the ocean. (high confidence) {1.2.1, 1.2.2,
Figure 1.1, Figure 1.3, 3.3.1, 3.3.2}

A.1.3

Trends in intensity and frequency of some climate and weather extremes have been detected over time spans during which
about 0.5C of global warming occurred (medium confidence). This assessment is based on several lines of evidence,
including attribution studies for changes in extremes since 1950. {3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3}

4

1 Decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 21.
2 The assessment covers literature accepted for publication by 15 May 2018.
3 Each finding is grounded in an evaluation of underlying evidence and agreement. A level of confidence is expressed using five qualifiers: very low, low, medium, high and very high, and
typeset in italics, for example, medium confidence. The following terms have been used to indicate the assessed likelihood of an outcome or a result: virtually certain 99-100%
probability, very likely 90-100%, likely 66-100%, about as likely as not 33-66%, unlikely 0-33%, very unlikely 0-10%, exceptionally unlikely 0-1%. Additional terms (extremely likely
95-100%, more likely than not >50-100%, more unlikely than likely 0-<50%, extremely unlikely 0-5%) may also be used when appropriate. Assessed likelihood is typeset in italics,
for example, very likely. This is consistent with AR5.
4 See also Box SPM.1: Core Concepts Central to this Special Report.
5 Present level of global warming is defined as the average of a 30-year period centred on 2017 assuming the recent rate of warming continues.
6 This range spans the four available peer-reviewed estimates of the observed GMST change and also accounts for additional uncertainty due to possible short-term natural variability.
{1.2.1, Table 1.1}

4

Summary for Policymakers

A.2

Warming from anthropogenic emissions from the pre-industrial period to the present will persist for
centuries to millennia and will continue to cause further long-term changes in the climate system,
such as sea level rise, with associated impacts (high confidence), but these emissions alone are
unlikely to cause global warming of 1.5C (medium confidence). (Figure SPM.1) {1.2, 3.3, Figure 1.5}

A.2.1

Anthropogenic emissions (including greenhouse gases, aerosols and their precursors) up to the present are unlikely to
cause further warming of more than 0.5C over the next two to three decades (high confidence) or on a century time scale
(medium confidence). {1.2.4, Figure 1.5}

A.2.2

Reaching and sustaining net zero global anthropogenic CO2 emissions and declining net non-CO2 radiative forcing would
halt anthropogenic global warming on multi-decadal time scales (high confidence). The maximum temperature reached is
then determined by cumulative net global anthropogenic CO2 emissions up to the time of net zero CO2 emissions (high
confidence) and the level of non-CO2 radiative forcing in the decades prior to the time that maximum temperatures are
reached (medium confidence). On longer time scales, sustained net negative global anthropogenic CO2 emissions and/
or further reductions in non-CO2 radiative forcing may still be required to prevent further warming due to Earth system
feedbacks and to reverse ocean acidification (medium confidence) and will be required to minimize sea level rise (high
confidence). {Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1, 1.2.3, 1.2.4, Figure 1.4, 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 3.4.4.8, 3.4.5.1, 3.6.3.2}

A.3

Climate-related risks for natural and human systems are higher for global warming of 1.5C than
at present, but lower than at 2C (high confidence). These risks depend on the magnitude and rate
of warming, geographic location, levels of development and vulnerability, and on the choices and
implementation of adaptation and mitigation options (high confidence). (Figure SPM.2) {1.3, 3.3,
3.4, 5.6}

A.3.1

Impacts on natural and human systems from global warming have already been observed (high confidence). Many land and
ocean ecosystems and some of the services they provide have already changed due to global warming (high confidence).
(Figure SPM.2) {1.4, 3.4, 3.5}

A.3.2

Future climate-related risks depend on the rate, peak and duration of warming. In the aggregate, they are larger if global
warming exceeds 1.5C before returning to that level by 2100 than if global warming gradually stabilizes at 1.5C, especially
if the peak temperature is high (e.g., about 2C) (high confidence). Some impacts may be long-lasting or irreversible, such
as the loss of some ecosystems (high confidence). {3.2, 3.4.4, 3.6.3, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3}

A.3.3

Adaptation and mitigation are already occurring (high confidence). Future climate-related risks would be reduced by the
upscaling and acceleration of far-reaching, multilevel and cross-sectoral climate mitigation and by both incremental and
transformational adaptation (high confidence). {1.2, 1.3, Table 3.5, 4.2.2, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, Box 4.2, Box
4.3, Box 4.6, 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3, 4.3.4, 4.3.5, 4.4.1, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, 4.5.3}

SPM

5

Summary for Policymakers

Cumulative emissions of CO2 and future non-CO2 radiative forcing determine
the probability of limiting warming to 1.5C
a) Observed global temperature change and modeled
responses to stylized anthropogenic emission and forcing pathways

SPM

Global warming relative to 1850-1900 (C)
2.0

1.5

Observed monthly global
mean surface temperature

1.0

Estimated anthropogenic
warming to date and
likely range
Likely range of modeled responses to stylized pathways
Global CO2 emissions reach net zero in 2055 while net
non-CO2 radiative forcing is reduced after 2030 (grey in b, c & d)

0.5

Faster CO2 reductions (blue in b & c) result in a higher
probability of limiting warming to 1.5C

2017

No reduction of net non-CO2 radiative forcing (purple in d)
results in a lower probability of limiting warming to 1.5C
0
1960

1980

2000

2020

b) Stylized net global CO2 emission pathways
Billion tonnes CO2 per year (GtCO2/yr)

2040

2060

c) Cumulative net CO2 emissions
Billion tonnes CO2 (GtCO2)

2080

2100

d) Non-CO2 radiative forcing pathways
Watts per square metre (W/m2)

60

CO2 emissions
decline from 2020
to reach net zero in
2055 or 2040

50
40

3 000

3

2 000

2

30
20

Cumulative CO2
emissions in pathways
reaching net zero in
2055 and 2040

1 000

10
0

0
1980

2020

2060

2100

Faster immediate CO2 emission reductions
limit cumulative CO2 emissions shown in
panel (c).

Non-CO2 radiative forcing
reduced after 2030 or
not reduced after 2030

1

0
1980

2020

2060

2100

1980

2020

2060

2100

Maximum temperature rise is determined by cumulative net CO2 emissions and net non-CO2
radiative forcing due to methane, nitrous oxide, aerosols and other anthropogenic forcing agents.

Figure SPM.1 | Panel a: Observed monthly global mean surface temperature (GMST, grey line up to 2017, from the HadCRUT4, GISTEMP, Cowtan-Way, and
NOAA datasets) change and estimated anthropogenic global warming (solid orange line up to 2017, with orange shading indicating assessed likely range). Orange
dashed arrow and horizontal orange error bar show respectively the central estimate and likely range of the time at which 1.5C is reached if the current rate
of warming continues. The grey plume on the right of panel a shows the likely range of warming responses, computed with a simple climate model, to a stylized
pathway (hypothetical future) in which net CO2 emissions (grey line in panels b and c) decline in a straight line from 2020 to reach net zero in 2055 and net nonCO2 radiative forcing (grey line in panel d) increases to 2030 and then declines. The blue plume in panel a) shows the response to faster CO2 emissions reductions
(blue line in panel b), reaching net zero in 2040, reducing cumulative CO2 emissions (panel c). The purple plume shows the response to net CO2 emissions declining
to zero in 2055, with net non-CO2 forcing remaining constant after 2030. The vertical error bars on right of panel a) show the likely ranges (thin lines) and central
terciles (33rd - 66th percentiles, thick lines) of the estimated distribution of warming in 2100 under these three stylized pathways. Vertical dotted error bars in
panels b, c and d show the likely range of historical annual and cumulative global net CO2 emissions in 2017 (data from the Global Carbon Project) and of net
non-CO2 radiative forcing in 2011 from AR5, respectively. Vertical axes in panels c and d are scaled to represent approximately equal effects on GMST. {1.2.1, 1.2.3,
1.2.4, 2.3, Figure 1.2 and Chapter 1 Supplementary Material, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1}

6

Summary for Policymakers

B.

Projected Climate Change, Potential Impacts and Associated Risks

B.1

Climate models project robust7 differences in regional climate characteristics between present-day
and global warming of 1.5C,8 and between 1.5C and 2C.8 These differences include increases
in: mean temperature in most land and ocean regions (high confidence), hot extremes in most
inhabited regions (high confidence), heavy precipitation in several regions (medium confidence),
and the probability of drought and precipitation deficits in some regions (medium confidence).
{3.3}

B.1.1

Evidence from attributed changes in some climate and weather extremes for a global warming of about 0.5C supports
the assessment that an additional 0.5C of warming compared to present is associated with further detectable changes in
these extremes (medium confidence). Several regional changes in climate are assessed to occur with global warming up
to 1.5C compared to pre-industrial levels, including warming of extreme temperatures in many regions (high confidence),
increases in frequency, intensity, and/or amount of heavy precipitation in several regions (high confidence), and an increase
in intensity or frequency of droughts in some regions (medium confidence). {3.2, 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, Table 3.2}

B.1.2

Temperature extremes on land are projected to warm more than GMST (high confidence): extreme hot days in mid-latitudes
warm by up to about 3C at global warming of 1.5C and about 4C at 2C, and extreme cold nights in high latitudes warm
by up to about 4.5C at 1.5C and about 6C at 2C (high confidence). The number of hot days is projected to increase in
most land regions, with highest increases in the tropics (high confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3}

B.1.3

Risks from droughts and precipitation deficits are projected to be higher at 2C compared to 1.5C of global warming in
some regions (medium confidence). Risks from heavy precipitation events are projected to be higher at 2C compared to
1.5C of global warming in several northern hemisphere high-latitude and/or high-elevation regions, eastern Asia and
eastern North America (medium confidence). Heavy precipitation associated with tropical cyclones is projected to be
higher at 2C compared to 1.5C global warming (medium confidence). There is generally low confidence in projected
changes in heavy precipitation at 2C compared to 1.5C in other regions. Heavy precipitation when aggregated at global
scale is projected to be higher at 2C than at 1.5C of global warming (medium confidence). As a consequence of heavy
precipitation, the fraction of the global land area affected by flood hazards is projected to be larger at 2C compared to
1.5C of global warming (medium confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.3.6}

B.2

By 2100, global mean sea level rise is projected to be around 0.1 metre lower with global warming
of 1.5C compared to 2C (medium confidence). Sea level will continue to rise well beyond 2100
(high confidence), and the magnitude and rate of this rise depend on future emission pathways.
A slower rate of sea level rise enables greater opportunities for adaptation in the human and
ecological systems of small islands, low-lying coastal areas and deltas (medium confidence).
{3.3, 3.4, 3.6}

B.2.1

Model-based projections of global mean sea level rise (relative to 1986-2005) suggest an indicative range of 0.26 to 0.77
m by 2100 for 1.5C of global warming, 0.1 m (0.04-0.16 m) less than for a global warming of 2C (medium confidence).
A reduction of 0.1 m in global sea level rise implies that up to 10 million fewer people would be exposed to related risks,
based on population in the year 2010 and assuming no adaptation (medium confidence). {3.4.4, 3.4.5, 4.3.2}

B.2.2

Sea level rise will continue beyond 2100 even if global warming is limited to 1.5C in the 21st century (high confidence).
Marine ice sheet instability in Antarctica and/or irreversible loss of the Greenland ice sheet could result in multi-metre rise
in sea level over hundreds to thousands of years. These instabilities could be triggered at around 1.5C to 2C of global
warming (medium confidence). (Figure SPM.2) {3.3.9, 3.4.5, 3.5.2, 3.6.3, Box 3.3}

SPM

7 Robust is here used to mean that at least two thirds of climate models show the same sign of changes at the grid point scale, and that differences in large regions are statistically
significant.
8 Projected changes in impacts between different levels of global warming are determined with respect to changes in global mean surface air temperature.

7

Summary for Policymakers

B.2.3

Increasing warming amplifies the exposure of small islands, low-lying coastal areas and deltas to the risks associated with
sea level rise for many human and ecological systems, including increased saltwater intrusion, flooding and damage to
infrastructure (high confidence). Risks associated with sea level rise are higher at 2C compared to 1.5C. The slower rate
of sea level rise at global warming of 1.5C reduces these risks, enabling greater opportunities for adaptation including
managing and restoring natural coastal ecosystems and infrastructure reinforcement (medium confidence). (Figure SPM.2)
{3.4.5, Box 3.5}

B.3

On land, impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems, including species loss and extinction, are
projected to be lower at 1.5C of global warming compared to 2C. Limiting global warming to
1.5C compared to 2C is projected to lower the impacts on terrestrial, freshwater and coastal
ecosystems and to retain more of their services to humans (high confidence). (Figure SPM.2)
{3.4, 3.5, Box 3.4, Box 4.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3}

B.3.1

Of 105,000 species studied,9 6% of insects, 8% of plants and 4% of vertebrates are projected to lose over half of their
climatically determined geographic range for global warming of 1.5C, compared with 18% of insects, 16% of plants and
8% of vertebrates for global warming of 2C (medium confidence). Impacts associated with other biodiversity-related
risks such as forest fires and the spread of invasive species are lower at 1.5C compared to 2C of global warming (high
confidence). {3.4.3, 3.5.2}

B.3.2

Approximately 4% (interquartile range 2-7%) of the global terrestrial land area is projected to undergo a transformation
of ecosystems from one type to another at 1C of global warming, compared with 13% (interquartile range 8-20%) at 2C
(medium confidence). This indicates that the area at risk is projected to be approximately 50% lower at 1.5C compared to
2C (medium confidence). {3.4.3.1, 3.4.3.5}

B.3.3

High-latitude tundra and boreal forests are particularly at risk of climate change-induced degradation and loss, with woody
shrubs already encroaching into the tundra (high confidence) and this will proceed with further warming. Limiting global
warming to 1.5C rather than 2C is projected to prevent the thawing over centuries of a permafrost area in the range of
1.5 to 2.5 million km2 (medium confidence). {3.3.2, 3.4.3, 3.5.5}

B.4

Limiting global warming to 1.5C compared to 2C is projected to reduce increases in ocean
temperature as well as associated increases in ocean acidity and decreases in ocean oxygen levels
(high confidence). Consequently, limiting global warming to 1.5C is projected to reduce risks
to marine biodiversity, fisheries, and ecosystems, and their functions and services to humans,
as illustrated by recent changes to Arctic sea ice and warm-water coral reef ecosystems (high
confidence). {3.3, 3.4, 3.5, Box 3.4, Box 3.5}

B.4.1

There is high confidence that the probability of a sea ice-free Arctic Ocean during summer is substantially lower at global
warming of 1.5C when compared to 2C. With 1.5C of global warming, one sea ice-free Arctic summer is projected per
century. This likelihood is increased to at least one per decade with 2C global warming. Effects of a temperature overshoot
are reversible for Arctic sea ice cover on decadal time scales (high confidence). {3.3.8, 3.4.4.7}

B.4.2

Global warming of 1.5C is projected to shift the ranges of many marine species to higher latitudes as well as increase the
amount of damage to many ecosystems. It is also expected to drive the loss of coastal resources and reduce the productivity of
fisheries and aquaculture (especially at low latitudes). The risks of climate-induced impacts are projected to be higher at 2C
than those at global warming of 1.5C (high confidence). Coral reefs, for example, are projected to decline by a further 70-90%
at 1.5C (high confidence) with larger losses (>99%) at 2C (very high confidence). The risk of irreversible loss of many marine
and coastal ecosystems increases with global warming, especially at 2C or more (high confidence). {3.4.4, Box 3.4}

SPM

9 Consistent with earlier studies, illustrative numbers were adopted from one recent meta-study.

8

Summary for Policymakers

B.4.3

The level of ocean acidification due to increasing CO2 concentrations associated with global warming of 1.5C is projected to
amplify the adverse effects of warming, and even further at 2C, impacting the growth, development, calcification, survival,
and thus abundance of a broad range of species, for example, from algae to fish (high confidence). {3.3.10, 3.4.4}

B.4.4

Impacts of climate change in the ocean are increasing risks to fisheries and aquaculture via impacts on the physiology,
survivorship, habitat, reproduction, disease incidence, and risk of invasive species (medium confidence) but are projected to
be less at 1.5C of global warming than at 2C. One global fishery model, for example, projected a decrease in global annual
catch for marine fisheries of about 1.5 million tonnes for 1.5C of global warming compared to a loss of more than 3 million
tonnes for 2C of global warming (medium confidence). {3.4.4, Box 3.4}

B.5

Climate-related risks to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human security, and
economic growth are projected to increase with global warming of 1.5C and increase further with
2C. (Figure SPM.2) {3.4, 3.5, 5.2, Box 3.2, Box 3.3, Box 3.5, Box 3.6, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter
3, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5, 5.2}

B.5.1

Populations at disproportionately higher risk of adverse consequences with global warming of 1.5C and beyond include
disadvantaged and vulnerable populations, some indigenous peoples, and local communities dependent on agricultural or
coastal livelihoods (high confidence). Regions at disproportionately higher risk include Arctic ecosystems, dryland regions,
small island developing states, and Least Developed Countries (high confidence). Poverty and disadvantage are expected
to increase in some populations as global warming increases; limiting global warming to 1.5C, compared with 2C, could
reduce the number of people both exposed to climate-related risks and susceptible to poverty by up to several hundred
million by 2050 (medium confidence). {3.4.10, 3.4.11, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in
Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5, 4.2.2.2, 5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.3, 5.6.3}

B.5.2

Any increase in global warming is projected to affect human health, with primarily negative consequences (high confidence).
Lower risks are projected at 1.5C than at 2C for heat-related morbidity and mortality (very high confidence) and for
ozone-related mortality if emissions needed for ozone formation remain high (high confidence). Urban heat islands often
amplify the impacts of heatwaves in cities (high confidence). Risks from some vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and
dengue fever, are projected to increase with warming from 1.5C to 2C, including potential shifts in their geographic range
(high confidence). {3.4.7, 3.4.8, 3.5.5.8}

B.5.3

Limiting warming to 1.5C compared with 2C is projected to result in smaller net reductions in yields of maize, rice, wheat,
and potentially other cereal crops, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and Central and South America, and
in the CO2-dependent nutritional quality of rice and wheat (high confidence). Reductions in projected food availability are
larger at 2C than at 1.5C of global warming in the Sahel, southern Africa, the Mediterranean, central Europe, and the
Amazon (medium confidence). Livestock are projected to be adversely affected with rising temperatures, depending on the
extent of changes in feed quality, spread of diseases, and water resource availability (high confidence). {3.4.6, 3.5.4, 3.5.5,
Box 3.1, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4}

B.5.4

Depending on future socio-economic conditions, limiting global warming to 1.5C compared to 2C may reduce the
proportion of the world population exposed to a climate change-induced increase in water stress by up to 50%, although
there is considerable variability between regions (medium confidence). Many small island developing states could
experience lower water stress as a result of projected changes in aridity when global warming is limited to 1.5C, as
compared to 2C (medium confidence). {3.3.5, 3.4.2, 3.4.8, 3.5.5, Box 3.2, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4}

B.5.5

Risks to global aggregated economic growth due to climate change impacts are projected to be lower at 1.5C than at
2C by the end of this century10 (medium confidence). This excludes the costs of mitigation, adaptation investments and
the benefits of adaptation. Countries in the tropics and Southern Hemisphere subtropics are projected to experience the
largest impacts on economic growth due to climate change should global warming increase from 1.5C to 2C (medium
confidence). {3.5.2, 3.5.3}

SPM

10 Here, impacts on economic growth refer to changes in gross domestic product (GDP). Many impacts, such as loss of human lives, cultural heritage and ecosystem services, are difficult
to value and monetize.

9

Summary for Policymakers

B.5.6

Exposure to multiple and compound climate-related risks increases between 1.5C and 2C of global warming, with greater
proportions of people both so exposed and susceptible to poverty in Africa and Asia (high confidence). For global warming
from 1.5C to 2C, risks across energy, food, and water sectors could overlap spatially and temporally, creating new and
exacerbating current hazards, exposures, and vulnerabilities that could affect increasing numbers of people and regions
(medium confidence). {Box 3.5, 3.3.1, 3.4.5.3, 3.4.5.6, 3.4.11, 3.5.4.9}

B.5.7

There are multiple lines of evidence that since AR5 the assessed levels of risk increased for four of the five Reasons for
Concern (RFCs) for global warming to 2C (high confidence). The risk transitions by degrees of global warming are now:
from high to very high risk between 1.5C and 2C for RFC1 (Unique and threatened systems) (high confidence); from
moderate to high risk between 1C and 1.5C for RFC2 (Extreme weather events) (medium confidence); from moderate to
high risk between 1.5C and 2C for RFC3 (Distribution of impacts) (high confidence); from moderate to high risk between
1.5C and 2.5C for RFC4 (Global aggregate impacts) (medium confidence); and from moderate to high risk between 1C
and 2.5C for RFC5 (Large-scale singular events) (medium confidence). (Figure SPM.2) {3.4.13; 3.5, 3.5.2}

B.6

Most adaptation needs will be lower for global warming of 1.5C compared to 2C (high confidence).
There are a wide range of adaptation options that can reduce the risks of climate change (high
confidence). There are limits to adaptation and adaptive capacity for some human and natural
systems at global warming of 1.5C, with associated losses (medium confidence). The number and
availability of adaptation options vary by sector (medium confidence). {Table 3.5, 4.3, 4.5, CrossChapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5}

B.6.1

A wide range of adaptation options are available to reduce the risks to natural and managed ecosystems (e.g., ecosystembased adaptation, ecosystem restoration and avoided degradation and deforestation, biodiversity management,
sustainable aquaculture, and local knowledge and indigenous knowledge), the risks of sea level rise (e.g., coastal defence
and hardening), and the risks to health, livelihoods, food, water, and economic growth, especially in rural landscapes
(e.g., efficient irrigation, social safety nets, disaster risk management, risk spreading and sharing, and communitybased adaptation) and urban areas (e.g., green infrastructure, sustainable land use and planning, and sustainable water
management) (medium confidence). {4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3, 4.3.5, 4.5.3, 4.5.4, 5.3.2, Box 4.2, Box 4.3, Box 4.6, Cross-Chapter
Box 9 in Chapter 4}.

B.6.2

Adaptation is expected to be more challenging for ecosystems, food and health systems at 2C of global warming than for
1.5C (medium confidence). Some vulnerable regions, including small islands and Least Developed Countries, are projected
to experience high multiple interrelated climate risks even at global warming of 1.5C (high confidence). {3.3.1, 3.4.5,
Box 3.5, Table 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, 5.6, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5, Box 5.3}

B.6.3

Limits to adaptive capacity exist at 1.5C of global warming, become more pronounced at higher levels of warming and
vary by sector, with site-specific implications for vulnerable regions, ecosystems and human health (medium confidence).
{Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5, Box 3.5, Table 3.5}

SPM

10

Summary for Policymakers

How the level of global warming affects impacts and/or risks associated with
the Reasons for Concern (RFCs) and selected natural, managed and human
systems
Five Reasons For Concern (RFCs) illustrate the impacts and risks of
different levels of global warming for people, economies and ecosystems
across sectors and regions.

SPM

Purple indicates very high
risks of severe impacts/risks
and the presence of
significant irreversibility or
the persistence of
climate-related hazards,
combined with limited
ability to adapt due to the
nature of the hazard or
impacts/risks.
Red indicates severe and
widespread impacts/risks.
Yellow indicates that
impacts/risks are detectable
and attributable to climate
change with at least medium
confidence.
White indicates that no
impacts are detectable and
attributable to climate
change.

Global mean surface temperature change
relative to pre-industrial levels (0C)

Impacts and risks associated with the Reasons for Concern (RFCs)
Very high
M

2.0
H

H
1.5

H

M

M

M

1.0

M

Moderate

2006-2015

M-H

H

H

High

Undetectable
0

RFC1
Unique and
threatened
systems

RFC2
Extreme
weather
events

RFC3
Distribution
of impacts

RFC4
Global
aggregate
impacts

RFC5
Large scale
singular
events

Level of additional
impact/risk due
to climate change

Global mean surface temperature change
relative to pre-industrial levels (0C)

Impacts and risks for selected natural, managed and human systems
H
H
1.5
1.0

M

M
M

H

M
VH
VH
H

0

M

H

2.0

M

M

H
M

H

Warm-water Mangroves Small-scale
corals
low-latitude
fisheries

H

H

Arctic
region

Terrestrial
ecosystems

H

2006-2015

H
H

M

Coastal
flooding

Fluvial
flooding

Crop
yields

Tourism

Heat-related
morbidity
and mortality

Confidence level for transition: L=Low, M=Medium, H=High and VH=Very high

Figure SPM.2 | Five integrative reasons for concern (RFCs) provide a framework for summarizing key impacts and risks across sectors and regions, and were
introduced in the IPCC Third Assessment Report. RFCs illustrate the implications of global warming for people, economies and ecosystems. Impacts and/or risks
for each RFC are based on assessment of the new literature that has appeared. As in AR5, this literature was used to make expert judgments to assess the levels
of global warming at which levels of impact and/or risk are undetectable, moderate, high or very high. The selection of impacts and risks to natural, managed and
human systems in the lower panel is illustrative and is not intended to be fully comprehensive. {3.4, 3.5, 3.5.2.1, 3.5.2.2, 3.5.2.3, 3.5.2.4, 3.5.2.5, 5.4.1, 5.5.3,
5.6.1, Box 3.4}
RFC1 Unique and threatened systems: ecological and human systems that have restricted geographic ranges constrained by climate-related conditions and
have high endemism or other distinctive properties. Examples include coral reefs, the Arctic and its indigenous people, mountain glaciers and biodiversity hotspots.
RFC2 Extreme weather events: risks/impacts to human health, livelihoods, assets and ecosystems from extreme weather events such as heat waves, heavy rain,
drought and associated wildfires, and coastal flooding.
RFC3 Distribution of impacts: risks/impacts that disproportionately affect particular groups due to uneven distribution of physical climate change hazards,
exposure or vulnerability.
RFC4 Global aggregate impacts: global monetary damage, global-scale degradation and loss of ecosystems and biodiversity.
RFC5
singular
events:
relatively
large,
abrupt
and (GDP).
sometimes
irreversible
systems
areheritage
causedand
by ecosystem
global warming.
Examples
10
Here,Large-scale
impacts on economic
growth
refer toare
changes
in gross
domestic
product
Many impacts,
suchchanges
as loss of in
human
lives,that
cultural
services, are
difficult
to value
and monetize.of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets.
include
disintegration

11

Summary for Policymakers

C.

Emission Pathways and System Transitions Consistent with 1.5C
Global Warming

C.1

In model pathways with no or limited overshoot of 1.5C, global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions
decline by about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030 (40-60% interquartile range), reaching net zero
around 2050 (2045-2055 interquartile range). For limiting global warming to below 2C11 CO2
emissions are projected to decline by about 25% by 2030 in most pathways (10-30% interquartile
range) and reach net zero around 2070 (2065-2080 interquartile range). Non-CO2 emissions in
pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C show deep reductions that are similar to those in
pathways limiting warming to 2C. (high confidence) (Figure SPM.3a) {2.1, 2.3, Table 2.4}

C.1.1

CO2 emissions reductions that limit global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot can involve different portfolios of
mitigation measures, striking different balances between lowering energy and resource intensity, rate of decarbonization,
and the reliance on carbon dioxide removal. Different portfolios face different implementation challenges and potential
synergies and trade-offs with sustainable development. (high confidence) (Figure SPM.3b) {2.3.2, 2.3.4, 2.4, 2.5.3}

C.1.2

Modelled pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot involve deep reductions in emissions
of methane and black carbon (35% or more of both by 2050 relative to 2010). These pathways also reduce most of the
cooling aerosols, which partially offsets mitigation effects for two to three decades. Non-CO2 emissions12 can be reduced
as a result of broad mitigation measures in the energy sector. In addition, targeted non-CO2 mitigation measures can
reduce nitrous oxide and methane from agriculture, methane from the waste sector, some sources of black carbon, and
hydrofluorocarbons. High bioenergy demand can increase emissions of nitrous oxide in some 1.5C pathways, highlighting
the importance of appropriate management approaches. Improved air quality resulting from projected reductions in many
non-CO2 emissions provide direct and immediate population health benefits in all 1.5C model pathways. (high confidence)
(Figure SPM.3a) {2.2.1, 2.3.3, 2.4.4, 2.5.3, 4.3.6, 5.4.2}

C.1.3

Limiting global warming requires limiting the total cumulative global anthropogenic emissions of CO2 since the preindustrial period, that is, staying within a total carbon budget (high confidence).13 By the end of 2017, anthropogenic CO2
emissions since the pre-industrial period are estimated to have reduced the total carbon budget for 1.5C by approximately
2200  320 GtCO2 (medium confidence). The associated remaining budget is being depleted by current emissions of
42  3 GtCO2 per year (high confidence). The choice of the measure of global temperature affects the estimated remaining
carbon budget. Using global mean surface air temperature, as in AR5, gives an estimate of the remaining carbon budget of
580 GtCO2 for a 50% probability of limiting warming to 1.5C, and 420 GtCO2 for a 66% probability (medium confidence).14
Alternatively, using GMST gives estimates of 770 and 570 GtCO2, for 50% and 66% probabilities,15 respectively (medium
confidence). Uncertainties in the size of these estimated remaining carbon budgets are substantial and depend on several
factors. Uncertainties in the climate response to CO2 and non-CO2 emissions contribute 400 GtCO2 and the level of historic
warming contributes 250 GtCO2 (medium confidence). Potential additional carbon release from future permafrost thawing
and methane release from wetlands would reduce budgets by up to 100 GtCO2 over the course of this century and more
thereafter (medium confidence). In addition, the level of non-CO2 mitigation in the future could alter the remaining carbon
budget by 250 GtCO2 in either direction (medium confidence). {1.2.4, 2.2.2, 2.6.1, Table 2.2, Chapter 2 Supplementary
Material}

C.1.4

Solar radiation modification (SRM) measures are not included in any of the available assessed pathways. Although some
SRM measures may be theoretically effective in reducing an overshoot, they face large uncertainties and knowledge gaps

SPM

11 References to pathways limiting global warming to 2C are based on a 66% probability of staying below 2C.
12 Non-CO2 emissions included in this Report are all anthropogenic emissions other than CO2 that result in radiative forcing. These include short-lived climate forcers, such as methane,
some fluorinated gases, ozone precursors, aerosols or aerosol precursors, such as black carbon and sulphur dioxide, respectively, as well as long-lived greenhouse gases, such as nitrous
oxide or some fluorinated gases. The radiative forcing associated with non-CO2 emissions and changes in surface albedo is referred to as non-CO2 radiative forcing. {2.2.1}
13 There is a clear scientific basis for a total carbon budget consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5C. However, neither this total carbon budget nor the fraction of this budget
taken up by past emissions were assessed in this Report.
14 Irrespective of the measure of global temperature used, updated understanding and further advances in methods have led to an increase in the estimated remaining carbon budget of
about 300 GtCO2 compared to AR5. (medium confidence) {2.2.2}
15 These estimates use observed GMST to 2006-2015 and estimate future temperature changes using near surface air temperatures.

12

Summary for Policymakers

as well as substantial risks and institutional and social constraints to deployment related to governance, ethics, and impacts
on sustainable development. They also do not mitigate ocean acidification. (medium confidence) {4.3.8, Cross-Chapter
Box 10 in Chapter 4}
SPM

Global emissions pathway characteristics
General characteristics of the evolution of anthropogenic net emissions of CO2, and total emissions of
methane, black carbon, and nitrous oxide in model pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C with no or
limited overshoot. Net emissions are defined as anthropogenic emissions reduced by anthropogenic
removals. Reductions in net emissions can be achieved through different portfolios of mitigation measures
illustrated in Figure SPM.3b.
Non-CO2 emissions relative to 2010

Global total net CO2 emissions

Emissions of non-CO2 forcers are also reduced
or limited in pathways limiting global warming
to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot, but
they do not reach zero globally.

Billion tonnes of CO2/yr
50

Methane emissions
In pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C
with no or limited overshoot as well as in
pathways with a higher overshoot, CO2 emissions
are reduced to net zero globally around 2050.

40

30

1

0
2020
20

2040

2060

2080

2100

2060

2080

2100

2060

2080

2100

Black carbon emissions
1

10

Four illustrative model pathways
0

0
P1
P2
-10
P3
-20

2020

2040

Nitrous oxide emissions
1

P4
0

2010

2020

2030

Timing of net zero CO2
Line widths depict the 5-95th
percentile and the 25-75th
percentile of scenarios

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

2090

2100

2020

2040

Pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot
Pathways with higher overshoot
Pathways limiting global warming below 2C
(Not shown above)

Figure SPM.3a | Global emissions pathway characteristics. The main panel shows global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions in pathways limiting global warming
to 1.5C with no or limited (less than 0.1C) overshoot and pathways with higher overshoot. The shaded area shows the full range for pathways analysed in this
Report. The panels on the right show non-CO2 emissions ranges for three compounds with large historical forcing and a substantial portion of emissions coming
from sources distinct from those central to CO2 mitigation. Shaded areas in these panels show the 5-95% (light shading) and interquartile (dark shading) ranges
of pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot. Box and whiskers at the bottom of the figure show the timing of pathways reaching
global net zero CO2 emission levels, and a comparison with pathways limiting global warming to 2C with at least 66% probability. Four illustrative model pathways
are highlighted in the main panel and are labelled P1, P2, P3 and P4, corresponding to the LED, S1, S2, and S5 pathways assessed in Chapter 2. Descriptions and
characteristics of these pathways are available in Figure SPM.3b. {2.1, 2.2, 2.3, Figure 2.5, Figure 2.10, Figure 2.11}

13

Summary for Policymakers

Characteristics of four illustrative model pathways
Different mitigation strategies can achieve the net emissions reductions that would be required to follow a
pathway that limits global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot. All pathways use Carbon Dioxide
Removal (CDR), but the amount varies across pathways, as do the relative contributions of Bioenergy with
Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS) and removals in the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU)
sector. This has implications for emissions and several other pathway characteristics.

SPM

Breakdown of contributions to global net CO2 emissions in four illustrative model pathways
Fossil fuel and industry

AFOLU

Billion tonnes CO per year (GtCO2/yr)
40

BECCS

Billion tonnes CO per year (GtCO2/yr)
40

P1

Billion tonnes CO per year (GtCO2/yr)
40

P2

40

20

20

20

20

0

0

0

0

-20

-20
2020

2060

2100

P1:

A scenario in which social,
business and technological innovations
result in lower energy demand up to
2050 while living standards rise,
especially in the global South. A
downsized energy system enables
rapid decarbonization of energy supply.
Afforestation is the only CDR option
considered; neither fossil fuels with CCS
nor BECCS are used.

2060

2100

2020

P2:

2060

2020

2100

P3:

A scenario with a broad focus on
sustainability including energy
intensity, human development,
economic convergence and
international cooperation, as well as
shifts towards sustainable and healthy
consumption patterns, low-carbon
technology innovation, and
well-managed land systems with
limited societal acceptability for BECCS.

P4

-20

-20
2020

2060

2100

P4:

A middle-of-the-road scenario in
which societal as well as technological
development follows historical
patterns. Emissions reductions are
mainly achieved by changing the way in
which energy and products are
produced, and to a lesser degree by
reductions in demand.

A resource- and energy-intensive
scenario in which economic growth and
globalization lead to widespread
adoption of greenhouse-gas-intensive
lifestyles, including high demand for
transportation fuels and livestock
products. Emissions reductions are
mainly achieved through technological
means, making strong use of CDR
through the deployment of BECCS.

Interquartile range

Global indicators

P1

Pathway classification

No or limited overshoot

No or limited overshoot

No or limited overshoot

-58

-47

-41

4

(-58,-40)

-93

-95

-91

-97

(-107,-94)

-50

-49

-35

-2

(-51,-39)

-82

-89

-78

-80

(-93,-81)

-15

-5

17

39

(-12,7)

-32

2

21

44

(-11,22)

60

58

48

25

(47,65)

77

81

63

70

(69,86)

-78

-61

-75

-59

(-78, -59)

in 2050 (% rel to 2010)

-97

-77

-73

-97

(-95, -74)

from oil in 2030 (% rel to 2010)

-37

-13

-3

86

(-34,3)

in 2050 (% rel to 2010)

-87

-50

-81

-32

(-78,-31)

from gas in 2030 (% rel to 2010)

-25

-20

33

37

(-26,21)

in 2050 (% rel to 2010)

-74

-53

21

-48

(-56,6)

59

83

98

106

(44,102)

150

98

501

468

(91,190)

-11

0

36

-1

(29,80)

-16

49

121

418

(123,261)

430

470

315

110

(245,436)

833

1327

878

1137

(576,1299)

0

348

687

1218

(550,1017)

0

151

414

1191

(364,662)

Land area of bioenergy crops in 2050 (million km2)

0.2

0.9

2.8

7.2

(1.5,3.2)

Agricultural CH4 emissions in 2030 (% rel to 2010)

-24

-48

1

14

(-30,-11)

-33

-69

-23

2

(-47,-24)

5

-26

15

3

(-21,3)

6

-26

0

39

(-26,1)

CO2 emission change in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
Kyoto-GHG emissions* in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
Final energy demand** in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
Renewable share in electricity in 2030 (%)
in 2050 (%)
Primary energy from coal in 2030 (% rel to 2010)

from nuclear in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
from biomass in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
from non-biomass renewables in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
Cumulative CCS until 2100 (GtCO2)
of which BECCS (GtCO2)

in 2050 (% rel to 2010)
Agricultural N2O emissions in 2030 (% rel to 2010)
in 2050 (% rel to 2010)

P2

P3

NOTE: Indicators have been selected to show global trends identified by the Chapter 2 assessment.
National and sectoral characteristics can differ substantially from the global trends shown above.

14

Billion tonnes CO per year (GtCO2/yr)

P3

P4
Higher overshoot

No or limited overshoot

* Kyoto-gas emissions are based on IPCC Second Assessment Report GWP-100
** Changes in energy demand are associated with improvements in energy
efficiency and behaviour change

Summary for Policymakers

Figure SPM.3b | Characteristics of four illustrative model pathways in relation to global warming of 1.5C introduced in Figure SPM.3a. These pathways were
selected to show a range of potential mitigation approaches and vary widely in their projected energy and land use, as well as their assumptions about future
socio-economic developments, including economic and population growth, equity and sustainability. A breakdown of the global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions
into the contributions in terms of CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industry; agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU); and bioenergy with carbon capture
and storage (BECCS) is shown. AFOLU estimates reported here are not necessarily comparable with countries' estimates. Further characteristics for each of these
pathways are listed below each pathway. These pathways illustrate relative global differences in mitigation strategies, but do not represent central estimates,
national strategies, and do not indicate requirements. For comparison, the right-most column shows the interquartile ranges across pathways with no or limited
overshoot of 1.5C. Pathways P1, P2, P3 and P4 correspond to the LED, S1, S2 and S5 pathways assessed in Chapter 2 (Figure SPM.3a). {2.2.1, 2.3.1, 2.3.2,
2.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.4, 2.5.3, Figure 2.5, Figure 2.6, Figure 2.9, Figure 2.10, Figure 2.11, Figure 2.14, Figure 2.15, Figure 2.16, Figure 2.17, Figure 2.24,
Figure 2.25, Table 2.4, Table 2.6, Table 2.7, Table 2.9, Table 4.1}

C.2

Pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot would require rapid
and far-reaching transitions in energy, land, urban and infrastructure (including transport and
buildings), and industrial systems (high confidence). These systems transitions are unprecedented
in terms of scale, but not necessarily in terms of speed, and imply deep emissions reductions in all
sectors, a wide portfolio of mitigation options and a significant upscaling of investments in those
options (medium confidence). {2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5}

C.2.1

Pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot show system changes that are more rapid and
pronounced over the next two decades than in 2C pathways (high confidence). The rates of system changes associated
with limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot have occurred in the past within specific sectors,
technologies and spatial contexts, but there is no documented historic precedent for their scale (medium confidence).
{2.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.4, 2.5, 4.2.1, 4.2.2, Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4}

C.2.2

In energy systems, modelled global pathways (considered in the literature) limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or
limited overshoot (for more details see Figure SPM.3b) generally meet energy service demand with lower energy use,
including through enhanced energy efficiency, and show faster electrification of energy end use compared to 2C (high
confidence). In 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot, low-emission energy sources are projected to have a higher
share, compared with 2C pathways, particularly before 2050 (high confidence). In 1.5C pathways with no or limited
overshoot, renewables are projected to supply 70-85% (interquartile range) of electricity in 2050 (high confidence). In
electricity generation, shares of nuclear and fossil fuels with carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) are modelled to
increase in most 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot. In modelled 1.5C pathways with limited or no overshoot,
the use of CCS would allow the electricity generation share of gas to be approximately 8% (3-11% interquartile range)
of global electricity in 2050, while the use of coal shows a steep reduction in all pathways and would be reduced to close
to 0% (0-2% interquartile range) of electricity (high confidence). While acknowledging the challenges, and differences
between the options and national circumstances, political, economic, social and technical feasibility of solar energy, wind
energy and electricity storage technologies have substantially improved over the past few years (high confidence). These
improvements signal a potential system transition in electricity generation. (Figure SPM.3b) {2.4.1, 2.4.2, Figure 2.1, Table
2.6, Table 2.7, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3, 4.2.1, 4.3.1, 4.3.3, 4.5.2}

C.2.3

CO2 emissions from industry in pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot are projected to
be about 65-90% (interquartile range) lower in 2050 relative to 2010, as compared to 50-80% for global warming of
2C (medium confidence). Such reductions can be achieved through combinations of new and existing technologies and
practices, including electrification, hydrogen, sustainable bio-based feedstocks, product substitution, and carbon capture,
utilization and storage (CCUS). These options are technically proven at various scales but their large-scale deployment
may be limited by economic, financial, human capacity and institutional constraints in specific contexts, and specific
characteristics of large-scale industrial installations. In industry, emissions reductions by energy and process efficiency
by themselves are insufficient for limiting warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot (high confidence). {2.4.3, 4.2.1,
Table 4.1, Table 4.3, 4.3.3, 4.3.4, 4.5.2}

C.2.4

The urban and infrastructure system transition consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot
would imply, for example, changes in land and urban planning practices, as well as deeper emissions reductions in transport
and buildings compared to pathways that limit global warming below 2C (medium confidence). Technical measures

SPM

15

Summary for Policymakers

and practices enabling deep emissions reductions include various energy efficiency options. In pathways limiting global
warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot, the electricity share of energy demand in buildings would be about 55-75%
in 2050 compared to 50-70% in 2050 for 2C global warming (medium confidence). In the transport sector, the share of
low-emission final energy would rise from less than 5% in 2020 to about 35-65% in 2050 compared to 25-45% for 2C
of global warming (medium confidence). Economic, institutional and socio-cultural barriers may inhibit these urban and
infrastructure system transitions, depending on national, regional and local circumstances, capabilities and the availability
of capital (high confidence). {2.3.4, 2.4.3, 4.2.1, Table 4.1, 4.3.3, 4.5.2}

SPM

C.2.5

Transitions in global and regional land use are found in all pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited
overshoot, but their scale depends on the pursued mitigation portfolio. Model pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C
with no or limited overshoot project a 4 million km2 reduction to a 2.5 million km2 increase of non-pasture agricultural land
for food and feed crops and a 0.5-11 million km2 reduction of pasture land, to be converted into a 0-6 million km2 increase
of agricultural land for energy crops and a 2 million km2 reduction to 9.5 million km2 increase in forests by 2050 relative
to 2010 (medium confidence).16 Land-use transitions of similar magnitude can be observed in modelled 2C pathways
(medium confidence). Such large transitions pose profound challenges for sustainable management of the various demands
on land for human settlements, food, livestock feed, fibre, bioenergy, carbon storage, biodiversity and other ecosystem
services (high confidence). Mitigation options limiting the demand for land include sustainable intensification of land-use
practices, ecosystem restoration and changes towards less resource-intensive diets (high confidence). The implementation
of land-based mitigation options would require overcoming socio-economic, institutional, technological, financing and
environmental barriers that differ across regions (high confidence). {2.4.4, Figure 2.24, 4.3.2, 4.3.7, 4.5.2, Cross-Chapter
Box 7 in Chapter 3}

C.2.6

Additional annual average energy-related investments for the period 2016 to 2050 in pathways limiting warming to
1.5C compared to pathways without new climate policies beyond those in place today are estimated to be around 830
billion USD2010 (range of 150 billion to 1700 billion USD2010 across six models17). This compares to total annual average
energy supply investments in 1.5C pathways of 1460 to 3510 billion USD2010 and total annual average energy demand
investments of 640 to 910 billion USD2010 for the period 2016 to 2050. Total energy-related investments increase by
about 12% (range of 3% to 24%) in 1.5C pathways relative to 2C pathways. Annual investments in low-carbon energy
technologies and energy efficiency are upscaled by roughly a factor of six (range of factor of 4 to 10) by 2050 compared to
2015 (medium confidence). {2.5.2, Box 4.8, Figure 2.27}

C.2.7

Modelled pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot project a wide range of global average
discounted marginal abatement costs over the 21st century. They are roughly 3-4 times higher than in pathways limiting
global warming to below 2C (high confidence). The economic literature distinguishes marginal abatement costs from total
mitigation costs in the economy. The literature on total mitigation costs of 1.5C mitigation pathways is limited and was
not assessed in this Report. Knowledge gaps remain in the integrated assessment of the economy-wide costs and benefits
of mitigation in line with pathways limiting warming to 1.5C. {2.5.2; 2.6; Figure 2.26}

16 The projected land-use changes presented are not deployed to their upper limits simultaneously in a single pathway.
17 Including two pathways limiting warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot and four pathways with higher overshoot.

16

Summary for Policymakers

C.3

All pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C with limited or no overshoot project the use of
carbon dioxide removal (CDR) on the order of 100-1000 GtCO2 over the 21st century. CDR would
be used to compensate for residual emissions and, in most cases, achieve net negative emissions
to return global warming to 1.5C following a peak (high confidence). CDR deployment of several
hundreds of GtCO2 is subject to multiple feasibility and sustainability constraints (high confidence).
Significant near-term emissions reductions and measures to lower energy and land demand can
limit CDR deployment to a few hundred GtCO2 without reliance on bioenergy with carbon capture
and storage (BECCS) (high confidence). {2.3, 2.4, 3.6.2, 4.3, 5.4}

C.3.1

Existing and potential CDR measures include afforestation and reforestation, land restoration and soil carbon sequestration,
BECCS, direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS), enhanced weathering and ocean alkalinization. These differ widely
in terms of maturity, potentials, costs, risks, co-benefits and trade-offs (high confidence). To date, only a few published
pathways include CDR measures other than afforestation and BECCS. {2.3.4, 3.6.2, 4.3.2, 4.3.7}

C.3.2

In pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with limited or no overshoot, BECCS deployment is projected to range from
0-1, 0-8, and 0-16 GtCO2 yr-1 in 2030, 2050, and 2100, respectively, while agriculture, forestry and land-use (AFOLU)
related CDR measures are projected to remove 0-5, 1-11, and 1-5 GtCO2 yr-1 in these years (medium confidence). The
upper end of these deployment ranges by mid-century exceeds the BECCS potential of up to 5 GtCO2 yr-1 and afforestation
potential of up to 3.6 GtCO2 yr-1 assessed based on recent literature (medium confidence). Some pathways avoid BECCS
deployment completely through demand-side measures and greater reliance on AFOLU-related CDR measures (medium
confidence). The use of bioenergy can be as high or even higher when BECCS is excluded compared to when it is included
due to its potential for replacing fossil fuels across sectors (high confidence). (Figure SPM.3b) {2.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.4.2, 3.6.2,
4.3.1, 4.2.3, 4.3.2, 4.3.7, 4.4.3, Table 2.4}

C.3.3

Pathways that overshoot 1.5C of global warming rely on CDR exceeding residual CO2 emissions later in the century to
return to below 1.5C by 2100, with larger overshoots requiring greater amounts of CDR (Figure SPM.3b) (high confidence).
Limitations on the speed, scale, and societal acceptability of CDR deployment hence determine the ability to return global
warming to below 1.5C following an overshoot. Carbon cycle and climate system understanding is still limited about the
effectiveness of net negative emissions to reduce temperatures after they peak (high confidence). {2.2, 2.3.4, 2.3.5, 2.6,
4.3.7, 4.5.2, Table 4.11}

C.3.4

Most current and potential CDR measures could have significant impacts on land, energy, water or nutrients if deployed
at large scale (high confidence). Afforestation and bioenergy may compete with other land uses and may have significant
impacts on agricultural and food systems, biodiversity, and other ecosystem functions and services (high confidence).
Effective governance is needed to limit such trade-offs and ensure permanence of carbon removal in terrestrial, geological
and ocean reservoirs (high confidence). Feasibility and sustainability of CDR use could be enhanced by a portfolio of options
deployed at substantial, but lesser scales, rather than a single option at very large scale (high confidence). (Figure SPM.3b)
{2.3.4, 2.4.4, 2.5.3, 2.6, 3.6.2, 4.3.2, 4.3.7, 4.5.2, 5.4.1, 5.4.2; Cross-Chapter Boxes 7 and 8 in Chapter 3, Table 4.11, Table
5.3, Figure 5.3}

C.3.5

Some AFOLU-related CDR measures such as restoration of natural ecosystems and soil carbon sequestration could provide
co-benefits such as improved biodiversity, soil quality, and local food security. If deployed at large scale, they would
require governance systems enabling sustainable land management to conserve and protect land carbon stocks and other
ecosystem functions and services (medium confidence). (Figure SPM.4) {2.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.4.2, 2.4.4, 3.6.2, 5.4.1, Cross-Chapter
Boxes 3 in Chapter 1 and 7 in Chapter 3, 4.3.2, 4.3.7, 4.4.1, 4.5.2, Table 2.4}

SPM

17

Summary for Policymakers

D.

Strengthening the Global Response in the Context of Sustainable
Development and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty

D.1

Estimates of the global emissions outcome of current nationally stated mitigation ambitions as
submitted under the Paris Agreement would lead to global greenhouse gas emissions18 in 2030
of 52-58 GtCO2eq yr-1 (medium confidence). Pathways reflecting these ambitions would not limit
global warming to 1.5C, even if supplemented by very challenging increases in the scale and
ambition of emissions reductions after 2030 (high confidence). Avoiding overshoot and reliance
on future large-scale deployment of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) can only be achieved if global
CO2 emissions start to decline well before 2030 (high confidence). {1.2, 2.3, 3.3, 3.4, 4.2, 4.4, CrossChapter Box 11 in Chapter 4}

D.1.1

Pathways that limit global warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot show clear emission reductions by 2030 (high
confidence). All but one show a decline in global greenhouse gas emissions to below 35 GtCO2eq yr-1 in 2030, and half of
available pathways fall within the 25-30 GtCO2eq yr-1 range (interquartile range), a 40-50% reduction from 2010 levels
(high confidence). Pathways reflecting current nationally stated mitigation ambition until 2030 are broadly consistent
with cost-effective pathways that result in a global warming of about 3C by 2100, with warming continuing afterwards
(medium confidence). {2.3.3, 2.3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4, 5.5.3.2}

D.1.2

Overshoot trajectories result in higher impacts and associated challenges compared to pathways that limit global warming
to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot (high confidence). Reversing warming after an overshoot of 0.2C or larger during
this century would require upscaling and deployment of CDR at rates and volumes that might not be achievable given
considerable implementation challenges (medium confidence). {1.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.3.5, 2.5.1, 3.3, 4.3.7, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in
Chapter 3, Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4}

D.1.3

The lower the emissions in 2030, the lower the challenge in limiting global warming to 1.5C after 2030 with no or limited
overshoot (high confidence). The challenges from delayed actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions include the risk of
cost escalation, lock-in in carbon-emitting infrastructure, stranded assets, and reduced flexibility in future response options
in the medium to long term (high confidence). These may increase uneven distributional impacts between countries at
different stages of development (medium confidence). {2.3.5, 4.4.5, 5.4.2}

D.2

The avoided climate change impacts on sustainable development, eradication of poverty and reducing
inequalities would be greater if global warming were limited to 1.5C rather than 2C, if mitigation
and adaptation synergies are maximized while trade-offs are minimized (high confidence). {1.1, 1.4,
2.5, 3.3, 3.4, 5.2, Table 5.1}

D.2.1

Climate change impacts and responses are closely linked to sustainable development which balances social well-being,
economic prosperity and environmental protection. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted in
2015, provide an established framework for assessing the links between global warming of 1.5C or 2C and development
goals that include poverty eradication, reducing inequalities, and climate action. (high confidence) {Cross-Chapter Box 4 in
Chapter 1, 1.4, 5.1}

D.2.2

The consideration of ethics and equity can help address the uneven distribution of adverse impacts associated with
1.5C and higher levels of global warming, as well as those from mitigation and adaptation, particularly for poor and
disadvantaged populations, in all societies (high confidence). {1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.4.3, 2.5.3, 3.4.10, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3. 5.4, CrossChapter Box 4 in Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter Boxes 6 and 8 in Chapter 3, and Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5}

D.2.3

Mitigation and adaptation consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5C are underpinned by enabling conditions, assessed
in this Report across the geophysical, environmental-ecological, technological, economic, socio-cultural and institutional

SPM

18 GHG emissions have been aggregated with 100-year GWP values as introduced in the IPCC Second Assessment Report.

18

Summary for Policymakers

dimensions of feasibility. Strengthened multilevel governance, institutional capacity, policy instruments, technological
innovation and transfer and mobilization of finance, and changes in human behaviour and lifestyles are enabling conditions
that enhance the feasibility of mitigation and adaptation options for 1.5C-consistent systems transitions. (high confidence)
{1.4, Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1, 2.5.1, 4.4, 4.5, 5.6}
SPM

D.3

Adaptation options specific to national contexts, if carefully selected together with enabling
conditions, will have benefits for sustainable development and poverty reduction with global
warming of 1.5C, although trade-offs are possible (high confidence). {1.4, 4.3, 4.5}

D.3.1

Adaptation options that reduce the vulnerability of human and natural systems have many synergies with sustainable
development, if well managed, such as ensuring food and water security, reducing disaster risks, improving health
conditions, maintaining ecosystem services and reducing poverty and inequality (high confidence). Increasing investment
in physical and social infrastructure is a key enabling condition to enhance the resilience and the adaptive capacities
of societies. These benefits can occur in most regions with adaptation to 1.5C of global warming (high confidence).
{1.4.3, 4.2.2, 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3, 4.3.5, 4.4.1, 4.4.3, 4.5.3, 5.3.1, 5.3.2}

D.3.2

Adaptation to 1.5C global warming can also result in trade-offs or maladaptations with adverse impacts for sustainable
development. For example, if poorly designed or implemented, adaptation projects in a range of sectors can increase
greenhouse gas emissions and water use, increase gender and social inequality, undermine health conditions, and encroach
on natural ecosystems (high confidence). These trade-offs can be reduced by adaptations that include attention to poverty
and sustainable development (high confidence). {4.3.2, 4.3.3, 4.5.4, 5.3.2; Cross-Chapter Boxes 6 and 7 in Chapter 3}

D.3.3

A mix of adaptation and mitigation options to limit global warming to 1.5C, implemented in a participatory and integrated
manner, can enable rapid, systemic transitions in urban and rural areas (high confidence). These are most effective when
aligned with economic and sustainable development, and when local and regional governments and decision makers are
supported by national governments (medium confidence). {4.3.2, 4.3.3, 4.4.1, 4.4.2}

D.3.4

Adaptation options that also mitigate emissions can provide synergies and cost savings in most sectors and system
transitions, such as when land management reduces emissions and disaster risk, or when low-carbon buildings are also
designed for efficient cooling. Trade-offs between mitigation and adaptation, when limiting global warming to 1.5C,
such as when bioenergy crops, reforestation or afforestation encroach on land needed for agricultural adaptation, can
undermine food security, livelihoods, ecosystem functions and services and other aspects of sustainable development. (high
confidence) {3.4.3, 4.3.2, 4.3.4, 4.4.1, 4.5.2, 4.5.3, 4.5.4}

D.4

Mitigation options consistent with 1.5C pathways are associated with multiple synergies and tradeoffs across the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). While the total number of possible synergies
exceeds the number of trade-offs, their net effect will depend on the pace and magnitude of changes,
the composition of the mitigation portfolio and the management of the transition. (high confidence)
(Figure SPM.4) {2.5, 4.5, 5.4}

D.4.1

1.5C pathways have robust synergies particularly for the SDGs 3 (health), 7 (clean energy), 11 (cities and communities), 12
(responsible consumption and production) and 14 (oceans) (very high confidence). Some 1.5C pathways show potential
trade-offs with mitigation for SDGs 1 (poverty), 2 (hunger), 6 (water) and 7 (energy access), if not managed carefully (high
confidence). (Figure SPM.4) {5.4.2; Figure 5.4, Cross-Chapter Boxes 7 and 8 in Chapter 3}

D.4.2

1.5C pathways that include low energy demand (e.g., see P1 in Figure SPM.3a and SPM.3b), low material consumption,
and low GHG-intensive food consumption have the most pronounced synergies and the lowest number of trade-offs with
respect to sustainable development and the SDGs (high confidence). Such pathways would reduce dependence on CDR. In
modelled pathways, sustainable development, eradicating poverty and reducing inequality can support limiting warming to
1.5C (high confidence). (Figure SPM.3b, Figure SPM.4) {2.4.3, 2.5.1, 2.5.3, Figure 2.4, Figure 2.28, 5.4.1, 5.4.2, Figure 5.4}

19

Summary for Policymakers

Indicative linkages between mitigation options and sustainable
development using SDGs (The linkages do not show costs and benefits)
Mitigation options deployed in each sector can be associated with potential positive effects (synergies) or
negative effects (trade-offs) with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The degree to which this
potential is realized will depend on the selected portfolio of mitigation options, mitigation policy design,
and local circumstances and context. Particularly in the energy-demand sector, the potential for synergies is
larger than for trade-offs. The bars group individually assessed options by level of confidence and take into
account the relative strength of the assessed mitigation-SDG connections.

SPM

Shades show level of confidence

Length shows strength of connection
The overall size of the coloured bars depict the relative
potential for synergies and trade-offs between the sectoral
mitigation options and the SDGs.

The shades depict the level of confidence of the
assessed potential for Trade-offs/Synergies.

Very High

NO
POVERTY

SDG1
No Poverty
SDG2
Zero Hunger
SDG 3
Good Health
and Well-being
SDG 4
Quality
Education
SDG 5
Gender
Equality
SDG 6
Clean Water
and Sanitation
SDG 7
Affordable and
Clean Energy

GOOD HEALTH
AND WELL-BEING

QUALITY
EDUCATION

GENDER
EQUALITY

CLEAN WATER
AND SANITATION

AFFORDABLE AND
CLEAN ENERGY

SDG 8
Decent Work
and Economic
Growth

DECENT WORK AND
ECONOMIC GROWTH

SDG 9
Industry,
Innovation and
Infrastructure

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION
AND INFRASTRUCTURE

SDG 10
Reduced
Inequalities
SDG 11
Sustainable
Cities and
Communities
SDG 12
Responsible
Consumption
and Production
SDG 14
Life Below
Water
SDG 15
Life on Land
SDG 16
Peace, Justice
and Strong
Institutions
SDG 17
Partnerships for
the Goals

20

ZERO
HUNGER

REDUCED
INEQUALITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

RESPONSIBLE
CONSUMPTION
AND PRODUCTION

LIFE
BELOW WATER

LIFE
ON LAND

PEACE, JUSTICE
AND STRONG
INSTITUTIONS

PARTNERSHIPS
FOR THE GOALS

Low

Energy Supply

Energy Demand

Land

Trade-offs

Trade-offs

Trade-offs

Synergies

Synergies

Synergies

Summary for Policymakers

Figure SPM.4 | Potential synergies and trade-offs between the sectoral portfolio of climate change mitigation options and the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). The SDGs serve as an analytical framework for the assessment of the different sustainable development dimensions, which extend beyond the time frame
of the 2030 SDG targets. The assessment is based on literature on mitigation options that are considered relevant for 1.5C. The assessed strength of the SDG
interactions is based on the qualitative and quantitative assessment of individual mitigation options listed in Table 5.2. For each mitigation option, the strength of
the SDG-connection as well as the associated confidence of the underlying literature (shades of green and red) was assessed. The strength of positive connections
(synergies) and negative connections (trade-offs) across all individual options within a sector (see Table 5.2) are aggregated into sectoral potentials for the whole
mitigation portfolio. The (white) areas outside the bars, which indicate no interactions, have low confidence due to the uncertainty and limited number of studies
exploring indirect effects. The strength of the connection considers only the effect of mitigation and does not include benefits of avoided impacts. SDG 13 (climate
action) is not listed because mitigation is being considered in terms of interactions with SDGs and not vice versa. The bars denote the strength of the connection,
and do not consider the strength of the impact on the SDGs. The energy demand sector comprises behavioural responses, fuel switching and efficiency options in
the transport, industry and building sector as well as carbon capture options in the industry sector. Options assessed in the energy supply sector comprise biomass
and non-biomass renewables, nuclear, carbon capture and storage (CCS) with bioenergy, and CCS with fossil fuels. Options in the land sector comprise agricultural
and forest options, sustainable diets and reduced food waste, soil sequestration, livestock and manure management, reduced deforestation, afforestation and
reforestation, and responsible sourcing. In addition to this figure, options in the ocean sector are discussed in the underlying report. {5.4, Table 5.2, Figure 5.2}

SPM

Information about the net impacts of mitigation on sustainable development in 1.5C pathways is available only for a limited number of SDGs and mitigation
options. Only a limited number of studies have assessed the benefits of avoided climate change impacts of 1.5C pathways for the SDGs, and the co-effects
of adaptation for mitigation and the SDGs. The assessment of the indicative mitigation potentials in Figure SPM.4 is a step further from AR5 towards a more
comprehensive and integrated assessment in the future.

D.4.3

1.5C and 2C modelled pathways often rely on the deployment of large-scale land-related measures like afforestation
and bioenergy supply, which, if poorly managed, can compete with food production and hence raise food security concerns
(high confidence). The impacts of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) options on SDGs depend on the type of options and the
scale of deployment (high confidence). If poorly implemented, CDR options such as BECCS and AFOLU options would lead
to trade-offs. Context-relevant design and implementation requires considering people's needs, biodiversity, and other
sustainable development dimensions (very high confidence). (Figure SPM.4) {5.4.1.3, Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3}

D.4.4

Mitigation consistent with 1.5C pathways creates risks for sustainable development in regions with high dependency on
fossil fuels for revenue and employment generation (high confidence). Policies that promote diversification of the economy
and the energy sector can address the associated challenges (high confidence). {5.4.1.2, Box 5.2}

D.4.5

Redistributive policies across sectors and populations that shield the poor and vulnerable can resolve trade-offs for a range
of SDGs, particularly hunger, poverty and energy access. Investment needs for such complementary policies are only a small
fraction of the overall mitigation investments in 1.5C pathways. (high confidence) {2.4.3, 5.4.2, Figure 5.5}

D.5

Limiting the risks from global warming of 1.5C in the context of sustainable development and
poverty eradication implies system transitions that can be enabled by an increase of adaptation
and mitigation investments, policy instruments, the acceleration of technological innovation and
behaviour changes (high confidence). {2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 3.2, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 5.2, 5.5, 5.6}

D.5.1

Directing finance towards investment in infrastructure for mitigation and adaptation could provide additional resources.
This could involve the mobilization of private funds by institutional investors, asset managers and development or
investment banks, as well as the provision of public funds. Government policies that lower the risk of low-emission and
adaptation investments can facilitate the mobilization of private funds and enhance the effectiveness of other public
policies. Studies indicate a number of challenges, including access to finance and mobilization of funds. (high confidence)
{2.5.1, 2.5.2, 4.4.5}

D.5.2

Adaptation finance consistent with global warming of 1.5C is difficult to quantify and compare with 2C. Knowledge
gaps include insufficient data to calculate specific climate resilience-enhancing investments from the provision of currently
underinvested basic infrastructure. Estimates of the costs of adaptation might be lower at global warming of 1.5C than for
2C. Adaptation needs have typically been supported by public sector sources such as national and subnational government
budgets, and in developing countries together with support from development assistance, multilateral development banks,
and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change channels (medium confidence). More recently there is a

21

Summary for Policymakers

growing understanding of the scale and increase in non-governmental organizations and private funding in some regions
(medium confidence). Barriers include the scale of adaptation financing, limited capacity and access to adaptation finance
(medium confidence). {4.4.5, 4.6}
SPM

22

D.5.3

Global model pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C are projected to involve the annual average investment needs
in the energy system of around 2.4 trillion USD2010 between 2016 and 2035, representing about 2.5% of the world GDP
(medium confidence). {4.4.5, Box 4.8}

D.5.4

Policy tools can help mobilize incremental resources, including through shifting global investments and savings and
through market and non-market based instruments as well as accompanying measures to secure the equity of the
transition, acknowledging the challenges related with implementation, including those of energy costs, depreciation of
assets and impacts on international competition, and utilizing the opportunities to maximize co-benefits (high confidence).
{1.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.3.5, 2.5.1, 2.5.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3, Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4, 4.4.5, 5.5.2}

D.5.5

The systems transitions consistent with adapting to and limiting global warming to 1.5C include the widespread adoption
of new and possibly disruptive technologies and practices and enhanced climate-driven innovation. These imply enhanced
technological innovation capabilities, including in industry and finance. Both national innovation policies and international
cooperation can contribute to the development, commercialization and widespread adoption of mitigation and adaptation
technologies. Innovation policies may be more effective when they combine public support for research and development
with policy mixes that provide incentives for technology diffusion. (high confidence) {4.4.4, 4.4.5}.

D.5.6

Education, information, and community approaches, including those that are informed by indigenous knowledge and local
knowledge, can accelerate the wide-scale behaviour changes consistent with adapting to and limiting global warming to
1.5C. These approaches are more effective when combined with other policies and tailored to the motivations, capabilities
and resources of specific actors and contexts (high confidence). Public acceptability can enable or inhibit the implementation
of policies and measures to limit global warming to 1.5C and to adapt to the consequences. Public acceptability depends
on the individual's evaluation of expected policy consequences, the perceived fairness of the distribution of these
consequences, and perceived fairness of decision procedures (high confidence). {1.1, 1.5, 4.3.5, 4.4.1, 4.4.3, Box 4.3, 5.5.3,
5.6.5}

D.6

Sustainable development supports, and often enables, the fundamental societal and systems
transitions and transformations that help limit global warming to 1.5C. Such changes facilitate the
pursuit of climate-resilient development pathways that achieve ambitious mitigation and adaptation
in conjunction with poverty eradication and efforts to reduce inequalities (high confidence). {Box 1.1,
1.4.3, Figure 5.1, 5.5.3, Box 5.3}

D.6.1

Social justice and equity are core aspects of climate-resilient development pathways that aim to limit global warming to
1.5C as they address challenges and inevitable trade-offs, widen opportunities, and ensure that options, visions, and values
are deliberated, between and within countries and communities, without making the poor and disadvantaged worse off
(high confidence). {5.5.2, 5.5.3, Box 5.3, Figure 5.1, Figure 5.6, Cross-Chapter Boxes 12 and 13 in Chapter 5}

D.6.2

The potential for climate-resilient development pathways differs between and within regions and nations, due to different
development contexts and systemic vulnerabilities (very high confidence). Efforts along such pathways to date have been
limited (medium confidence) and enhanced efforts would involve strengthened and timely action from all countries and
non-state actors (high confidence). {5.5.1, 5.5.3, Figure 5.1}

D.6.3

Pathways that are consistent with sustainable development show fewer mitigation and adaptation challenges and are
associated with lower mitigation costs. The large majority of modelling studies could not construct pathways characterized
by lack of international cooperation, inequality and poverty that were able to limit global warming to 1.5C. (high
confidence) {2.3.1, 2.5.1, 2.5.3, 5.5.2}

Summary for Policymakers

D.7

Strengthening the capacities for climate action of national and sub-national authorities, civil society,
the private sector, indigenous peoples and local communities can support the implementation of
ambitious actions implied by limiting global warming to 1.5C (high confidence). International
cooperation can provide an enabling environment for this to be achieved in all countries and for all
people, in the context of sustainable development. International cooperation is a critical enabler for
developing countries and vulnerable regions (high confidence). {1.4, 2.3, 2.5, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5,
5.6, 5, Box 4.1, Box 4.2, Box 4.7, Box 5.3, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 13 in
Chapter 5}

D.7.1

Partnerships involving non-state public and private actors, institutional investors, the banking system, civil society and
scientific institutions would facilitate actions and responses consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5C (very high
confidence). {1.4, 4.4.1, 4.2.2, 4.4.3, 4.4.5, 4.5.3, 5.4.1, 5.6.2, Box 5.3}.

D.7.2

Cooperation on strengthened accountable multilevel governance that includes non-state actors such as industry, civil
society and scientific institutions, coordinated sectoral and cross-sectoral policies at various governance levels, gendersensitive policies, finance including innovative financing, and cooperation on technology development and transfer can
ensure participation, transparency, capacity building and learning among different players (high confidence). {2.5.1, 2.5.2,
4.2.2, 4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.3, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, 4.5.3, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, 5.3.1, 5.5.3, Cross-Chapter Box 13 in Chapter
5, 5.6.1, 5.6.3}

D.7.3

International cooperation is a critical enabler for developing countries and vulnerable regions to strengthen their action for
the implementation of 1.5C-consistent climate responses, including through enhancing access to finance and technology
and enhancing domestic capacities, taking into account national and local circumstances and needs (high confidence).
{2.3.1, 2.5.1, 4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, 5.4.1 5.5.3, 5.6.1, Box 4.1, Box 4.2, Box 4.7}.

D.7.4

Collective efforts at all levels, in ways that reflect different circumstances and capabilities, in the pursuit of limiting global
warming to 1.5C, taking into account equity as well as effectiveness, can facilitate strengthening the global response to
climate change, achieving sustainable development and eradicating poverty (high confidence). {1.4.2, 2.3.1, 2.5.1, 2.5.2,
2.5.3, 4.2.2, 4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.3, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, 4.5.3, 5.3.1, 5.4.1, 5.5.3, 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.6.3}

SPM

23

Summary for Policymakers

Box SPM.1: Core Concepts Central to this Special Report
Global mean surface temperature (GMST): Estimated global average of near-surface air temperatures over land and
sea ice, and sea surface temperatures over ice-free ocean regions, with changes normally expressed as departures from a
value over a specified reference period. When estimating changes in GMST, near-surface air temperature over both land
and oceans are also used.19 {1.2.1.1}

SPM

Pre-industrial: The multi-century period prior to the onset of large-scale industrial activity around 1750. The reference
period 1850-1900 is used to approximate pre-industrial GMST. {1.2.1.2}
Global warming: The estimated increase in GMST averaged over a 30-year period, or the 30-year period centred on a
particular year or decade, expressed relative to pre-industrial levels unless otherwise specified. For 30-year periods that
span past and future years, the current multi-decadal warming trend is assumed to continue. {1.2.1}
Net zero CO2 emissions: Net zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are achieved when anthropogenic CO2 emissions are
balanced globally by anthropogenic CO2 removals over a specified period.
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR): Anthropogenic activities removing CO2 from the atmosphere and durably storing it in
geological, terrestrial, or ocean reservoirs, or in products. It includes existing and potential anthropogenic enhancement of
biological or geochemical sinks and direct air capture and storage, but excludes natural CO2 uptake not directly caused by
human activities.
Total carbon budget: Estimated cumulative net global anthropogenic CO2 emissions from the pre-industrial period
to the time that anthropogenic CO2 emissions reach net zero that would result, at some probability, in limiting global
warming to a given level, accounting for the impact of other anthropogenic emissions. {2.2.2}
Remaining carbon budget: Estimated cumulative net global anthropogenic CO2 emissions from a given start date to the
time that anthropogenic CO2 emissions reach net zero that would result, at some probability, in limiting global warming
to a given level, accounting for the impact of other anthropogenic emissions. {2.2.2}
Temperature overshoot: The temporary exceedance of a specified level of global warming.
Emission pathways: In this Summary for Policymakers, the modelled trajectories of global anthropogenic emissions over
the 21st century are termed emission pathways. Emission pathways are classified by their temperature trajectory over
the 21st century: pathways giving at least 50% probability based on current knowledge of limiting global warming to
below 1.5C are classified as `no overshoot'; those limiting warming to below 1.6C and returning to 1.5C by 2100 are
classified as `1.5C limited-overshoot'; while those exceeding 1.6C but still returning to 1.5C by 2100 are classified as
`higher-overshoot'.
Impacts: Effects of climate change on human and natural systems. Impacts can have beneficial or adverse outcomes
for livelihoods, health and well-being, ecosystems and species, services, infrastructure, and economic, social and cultural
assets.
Risk: The potential for adverse consequences from a climate-related hazard for human and natural systems, resulting
from the interactions between the hazard and the vulnerability and exposure of the affected system. Risk integrates
the likelihood of exposure to a hazard and the magnitude of its impact. Risk also can describe the potential for adverse
consequences of adaptation or mitigation responses to climate change.
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs): Trajectories that strengthen sustainable development at multiple
scales and efforts to eradicate poverty through equitable societal and systems transitions and transformations while
reducing the threat of climate change through ambitious mitigation, adaptation and climate resilience.

19 Past IPCC reports, reflecting the literature, have used a variety of approximately equivalent metrics of GMST change.

24

Technical Summary

TS

Technical Summary

TS

Coordinating Lead Authors:
Myles R. Allen (UK), Heleen de Coninck (Netherlands/EU), Opha Pauline Dube (Botswana),
Ove Hoegh-Guldberg (Australia), Daniela Jacob (Germany), Kejun Jiang (China), Aromar Revi
(India), Joeri Rogelj (Belgium/Austria), Joyashree Roy (India), Drew Shindell (USA), William
Solecki (USA), Michael Taylor (Jamaica), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria), Henri Waisman
(France)

Lead Authors:
Sharina Abdul Halim (Malaysia), Philip Antwi-Agyei (Ghana), Fernando Aragon-Durand
(Mexico), Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Marco Bindi (Italy), Sally Brown
(UK), Marcos Buckeridge (Brazil), Ines Camilloni (Argentina), Anton Cartwright (South
Africa), Wolfgang Cramer (France/Germany), Purnamita Dasgupta (India), Arona Diedhiou
(Ivory Coast/Senegal), Riyanti Djalante (Japan/Indonesia), Wenjie Dong (China), Kristie L. Ebi
(USA), Francois Engelbrecht (South Africa), Solomone Fifita (Fiji), James Ford (UK/Canada),
Piers Forster (UK), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Bronwyn Hayward (New Zealand), Jean-Charles
Hourcade (France), Veronika Ginzburg (Russia), Joel Guiot (France), Collins Handa (Kenya),
Yasuaki Hijioka (Japan), Stephen Humphreys (UK/Ireland), Mikiko Kainuma (Japan), Jatin
Kala (Australia), Markku Kanninen (Finland), Haroon Kheshgi (USA), Shigeki Kobayashi
(Japan), Elmar Kriegler (Germany), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Diana Liverman (USA),
Natalie Mahowald (USA), Reinhard Mechler (Germany), Shagun Mehrotra (USA/India),
Yacob Mulugetta (UK/Ethiopia), Luis Mundaca (Sweden/Chile), Peter Newman (Australia),
Chukwumerije Okereke (UK/Nigeria), Antony Payne (UK), Rosa Perez (Philippines), Patricia
Fernanda Pinho (Brazil), Anastasia Revokatova (Russian Federation), Keywan Riahi (Austria),
Seth Schultz (USA), Roland Seferian (France), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Linda Steg
(Netherlands), Avelino G. Suarez Rodriguez (Cuba), Taishi Sugiyama (Japan), Adelle Thomas
(Bahamas), Maria Virginia Vilarino (Argentina), Morgan Wairiu (Solomon Islands), Rachel
Warren (UK), Guangsheng Zhou (China), Kirsten Zickfeld (Canada/Germany)

27

Technical Summary

Contributing Authors:
Michelle Achlatis (Australia/Greece), Lisa V. Alexander (Australia), Malcolm Araos (Maldives/
Canada), Stefan Bakker (Netherlands), Mook Bangalore (USA), Amir Bazaz (India), Ella
Belfer (Canada), Tim Benton (UK), Peter Berry (Canada), Bishwa Bhaskar Choudhary (India),
Christopher Boyer (USA), Lorenzo Brilli (Italy), Katherine Calvin (USA), William Cheung
(Canada), Sarah Connors (France/UK), Joana Correia de Oliveira de Portugal Pereira (UK/
Portugal), Marlies Craig (South Africa), Dipak Dasgupta (India), Kiane de Kleijne (Netherlands/
EU), Maria del Mar Zamora Dominguez (Mexico), Michel den Elzen (Netherlands), Haile
Eakin (USA), Oreane Edelenbosch (Netherlands/Italy), Neville Ellis (Australia), Johannes
Emmerling (Italy/Germany), Jason Evans (Australia), Maria Figueroa (Denmark/Venezuela),
Dominique Finon (France), Hubertus Fisher (Switzerland), Klaus Fraedrich (Germany), Jan
Fuglestvedt (Norway), Anjani Ganase (Trinidad and Tobago), Thomas Gasser (Austria/
France), Jean Pierre Gattuso (France), Frederic Ghersi (France), Nathan Gillett (Canada),
Adriana Grandis (Brazil), Peter Greve (Germany/Austria), Tania Guillen Bolanos (Germany/
Nicaragua), Mukesh Gupta (India), Amaha Medhin Haileselassie (Ethiopia), Naota Hanasaki
(Japan), Tomoko Hasegawa (Japan), Eamon Haughey (Ireland), Katie Hayes (Canada),
Chenmin He (China), Edgar Hertwich (USA/Austria), Diana Hinge Salili (Vanuatu), Annette
Hirsch (Australia/Switzerland), Lena Hoglund-Isaksson (Austria/Sweden), Daniel Huppmann
(Austria), Saleemul Huq (Bangladesh/UK), Rachel James (UK), Chris Jones (UK), Thomas Jung
(Germany), Richard Klein (Netherlands/Germany), Gerhard Krinner (France), David Lawrence
(USA), Tim Lenton (UK), Gunnar Luderer (Germany), Peter Marcotullio (USA), Anil Markandya
(Spain/UK), Omar Massera (Mexico), David L. McCollum (Austria/USA), Kathleen McInnes
(Australia), Malte Meinshausen (Australia/Germany), Katrin J. Meissner (Australia), Richard
Millar (UK), Katja Mintenbeck (Germany), Dann Mitchell (UK), Alan C. Mix (USA), Dirk Notz
(Germany), Leonard Nurse (Barbados), Andrew Okem (Nigeria), Lennart Olsson (Sweden),
Carolyn Opio (Uganda), Michael Oppenheimer (USA), Karen Paiva Henrique (Brazil), Simon
Parkinson (Canada), Shlomit Paz (Israel), Juliane Petersen (Germany), Jan Petzold (Germany),
Maxime Plazzotta (France), Alexander Popp (Germany), Swantje Preuschmann (Germany),
Pallav Purohit (Austria/India), Graciela Raga (Mexico/Argentina), Mohammad Feisal Rahman
(Bangladesh), Andy Reisinger (New Zealand), Kevon Rhiney (Jamaica), Aurelien Ribes
(France), Mark Richardson (USA/UK), Wilfried Rickels (Germany), Timmons Roberts (USA),
Maisa Rojas (Chile), Harry Saunders (Canada/USA), Christina Schadel (USA/Switzerland),
Hanna Scheuffele (Germany), Lisa Schipper (UK/Sweden), Carl-Friedrich Schleussner
(Germany), Jorn Schmidt (Germany), Daniel Scott (Canada), Jana Sillmann (Germany/
Norway), Chandni Singh (India), Raphael Slade (UK), Christopher Smith (UK), Pete Smith (UK),
Shreya Some (India), Gerd Sparovek (Brazil), Will Steffen (Australia), Kimberly Stephenson
(Jamaica), Tannecia Stephenson (Jamaica), Pablo Suarez (Argentina), Mouhamadou B. Sylla
(Senegal), Nenenteiti Teariki-Ruatu (Kiribati), Mark Tebboth (UK), Peter Thorne (Ireland/UK),
Evelina Trutnevyte (Switzerland/Lithuania), Penny Urquhart (South Africa), Arjan van Rooij
(Netherlands), Anne M. van Valkengoed (Netherlands), Robert Vautard (France), Richard
Wartenburger (Germany/Switzerland), Michael Wehner (USA), Margaretha WewerinkeSingh (Netherlands), Nora M. Weyer (Germany), Felicia Whyte (Jamaica), Lini Wollenberg
(USA), Yang Xiu (China), Gary Yohe (USA), Xuebin Zhang (Canada), Wenji Zhou (Austria/
China), Robert B. Zougmore (Burkina Faso/Mali)

TS

28

Technical Summary

Review Editors:
Amjad Abdulla (Maldives), Rizaldi Boer (Indonesia), Ismail Elgizouli Idris (Sudan), Andreas
Fischlin (Switzerland), Greg Flato (Canada), Jan Fuglestvedt (Norway), Xuejie Gao (China),
Mark Howden (Australia), Svitlana Krakovska (Ukraine), Ramon Pichs Madruga (Cuba), Jose
Antonio Marengo (Brazil/Peru), Rachid Mrabet (Morocco), Joy Pereira (Malaysia), Roberto
Sanchez (Mexico), Roberto Schaeffer (Brazil), Boris Sherstyukov (Russian Federation), Diana
Urge-Vorsatz (Hungary)

Chapter Scientists:
Daniel Huppmann (Austria), Tania Guillen Bolanos (Germany/Nicaragua), Neville Ellis
(Australia), Kiane de Kleijne (Netherlands/EU), Richard Millar (UK), Chandni Singh (India),
Chris Smith (UK)
TS

This Technical Summary should be cited as:
Allen, M.R., H. de Coninck, O.P. Dube, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, D. Jacob, K. Jiang, A. Revi, J. Rogelj, J. Roy, D. Shindell,
W. Solecki, M. Taylor, P. Tschakert, H. Waisman, S. Abdul Halim, P. Antwi-Agyei, F. Aragon-Durand, M. Babiker,
P. Bertoldi, M. Bindi, S. Brown, M. Buckeridge, I. Camilloni, A. Cartwright, W. Cramer, P. Dasgupta, A. Diedhiou,
R. Djalante, W. Dong, K.L. Ebi, F. Engelbrecht, S. Fifita, J. Ford, P. Forster, S. Fuss, V. Ginzburg, J. Guiot, C. Handa,
B. Hayward, Y. Hijioka, J.-C. Hourcade, S. Humphreys, M. Kainuma, J. Kala, M. Kanninen, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayashi,
E. Kriegler, D. Ley, D. Liverman, N. Mahowald, R. Mechler, S. Mehrotra, Y. Mulugetta, L. Mundaca, P. Newman, C.
Okereke, A. Payne, R. Perez, P.F. Pinho, A. Revokatova, K. Riahi, S. Schultz, R. Seferian, S.I. Seneviratne, L. Steg,
A.G. Suarez Rodriguez, T. Sugiyama, A. Thomas, M.V. Vilarino, M. Wairiu, R. Warren, K. Zickfeld, and G. Zhou,
2018: Technical Summary. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the
context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and
efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani,
W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy,
T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

29

Technical Summary

Table of Contents
TS.1

Framing and Context......................................................31

TS.2 Mitigation Pathways Compatible
 with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable
 Development....................................................................32

TS

TS.3


Impacts of 1.5C Global Warming
on Natural and Human Systems..................................35

TS.4


Strengthening and Implementing
the Global Response.......................................................40

TS.5


Sustainable Development, Poverty
Eradication and Reducing Inequalities.....................44

30

Technical Summary

TS.1

Framing and Context

This chapter frames the context, knowledge-base and assessment
approaches used to understand the impacts of 1.5C global warming
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas
emission pathways, building on the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report
(AR5), in the context of strengthening the global response to the
threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to
eradicate poverty.
Human-induced warming reached approximately 1C (likely)
between 0.8C and 1.2C) above pre-industrial levels in 2017,
increasing at 0.2C (likely between 0.1C and 0.3C) per
decade (high confidence). Global warming is defined in this report
as an increase in combined surface air and sea surface temperatures
averaged over the globe and over a 30-year period. Unless otherwise
specified, warming is expressed relative to the period 1850-1900,
used as an approximation of pre-industrial temperatures in AR5.
For periods shorter than 30 years, warming refers to the estimated
average temperature over the 30 years centred on that shorter
period, accounting for the impact of any temperature fluctuations
or trend within those 30 years. Accordingly, warming from preindustrial levels to the decade 2006-2015 is assessed to be 0.87C
(likely between 0.75C and 0.99C). Since 2000, the estimated level
of human-induced warming has been equal to the level of observed
warming with a likely range of 20% accounting for uncertainty due
to contributions from solar and volcanic activity over the historical
period (high confidence). {1.2.1}
Warming greater than the global average has already been
experienced in many regions and seasons, with higher average
warming over land than over the ocean (high confidence). Most
land regions are experiencing greater warming than the global average,
while most ocean regions are warming at a slower rate. Depending
on the temperature dataset considered, 20-40% of the global human
population live in regions that, by the decade 2006-2015, had already
experienced warming of more than 1.5C above pre-industrial in at
least one season (medium confidence). {1.2.1, 1.2.2}
Past emissions alone are unlikely to raise global-mean
temperature to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels (medium
confidence), but past emissions do commit to other changes,
such as further sea level rise (high confidence). If all
anthropogenic emissions (including aerosol-related) were reduced
to zero immediately, any further warming beyond the 1C already
experienced would likely be less than 0.5C over the next two to
three decades (high confidence), and likely less than 0.5C on a
century time scale (medium confidence), due to the opposing effects
of different climate processes and drivers. A warming greater than
1.5C is therefore not geophysically unavoidable: whether it will
occur depends on future rates of emission reductions. {1.2.3, 1.2.4}
1.5C emission pathways are defined as those that, given
current knowledge of the climate response, provide a onein-two to two-in-three chance of warming either remaining
below 1.5C or returning to 1.5C by around 2100 following

an overshoot. Overshoot pathways are characterized by the peak
magnitude of the overshoot, which may have implications for
impacts. All 1.5C pathways involve limiting cumulative emissions
of long-lived greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide and nitrous
oxide, and substantial reductions in other climate forcers (high
confidence). Limiting cumulative emissions requires either reducing
net global emissions of long-lived greenhouse gases to zero before
the cumulative limit is reached, or net negative global emissions
(anthropogenic removals) after the limit is exceeded. {1.2.3, 1.2.4,
Cross-Chapter Boxes 1 and 2}
This report assesses projected impacts at a global average
warming of 1.5C and higher levels of warming. Global warming
of 1.5C is associated with global average surface temperatures
fluctuating naturally on either side of 1.5C, together with warming
substantially greater than 1.5C in many regions and seasons (high
confidence), all of which must be considered in the assessment of
impacts. Impacts at 1.5C of warming also depend on the emission
pathway to 1.5C. Very different impacts result from pathways
that remain below 1.5C versus pathways that return to 1.5C
after a substantial overshoot, and when temperatures stabilize at
1.5C versus a transient warming past 1.5C (medium confidence).
{1.2.3, 1.3}
Ethical considerations, and the principle of equity in particular,
are central to this report, recognizing that many of the impacts
of warming up to and beyond 1.5C, and some potential
impacts of mitigation actions required to limit warming to
1.5C, fall disproportionately on the poor and vulnerable (high
confidence). Equity has procedural and distributive dimensions and
requires fairness in burden sharing both between generations and
between and within nations. In framing the objective of holding the
increase in the global average temperature rise to well below 2C
above pre-industrial levels, and to pursue efforts to limit warming to
1.5C, the Paris Agreement associates the principle of equity with the
broader goals of poverty eradication and sustainable development,
recognising that effective responses to climate change require a
global collective effort that may be guided by the 2015 United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals. {1.1.1}
Climate adaptation refers to the actions taken to manage
impacts of climate change by reducing vulnerability and
exposure to its harmful effects and exploiting any potential
benefits. Adaptation takes place at international, national and
local levels. Subnational jurisdictions and entities, including urban
and rural municipalities, are key to developing and reinforcing
measures for reducing weather- and climate-related risks. Adaptation
implementation faces several barriers including lack of up-to-date and
locally relevant information, lack of finance and technology, social
values and attitudes, and institutional constraints (high confidence).
Adaptation is more likely to contribute to sustainable development
when policies align with mitigation and poverty eradication goals
(medium confidence). {1.1, 1.4}
Ambitious mitigation actions are indispensable to limit
warming to 1.5C while achieving sustainable development
and poverty eradication (high confidence). Ill-designed responses,
31

TS

Technical Summary

however, could pose challenges especially - but not exclusively - for
countries and regions contending with poverty and those requiring
significant transformation of their energy systems. This report focuses
on `climate-resilient development pathways', which aim to meet the
goals of sustainable development, including climate adaptation and
mitigation, poverty eradication and reducing inequalities. But any
feasible pathway that remains within 1.5C involves synergies and
trade-offs (high confidence). Significant uncertainty remains as to
which pathways are more consistent with the principle of equity.
{1.1.1, 1.4}

TS

Multiple forms of knowledge, including scientific evidence,
narrative scenarios and prospective pathways, inform the
understanding of 1.5C. This report is informed by traditional
evidence of the physical climate system and associated impacts and
vulnerabilities of climate change, together with knowledge drawn
from the perceptions of risk and the experiences of climate impacts
and governance systems. Scenarios and pathways are used to
explore conditions enabling goal-oriented futures while recognizing
the significance of ethical considerations, the principle of equity, and
the societal transformation needed. {1.2.3, 1.5.2}
There is no single answer to the question of whether it
is feasible to limit warming to 1.5C and adapt to the
consequences. Feasibility is considered in this report as the
capacity of a system as a whole to achieve a specific outcome. The
global transformation that would be needed to limit warming to
1.5C requires enabling conditions that reflect the links, synergies
and trade-offs between mitigation, adaptation and sustainable
development. These enabling conditions are assessed across many
dimensions of feasibility - geophysical, environmental-ecological,
technological, economic, socio-cultural and institutional - that
may be considered through the unifying lens of the Anthropocene,
acknowledging profound, differential but increasingly geologically
significant human influences on the Earth system as a whole. This
framing also emphasises the global interconnectivity of past, present
and future human-environment relations, highlighting the need and
opportunities for integrated responses to achieve the goals of the
Paris Agreement. {1.1, Cross-Chapter Box 1}

TS.2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible
with 1.5C in the Context of
Sustainable Development

This chapter assesses mitigation pathways consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. In doing so, it explores
the following key questions: What role do CO2 and non-CO2 emissions
play? {2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.6} To what extent do 1.5C pathways involve
overshooting and returning below 1.5C during the 21st century? {2.2,
2.3} What are the implications for transitions in energy, land use and
sustainable development? {2.3, 2.4, 2.5} How do policy frameworks
affect the ability to limit warming to 1.5C? {2.3, 2.5} What are the
associated knowledge gaps? {2.6}
The assessed pathways describe integrated, quantitative
evolutions of all emissions over the 21st century associated
with global energy and land use and the world economy. The
assessment is contingent upon available integrated assessment
literature and model assumptions, and is complemented by other
studies with different scope, for example, those focusing on individual
sectors. In recent years, integrated mitigation studies have improved
the characterizations of mitigation pathways. However, limitations
remain, as climate damages, avoided impacts, or societal co-benefits
of the modelled transformations remain largely unaccounted for, while
concurrent rapid technological changes, behavioural aspects, and
uncertainties about input data present continuous challenges. (high
confidence) {2.1.3, 2.3, 2.5.1, 2.6, Technical Annex 2}

The Chances of Limiting Warming to 1.5C
and the Requirements for Urgent Action
Pathways consistent with 1.5C of warming above pre-industrial
levels can be identified under a range of assumptions about
economic growth, technology developments and lifestyles.
However, lack of global cooperation, lack of governance of the required
energy and land transformation, and increases in resource-intensive
consumption are key impediments to achieving 1.5C pathways.
Governance challenges have been related to scenarios with high
inequality and high population growth in the 1.5C pathway literature.
{2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.5}
Under emissions in line with current pledges under the Paris
Agreement (known as Nationally Determined Contributions,
or NDCs), global warming is expected to surpass 1.5C above
pre-industrial levels, even if these pledges are supplemented
with very challenging increases in the scale and ambition of
mitigation after 2030 (high confidence). This increased action
would need to achieve net zero CO2 emissions in less than 15 years.
Even if this is achieved, temperatures would only be expected to remain
below the 1.5C threshold if the actual geophysical response ends up
being towards the low end of the currently estimated uncertainty range.
Transition challenges as well as identified trade-offs can be reduced if
global emissions peak before 2030 and marked emissions reductions
compared to today are already achieved by 2030. {2.2, 2.3.5, CrossChapter Box 11 in Chapter 4}

32

Technical Summary

Limiting warming to 1.5C depends on greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions over the next decades, where lower GHG emissions in
2030 lead to a higher chance of keeping peak warming to 1.5C
(high confidence). Available pathways that aim for no or limited (less
than 0.1C) overshoot of 1.5C keep GHG emissions in 2030 to 25-30
GtCO2e yr-1 in 2030 (interquartile range). This contrasts with median
estimates for current unconditional NDCs of 52-58 GtCO2e yr-1 in
2030. Pathways that aim for limiting warming to 1.5C by 2100 after
a temporary temperature overshoot rely on large-scale deployment
of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) measures, which are uncertain and
entail clear risks. In model pathways with no or limited overshoot of
1.5C, global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions decline by about 45%
from 2010 levels by 2030 (40-60% interquartile range), reaching net
zero around 2050 (2045-2055 interquartile range). For limiting global
warming to below 2C with at least 66% probability CO2 emissions
are projected to decline by about 25% by 2030 in most pathways (10-
30% interquartile range) and reach net zero around 2070 (2065-2080
interquartile range).1 {2.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.5, 2.5.3, Cross-Chapter Boxes 6 in
Chapter 3 and 9 in Chapter 4, 4.3.7}
Limiting warming to 1.5C implies reaching net zero CO2
emissions globally around 2050 and concurrent deep reductions
in emissions of non-CO2 forcers, particularly methane (high
confidence). Such mitigation pathways are characterized by energydemand reductions, decarbonization of electricity and other fuels,
electrification of energy end use, deep reductions in agricultural
emissions, and some form of CDR with carbon storage on land or
sequestration in geological reservoirs. Low energy demand and low
demand for land- and GHG-intensive consumption goods facilitate
limiting warming to as close as possible to 1.5C. {2.2.2, 2.3.1, 2.3.5,
2.5.1, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4}.
In comparison to a 2C limit, the transformations required to limit
warming to 1.5C are qualitatively similar but more pronounced
and rapid over the next decades (high confidence). 1.5C implies
very ambitious, internationally cooperative policy environments that
transform both supply and demand (high confidence). {2.3, 2.4, 2.5}
Policies reflecting a high price on emissions are necessary
in models to achieve cost-effective 1.5C pathways (high
confidence). Other things being equal, modelling studies suggest
the global average discounted marginal abatement costs for limiting
warming to 1.5C being about 3-4 times higher compared to 2C
over the 21st century, with large variations across models and socioeconomic and policy assumptions. Carbon pricing can be imposed
directly or implicitly by regulatory policies. Policy instruments, like
technology policies or performance standards, can complement explicit
carbon pricing in specific areas. {2.5.1, 2.5.2, 4.4.5}
Limiting warming to 1.5C requires a marked shift in investment
patterns (medium confidence). Additional annual average energyrelated investments for the period 2016 to 2050 in pathways limiting
warming to 1.5C compared to pathways without new climate policies
beyond those in place today (i.e., baseline) are estimated to be around

1

830 billion USD2010 (range of 150 billion to 1700 billion USD2010
across six models). Total energy-related investments increase by about
12% (range of 3% to 24%) in 1.5C pathways relative to 2C pathways.
Average annual investment in low-carbon energy technologies and
energy efficiency are upscaled by roughly a factor of six (range of factor
of 4 to 10) by 2050 compared to 2015, overtaking fossil investments
globally by around 2025 (medium confidence). Uncertainties and
strategic mitigation portfolio choices affect the magnitude and focus
of required investments. {2.5.2}

Future Emissions in 1.5C Pathways
Mitigation requirements can be quantified using carbon budget
approaches that relate cumulative CO2 emissions to global mean
temperature increase. Robust physical understanding underpins
this relationship, but uncertainties become increasingly relevant as a
specific temperature limit is approached. These uncertainties relate to
the transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions (TCRE),
non-CO2 emissions, radiative forcing and response, potential additional
Earth system feedbacks (such as permafrost thawing), and historical
emissions and temperature. {2.2.2, 2.6.1}
Cumulative CO2 emissions are kept within a budget by reducing
global annual CO2 emissions to net zero. This assessment
suggests a remaining budget of about 420 GtCO2 for a twothirds chance of limiting warming to 1.5C, and of about 580
GtCO2 for an even chance (medium confidence). The remaining
carbon budget is defined here as cumulative CO2 emissions from the
start of 2018 until the time of net zero global emissions for global
warming defined as a change in global near-surface air temperatures.
Remaining budgets applicable to 2100 would be approximately
100 GtCO2 lower than this to account for permafrost thawing and
potential methane release from wetlands in the future, and more
thereafter. These estimates come with an additional geophysical
uncertainty of at least 400 GtCO2, related to non-CO2 response
and TCRE distribution. Uncertainties in the level of historic warming
contribute 250 GtCO2. In addition, these estimates can vary by
250 GtCO2 depending on non-CO2 mitigation strategies as found in
available pathways. {2.2.2, 2.6.1}
Staying within a remaining carbon budget of 580 GtCO2 implies
that CO2 emissions reach carbon neutrality in about 30 years,
reduced to 20 years for a 420 GtCO2 remaining carbon budget
(high confidence). The 400 GtCO2 geophysical uncertainty range
surrounding a carbon budget translates into a variation of this timing
of carbon neutrality of roughly 15-20 years. If emissions do not start
declining in the next decade, the point of carbon neutrality would need
to be reached at least two decades earlier to remain within the same
carbon budget. {2.2.2, 2.3.5}
Non-CO2 emissions contribute to peak warming and thus
affect the remaining carbon budget. The evolution of
methane and sulphur dioxide emissions strongly influences
the chances of limiting warming to 1.5C. In the near-term, a

Kyoto-GHG emissions in this statement are aggregated with GWP-100 values of the IPCC Second Assessment Report.

33

TS

Technical Summary

weakening of aerosol cooling would add to future warming,
but can be tempered by reductions in methane emissions (high
confidence). Uncertainty in radiative forcing estimates (particularly
aerosol) affects carbon budgets and the certainty of pathway
categorizations. Some non-CO2 forcers are emitted alongside CO2,
particularly in the energy and transport sectors, and can be largely
addressed through CO2 mitigation. Others require specific measures,
for example, to target agricultural nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane
(CH4), some sources of black carbon, or hydrofluorocarbons (high
confidence). In many cases, non-CO2 emissions reductions are similar
in 2C pathways, indicating reductions near their assumed maximum
potential by integrated assessment models. Emissions of N2O and
NH3 increase in some pathways with strongly increased bioenergy
demand. {2.2.2, 2.3.1, 2.4.2, 2.5.3}
TS

The Role of Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)
All analysed pathways limiting warming to 1.5C with no
or limited overshoot use CDR to some extent to neutralize
emissions from sources for which no mitigation measures
have been identified and, in most cases, also to achieve
net negative emissions to return global warming to 1.5C
following a peak (high confidence). The longer the delay in
reducing CO2 emissions towards zero, the larger the likelihood
of exceeding 1.5C, and the heavier the implied reliance on
net negative emissions after mid-century to return warming to
1.5C (high confidence). The faster reduction of net CO2 emissions
in 1.5C compared to 2C pathways is predominantly achieved by
measures that result in less CO2 being produced and emitted, and
only to a smaller degree through additional CDR. Limitations on
the speed, scale and societal acceptability of CDR deployment also
limit the conceivable extent of temperature overshoot. Limits to our
understanding of how the carbon cycle responds to net negative
emissions increase the uncertainty about the effectiveness of CDR to
decline temperatures after a peak. {2.2, 2.3, 2.6, 4.3.7}
CDR deployed at scale is unproven, and reliance on such
technology is a major risk in the ability to limit warming to
1.5C. CDR is needed less in pathways with particularly strong
emphasis on energy efficiency and low demand. The scale and
type of CDR deployment varies widely across 1.5C pathways,
with different consequences for achieving sustainable
development objectives (high confidence). Some pathways rely
more on bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), while
others rely more on afforestation, which are the two CDR methods
most often included in integrated pathways. Trade-offs with other
sustainability objectives occur predominantly through increased land,
energy, water and investment demand. Bioenergy use is substantial
in 1.5C pathways with or without BECCS due to its multiple roles in
decarbonizing energy use. {2.3.1, 2.5.3, 2.6.3, 4.3.7}

Properties of Energy and Land Transitions in 1.5C Pathways
The share of primary energy from renewables increases while
coal usage decreases across pathways limiting warming to
1.5C with no or limited overshoot (high confidence). By 2050,
renewables (including bioenergy, hydro, wind, and solar, with direct34

equivalence method) supply a share of 52-67% (interquartile range)
of primary energy in 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot;
while the share from coal decreases to 1-7% (interquartile range),
with a large fraction of this coal use combined with carbon capture
and storage (CCS). From 2020 to 2050 the primary energy supplied
by oil declines in most pathways (-39 to -77% interquartile range).
Natural gas changes by -13% to -62% (interquartile range), but
some pathways show a marked increase albeit with widespread
deployment of CCS. The overall deployment of CCS varies widely
across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot, with cumulative
CO2 stored through 2050 ranging from zero up to 300 GtCO2
(minimum-maximum range), of which zero up to 140 GtCO2 is stored
from biomass. Primary energy supplied by bioenergy ranges from
40-310 EJ yr-1 in 2050 (minimum-maximum range), and nuclear from
3-66 EJ yr-1 (minimum-maximum range). These ranges reflect both
uncertainties in technological development and strategic mitigation
portfolio choices. {2.4.2}
1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot include a rapid
decline in the carbon intensity of electricity and an increase
in electrification of energy end use (high confidence). By 2050,
the carbon intensity of electricity decreases to -92 to +11 gCO2 MJ-1
(minimum-maximum range) from about 140 gCO2 MJ-1 in 2020,
and electricity covers 34-71% (minimum-maximum range) of final
energy across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot from
about 20% in 2020. By 2050, the share of electricity supplied by
renewables increases to 59-97% (minimum-maximum range) across
1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot. Pathways with higher
chances of holding warming to below 1.5C generally show a faster
decline in the carbon intensity of electricity by 2030 than pathways
that temporarily overshoot 1.5C. {2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.3}
Transitions in global and regional land use are found in all
pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited
overshoot, but their scale depends on the pursued mitigation
portfolio (high confidence). Pathways that limit global warming to
1.5C with no or limited overshoot project a 4 million km2 reduction
to a 2.5 million km2 increase of non-pasture agricultural land for food
and feed crops and a 0.5-11 million km2 reduction of pasture land,
to be converted into 0-6 million km2 of agricultural land for energy
crops and a 2 million km2 reduction to 9.5 million km2 increase in
forests by 2050 relative to 2010 (medium confidence). Land-use
transitions of similar magnitude can be observed in modelled 2C
pathways (medium confidence). Such large transitions pose profound
challenges for sustainable management of the various demands on
land for human settlements, food, livestock feed, fibre, bioenergy,
carbon storage, biodiversity and other ecosystem services (high
confidence). {2.3.4, 2.4.4}

Demand-Side Mitigation and Behavioural Changes
Demand-side measures are key elements of 1.5C pathways.
Lifestyle choices lowering energy demand and the land- and
GHG-intensity of food consumption can further support
achievement of 1.5C pathways (high confidence). By 2030 and
2050, all end-use sectors (including building, transport, and industry)
show marked energy demand reductions in modelled 1.5C pathways,

Technical Summary

comparable and beyond those projected in 2C pathways. Sectoral
models support the scale of these reductions. {2.3.4, 2.4.3, 2.5.1}

TS.3

Impacts of 1.5C Global Warming
on Natural and Human Systems

Links between 1.5C Pathways and Sustainable Development
Choices about mitigation portfolios for limiting warming to
1.5C can positively or negatively impact the achievement of
other societal objectives, such as sustainable development
(high confidence). In particular, demand-side and efficiency
measures, and lifestyle choices that limit energy, resource, and
GHG-intensive food demand support sustainable development
(medium confidence). Limiting warming to 1.5C can be achieved
synergistically with poverty alleviation and improved energy security
and can provide large public health benefits through improved air
quality, preventing millions of premature deaths. However, specific
mitigation measures, such as bioenergy, may result in trade-offs that
require consideration. {2.5.1, 2.5.2, 2.5.3}

This chapter builds on findings of AR5 and assesses new scientific
evidence of changes in the climate system and the associated impacts
on natural and human systems, with a specific focus on the magnitude
and pattern of risks linked for global warming of 1.5C above
temperatures in the pre-industrial period. Chapter 3 explores observed
impacts and projected risks to a range of natural and human systems,
with a focus on how risk levels change from 1.5C to 2C of global
warming. The chapter also revisits major categories of risk (Reasons for
Concern, RFC) based on the assessment of new knowledge that has
become available since AR5.

1.5C and 2C Warmer Worlds

TS

The global climate has changed relative to the pre-industrial
period, and there are multiple lines of evidence that these
changes have had impacts on organisms and ecosystems, as
well as on human systems and well-being (high confidence). The
increase in global mean surface temperature (GMST), which reached
0.87C in 2006-2015 relative to 1850-1900, has increased the
frequency and magnitude of impacts (high confidence), strengthening
evidence of how an increase in GMST of 1.5C or more could impact
natural and human systems (1.5C versus 2C). {3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6,
Cross-Chapter Boxes 6, 7 and 8 in this chapter}
Human-induced global warming has already caused multiple
observed changes in the climate system (high confidence).
Changes include increases in both land and ocean temperatures, as well
as more frequent heatwaves in most land regions (high confidence).
There is also high confidence that global warming has resulted in an
increase in the frequency and duration of marine heatwaves. Further,
there is substantial evidence that human-induced global warming has
led to an increase in the frequency, intensity and/or amount of heavy
precipitation events at the global scale (medium confidence), as well
as an increased risk of drought in the Mediterranean region (medium
confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, Box 3.4}
Trends in intensity and frequency of some climate and weather
extremes have been detected over time spans during which
about 0.5C of global warming occurred (medium confidence).
This assessment is based on several lines of evidence, including
attribution studies for changes in extremes since 1950. {3.2, 3.3.1,
3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4}
Several regional changes in climate are assessed to occur with
global warming up to 1.5C as compared to pre-industrial
levels, including warming of extreme temperatures in many
regions (high confidence), increases in frequency, intensity and/or
amount of heavy precipitation in several regions (high confidence),
and an increase in intensity or frequency of droughts in some regions
(medium confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, Table 3.2}
There is no single `1.5C warmer world' (high confidence). In
addition to the overall increase in GMST, it is important to consider the
35

Technical Summary

TS

size and duration of potential overshoots in temperature. Furthermore,
there are questions on how the stabilization of an increase in GMST of
1.5C can be achieved, and how policies might be able to influence the
resilience of human and natural systems, and the nature of regional
and subregional risks. Overshooting poses large risks for natural and
human systems, especially if the temperature at peak warming is
high, because some risks may be long-lasting and irreversible, such
as the loss of some ecosystems (high confidence). The rate of change
for several types of risks may also have relevance, with potentially
large risks in the case of a rapid rise to overshooting temperatures,
even if a decrease to 1.5C can be achieved at the end of the 21st
century or later (medium confidence). If overshoot is to be minimized,
the remaining equivalent CO2 budget available for emissions is very
small, which implies that large, immediate and unprecedented global
efforts to mitigate greenhouse gases are required (high confidence).
{3.2, 3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter}
Robust1 global differences in temperature means and extremes
are expected if global warming reaches 1.5C versus 2C above
the pre-industrial levels (high confidence). For oceans, regional
surface temperature means and extremes are projected to be higher
at 2C compared to 1.5C of global warming (high confidence).
Temperature means and extremes are also projected to be higher at
2C compared to 1.5C in most land regions, with increases being
2-3 times greater than the increase in GMST projected for some
regions (high confidence). Robust increases in temperature means and
extremes are also projected at 1.5C compared to present-day values
(high confidence) {3.3.1, 3.3.2}. There are decreases in the occurrence
of cold extremes, but substantial increases in their temperature, in
particular in regions with snow or ice cover (high confidence) {3.3.1}.
Climate models project robust2 differences in regional climate
between present-day and global warming up to 1.5C3, and
between 1.5C and 2C3 (high confidence), depending on the
variable and region in question (high confidence). Large, robust
and widespread differences are expected for temperature
extremes (high confidence). Regarding hot extremes, the strongest
warming is expected to occur at mid-latitudes in the warm season (with
increases of up to 3C for 1.5C of global warming, i.e., a factor of two)
and at high latitudes in the cold season (with increases of up to 4.5C
at 1.5C of global warming, i.e., a factor of three) (high confidence).
The strongest warming of hot extremes is projected to occur in
central and eastern North America, central and southern Europe, the
Mediterranean region (including southern Europe, northern Africa and
the Near East), western and central Asia, and southern Africa (medium
confidence). The number of exceptionally hot days are expected to
increase the most in the tropics, where interannual temperature
variability is lowest; extreme heatwaves are thus projected to emerge
earliest in these regions, and they are expected to already become
widespread there at 1.5C global warming (high confidence). Limiting
global warming to 1.5C instead of 2C could result in around 420
million fewer people being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves,

and about 65 million fewer people being exposed to exceptional
heatwaves, assuming constant vulnerability (medium confidence).
{3.3.1, 3.3.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter}
Limiting global warming to 1.5C would limit risks of increases
in heavy precipitation events on a global scale and in several
regions compared to conditions at 2C global warming
(medium confidence). The regions with the largest increases in heavy
precipitation events for 1.5C to 2C global warming include: several
high-latitude regions (e.g. Alaska/western Canada, eastern Canada/
Greenland/Iceland, northern Europe and northern Asia); mountainous
regions (e.g., Tibetan Plateau); eastern Asia (including China and Japan);
and eastern North America (medium confidence). Tropical cyclones are
projected to decrease in frequency but with an increase in the number
of very intense cyclones (limited evidence, low confidence). Heavy
precipitation associated with tropical cyclones is projected to be higher
at 2C compared to 1.5C of global warming (medium confidence).
Heavy precipitation, when aggregated at a global scale, is projected to
be higher at 2C than at 1.5C of global warming (medium confidence)
{3.3.3, 3.3.6}
Limiting global warming to 1.5C is expected to substantially
reduce the probability of extreme drought, precipitation deficits,
and risks associated with water availability (i.e., water stress) in
some regions (medium confidence). In particular, risks associated
with increases in drought frequency and magnitude are projected to be
substantially larger at 2C than at 1.5C in the Mediterranean region
(including southern Europe, northern Africa and the Near East) and
southern Africa (medium confidence). {3.3.3, 3.3.4, Box 3.1, Box 3.2}
Risks to natural and human systems are expected to be lower
at 1.5C than at 2C of global warming (high confidence). This
difference is due to the smaller rates and magnitudes of climate
change associated with a 1.5C temperature increase, including lower
frequencies and intensities of temperature-related extremes. Lower
rates of change enhance the ability of natural and human systems
to adapt, with substantial benefits for a wide range of terrestrial,
freshwater, wetland, coastal and ocean ecosystems (including coral
reefs) (high confidence), as well as food production systems, human
health, and tourism (medium confidence), together with energy
systems and transportation (low confidence). {3.3.1, 3.4}
Exposure to multiple and compound climate-related risks is
projected to increase between 1.5C and 2C of global warming
with greater proportions of people both exposed and susceptible to
poverty in Africa and Asia (high confidence). For global warming from
1.5C to 2C, risks across energy, food, and water sectors could overlap
spatially and temporally, creating new - and exacerbating current -
hazards, exposures, and vulnerabilities that could affect increasing
numbers of people and regions (medium confidence). Small island
states and economically disadvantaged populations are particularly at
risk (high confidence). {3.3.1, 3.4.5.3, 3.4.5.6, 3.4.11, 3.5.4.9, Box 3.5}

2

Robust is used here to mean that at least two thirds of climate models show the same sign of changes at the grid point scale, and that differences in large regions are
statistically significant.

3

Projected changes in impacts between different levels of global warming are determined with respect to changes in global mean near-surface air temperature.

36

Technical Summary

Global warming of 2C would lead to an expansion of areas with
significant increases in runoff, as well as those affected by flood
hazard, compared to conditions at 1.5C (medium confidence).
Global warming of 1.5C would also lead to an expansion of the global
land area with significant increases in runoff (medium confidence) and
an increase in flood hazard in some regions (medium confidence)
compared to present-day conditions. {3.3.5}
The probability of a sea-ice-free Arctic Ocean4 during summer
is substantially higher at 2C compared to 1.5C of global
warming (medium confidence). Model simulations suggest that
at least one sea-ice-free Arctic summer is expected every 10 years
for global warming of 2C, with the frequency decreasing to one
sea-ice-free Arctic summer every 100 years under 1.5C (medium
confidence). An intermediate temperature overshoot will have no longterm consequences for Arctic sea ice coverage, and hysteresis is not
expected (high confidence). {3.3.8, 3.4.4.7}
Global mean sea level rise (GMSLR) is projected to be around
0.1 m (0.04 - 0.16 m) less by the end of the 21st century in a
1.5C warmer world compared to a 2C warmer world (medium
confidence). Projected GMSLR for 1.5C of global warming has an
indicative range of 0.26 - 0.77m, relative to 1986-2005, (medium
confidence). A smaller sea level rise could mean that up to 10.4 million
fewer people (based on the 2010 global population and assuming no
adaptation) would be exposed to the impacts of sea level rise globally
in 2100 at 1.5C compared to at 2C. A slower rate of sea level rise
enables greater opportunities for adaptation (medium confidence).
There is high confidence that sea level rise will continue beyond 2100.
Instabilities exist for both the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, which
could result in multi-meter rises in sea level on time scales of century
to millennia. There is medium confidence that these instabilities could
be triggered at around 1.5C to 2C of global warming. {3.3.9, 3.4.5,
3.6.3}
The ocean has absorbed about 30% of the anthropogenic
carbon dioxide, resulting in ocean acidification and changes to
carbonate chemistry that are unprecedented for at least the
last 65 million years (high confidence). Risks have been identified
for the survival, calcification, growth, development and abundance of
a broad range of marine taxonomic groups, ranging from algae to fish,
with substantial evidence of predictable trait-based sensitivities (high
confidence). There are multiple lines of evidence that ocean warming
and acidification corresponding to 1.5C of global warming would
impact a wide range of marine organisms and ecosystems, as well as
sectors such as aquaculture and fisheries (high confidence). {3.3.10,
3.4.4}
Larger risks are expected for many regions and systems for
global warming at 1.5C, as compared to today, with adaptation
required now and up to 1.5C. However, risks would be larger at 2C of
warming and an even greater effort would be needed for adaptation to
a temperature increase of that magnitude (high confidence). {3.4, Box
3.4, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter}
4

Future risks at 1.5C of global warming will depend on the
mitigation pathway and on the possible occurrence of a
transient overshoot (high confidence). The impacts on natural
and human systems would be greater if mitigation pathways
temporarily overshoot 1.5C and return to 1.5C later in the century,
as compared to pathways that stabilize at 1.5C without an overshoot
(high confidence). The size and duration of an overshoot would also
affect future impacts (e.g., irreversible loss of some ecosystems) (high
confidence). Changes in land use resulting from mitigation choices
could have impacts on food production and ecosystem diversity. {3.6.1,
3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Boxes 7 and 8 in this chapter}

Climate Change Risks for Natural and Human systems
Terrestrial and Wetland Ecosystems
TS

Risks of local species losses and, consequently, risks of
extinction are much less in a 1.5C versus a 2C warmer world
(high confidence). The number of species projected to lose over
half of their climatically determined geographic range at 2C global
warming (18% of insects, 16% of plants, 8% of vertebrates) is
projected to be reduced to 6% of insects, 8% of plants and 4% of
vertebrates at 1.5C warming (medium confidence). Risks associated
with other biodiversity-related factors, such as forest fires, extreme
weather events, and the spread of invasive species, pests and
diseases, would also be lower at 1.5C than at 2C of warming (high
confidence), supporting a greater persistence of ecosystem services.
{3.4.3, 3.5.2}
Constraining global warming to 1.5C, rather than to 2C
and higher, is projected to have many benefits for terrestrial
and wetland ecosystems and for the preservation of their
services to humans (high confidence). Risks for natural and
managed ecosystems are higher on drylands compared to humid
lands. The global terrestrial land area projected to be affected by
ecosystem transformations (13%, interquartile range 8-20%) at 2C
is approximately halved at 1.5C global warming to 4% (interquartile
range 2-7%) (medium confidence). Above 1.5C, an expansion of
desert terrain and vegetation would occur in the Mediterranean
biome (medium confidence), causing changes unparalleled in the last
10,000 years (medium confidence). {3.3.2.2, 3.4.3.2, 3.4.3.5, 3.4.6.1,
3.5.5.10, Box 4.2}
Many impacts are projected to be larger at higher latitudes,
owing to mean and cold-season warming rates above the
global average (medium confidence). High-latitude tundra and
boreal forest are particularly at risk, and woody shrubs are already
encroaching into tundra (high confidence) and will proceed with
further warming. Constraining warming to 1.5C would prevent the
thawing of an estimated permafrost area of 1.5 to 2.5 million km2
over centuries compared to thawing under 2C (medium confidence).
{3.3.2, 3.4.3, 3.4.4}

Ice free is defined for the Special Report as when the sea ice extent is less than 106 km2. Ice coverage less than this is considered to be equivalent to an ice-free Arctic Ocean
for practical purposes in all recent studies.

37

Technical Summary

Ocean Ecosystems
Ocean ecosystems are already experiencing large-scale
changes, and critical thresholds are expected to be reached at
1.5C and higher levels of global warming (high confidence).
In the transition to 1.5C of warming, changes to water temperatures
are expected to drive some species (e.g., plankton, fish) to relocate
to higher latitudes and cause novel ecosystems to assemble (high
confidence). Other ecosystems (e.g., kelp forests, coral reefs) are
relatively less able to move, however, and are projected to experience
high rates of mortality and loss (very high confidence). For example,
multiple lines of evidence indicate that the majority (70-90%) of
warm water (tropical) coral reefs that exist today will disappear even
if global warming is constrained to 1.5C (very high confidence).
{3.4.4, Box 3.4}

(high confidence). A loss of 7-10% of rangeland livestock globally
is projected for approximately 2C of warming, with considerable
economic consequences for many communities and regions (medium
confidence). {3.4.6, 3.6, Box 3.1, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter}
Reductions in projected food availability are larger at 2C
than at 1.5C of global warming in the Sahel, southern Africa,
the Mediterranean, central Europe and the Amazon (medium
confidence). This suggests a transition from medium to high risk of
regionally differentiated impacts on food security between 1.5C and
2C (medium confidence). Future economic and trade environments
and their response to changing food availability (medium confidence)
are important potential adaptation options for reducing hunger risk
in low- and middle-income countries. {Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this
chapter}

TS

Current ecosystem services from the ocean are expected to be
reduced at 1.5C of global warming, with losses being even
greater at 2C of global warming (high confidence). The risks
of declining ocean productivity, shifts of species to higher latitudes,
damage to ecosystems (e.g., coral reefs, and mangroves, seagrass
and other wetland ecosystems), loss of fisheries productivity (at
low latitudes), and changes to ocean chemistry (e.g., acidification,
hypoxia and dead zones) are projected to be substantially lower
when global warming is limited to 1.5C (high confidence). {3.4.4,
Box 3.4}
Water Resources
The projected frequency and magnitude of floods and droughts
in some regions are smaller under 1.5C than under 2C of
warming (medium confidence). Human exposure to increased
flooding is projected to be substantially lower at 1.5C compared to
2C of global warming, although projected changes create regionally
differentiated risks (medium confidence). The differences in the risks
among regions are strongly influenced by local socio-economic
conditions (medium confidence). {3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.4.2}
Risks of water scarcity are projected to be greater at 2C than at
1.5C of global warming in some regions (medium confidence).
Depending on future socio-economic conditions, limiting global
warming to 1.5C, compared to 2C, may reduce the proportion of
the world population exposed to a climate change-induced increase
in water stress by up to 50%, although there is considerable variability
between regions (medium confidence). Regions with particularly
large benefits could include the Mediterranean and the Caribbean
(medium confidence). Socio-economic drivers, however, are expected
to have a greater influence on these risks than the changes in climate
(medium confidence). {3.3.5, 3.4.2, Box 3.5}
Land Use, Food Security and Food Production Systems
Limiting global warming to 1.5C, compared with 2C, is
projected to result in smaller net reductions in yields of maize,
rice, wheat, and potentially other cereal crops, particularly in
sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and Central and South America;
and in the CO2-dependent nutritional quality of rice and wheat
38

Fisheries and aquaculture are important to global food security
but are already facing increasing risks from ocean warming
and acidification (medium confidence). These risks are
projected to increase at 1.5C of global warming and impact
key organisms such as fin fish and bivalves (e.g., oysters),
especially at low latitudes (medium confidence). Small-scale
fisheries in tropical regions, which are very dependent on habitat
provided by coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs, mangroves,
seagrass and kelp forests, are expected to face growing risks at 1.5C
of warming because of loss of habitat (medium confidence). Risks
of impacts and decreasing food security are projected to become
greater as global warming reaches beyond 1.5C and both ocean
warming and acidification increase, with substantial losses likely for
coastal livelihoods and industries (e.g., fisheries and aquaculture)
(medium to high confidence). {3.4.4, 3.4.5, 3.4.6, Box 3.1, Box 3.4,
Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter}
Land use and land-use change emerge as critical features of
virtually all mitigation pathways that seek to limit global
warming to 1.5C (high confidence). Most least-cost mitigation
pathways to limit peak or end-of-century warming to 1.5C make
use of carbon dioxide removal (CDR), predominantly employing
significant levels of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage
(BECCS) and/or afforestation and reforestation (AR) in their portfolio
of mitigation measures (high confidence). {Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
this chapter}
Large-scale deployment of BECCS and/or AR would have
a far-reaching land and water footprint (high confidence).
Whether this footprint would result in adverse impacts, for example
on biodiversity or food production, depends on the existence and
effectiveness of measures to conserve land carbon stocks, measures
to limit agricultural expansion in order to protect natural ecosystems,
and the potential to increase agricultural productivity (medium
agreement). In addition, BECCS and/or AR would have substantial
direct effects on regional climate through biophysical feedbacks,
which are generally not included in Integrated Assessments Models
(high confidence). {3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Boxes 7 and 8 in this chapter}
The impacts of large-scale CDR deployment could be greatly
reduced if a wider portfolio of CDR options were deployed, if a

Technical Summary

holistic policy for sustainable land management were adopted,
and if increased mitigation efforts were employed to strongly
limit the demand for land, energy and material resources,
including through lifestyle and dietary changes (medium
confidence). In particular, reforestation could be associated with
significant co-benefits if implemented in a manner than helps restore
natural ecosystems (high confidence). {Cross-Chapter Box 7 in this
chapter}
Human Health, Well-Being, Cities and Poverty
Any increase in global temperature (e.g., +0.5C) is projected
to affect human health, with primarily negative consequences
(high confidence). Lower risks are projected at 1.5C than at 2C
for heat-related morbidity and mortality (very high confidence), and
for ozone-related mortality if emissions needed for ozone formation
remain high (high confidence). Urban heat islands often amplify the
impacts of heatwaves in cities (high confidence). Risks for some
vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and dengue fever are projected
to increase with warming from 1.5C to 2C, including potential
shifts in their geographic range (high confidence). Overall for vectorborne diseases, whether projections are positive or negative depends
on the disease, region and extent of change (high confidence). Lower
risks of undernutrition are projected at 1.5C than at 2C (medium
confidence). Incorporating estimates of adaptation into projections
reduces the magnitude of risks (high confidence). {3.4.7, 3.4.7.1,
3.4.8, 3.5.5.8}
Global warming of 2C is expected to pose greater risks to urban
areas than global warming of 1.5C (medium confidence). The
extent of risk depends on human vulnerability and the effectiveness
of adaptation for regions (coastal and non-coastal), informal
settlements and infrastructure sectors (such as energy, water and
transport) (high confidence). {3.4.5, 3.4.8}
Poverty and disadvantage have increased with recent warming
(about 1C) and are expected to increase for many populations
as average global temperatures increase from 1C to 1.5C
and higher (medium confidence). Outmigration in agriculturaldependent communities is positively and statistically significantly
associated with global temperature (medium confidence). Our
understanding of the links of 1.5C and 2C of global warming to
human migration are limited and represent an important knowledge
gap. {3.4.10, 3.4.11, 5.2.2, Table 3.5}
Key Economic Sectors and Services
Risks to global aggregated economic growth due to climate
change impacts are projected to be lower at 1.5C than at 2C
by the end of this century (medium confidence). {3.5.2, 3.5.3}
The largest reductions in economic growth at 2C compared
to 1.5C of warming are projected for low- and middle-income
countries and regions (the African continent, Southeast Asia,
India, Brazil and Mexico) (low to medium confidence). Countries
in the tropics and Southern Hemisphere subtropics are projected to
experience the largest impacts on economic growth due to climate

change should global warming increase from 1.5C to 2C (medium
confidence). {3.5}
Global warming has already affected tourism, with increased
risks projected under 1.5C of warming in specific geographic
regions and for seasonal tourism including sun, beach and
snow sports destinations (very high confidence). Risks will be
lower for tourism markets that are less climate sensitive, such as
gaming and large hotel-based activities (high confidence). Risks for
coastal tourism, particularly in subtropical and tropical regions, will
increase with temperature-related degradation (e.g., heat extremes,
storms) or loss of beach and coral reef assets (high confidence).
{3.3.6, 3.4.4.12, 3.4.9.1, Box 3.4}
Small Islands, and Coastal and Low-lying areas
TS

Small islands are projected to experience multiple interrelated risks at 1.5C of global warming that will increase with
warming of 2C and higher levels (high confidence). Climate
hazards at 1.5C are projected to be lower compared to those at 2C
(high confidence). Long-term risks of coastal flooding and impacts on
populations, infrastructures and assets (high confidence), freshwater
stress (medium confidence), and risks across marine ecosystems (high
confidence) and critical sectors (medium confidence) are projected to
increase at 1.5C compared to present-day levels and increase further
at 2C, limiting adaptation opportunities and increasing loss and
damage (medium confidence). Migration in small islands (internally
and internationally) occurs for multiple reasons and purposes, mostly
for better livelihood opportunities (high confidence) and increasingly
owing to sea level rise (medium confidence). {3.3.2.2, 3.3.6-9,
3.4.3.2, 3.4.4.2, 3.4.4.5, 3.4.4.12, 3.4.5.3, 3.4.7.1, 3.4.9.1, 3.5.4.9,
Box 3.4, Box 3.5}
Impacts associated with sea level rise and changes to the
salinity of coastal groundwater, increased flooding and damage
to infrastructure, are projected to be critically important in
vulnerable environments, such as small islands, low-lying
coasts and deltas, at global warming of 1.5C and 2C (high
confidence). Localized subsidence and changes to river discharge can
potentially exacerbate these effects. Adaptation is already happening
(high confidence) and will remain important over multi-centennial
time scales. {3.4.5.3, 3.4.5.4, 3.4.5.7, 5.4.5.4, Box 3.5}
Existing and restored natural coastal ecosystems may be
effective in reducing the adverse impacts of rising sea levels
and intensifying storms by protecting coastal and deltaic
regions (medium confidence). Natural sedimentation rates are
expected to be able to offset the effect of rising sea levels, given
the slower rates of sea level rise associated with 1.5C of warming
(medium confidence). Other feedbacks, such as landward migration
of wetlands and the adaptation of infrastructure, remain important
(medium confidence). {3.4.4.12, 3.4.5.4, 3.4.5.7}

Increased Reasons for Concern
There are multiple lines of evidence that since AR5 the assessed
levels of risk increased for four of the five Reasons for Concern
39

Technical Summary

(RFCs) for global warming levels of up to 2C (high confidence).
The risk transitions by degrees of global warming are now: from high
to very high between 1.5C and 2C for RFC1 (Unique and threatened
systems) (high confidence); from moderate to high risk between 1C and
1.5C for RFC2 (Extreme weather events) (medium confidence); from
moderate to high risk between 1.5C and 2C for RFC3 (Distribution of
impacts) (high confidence); from moderate to high risk between 1.5C
and 2.5C for RFC4 (Global aggregate impacts) (medium confidence);
and from moderate to high risk between 1C and 2.5C for RFC5
(Large-scale singular events) (medium confidence). {3.5.2}
1.

The category `Unique and threatened systems' (RFC1)
display a transition from high to very high risk which is
now located between 1.5C and 2C of global warming as
opposed to at 2.6C of global warming in AR5, owing to new and
multiple lines of evidence for changing risks for coral reefs, the
Arctic and biodiversity in general (high confidence). {3.5.2.1}

2.

In `Extreme weather events' (RFC2), the transition from
moderate to high risk is now located between 1.0C and
1.5C of global warming, which is very similar to the AR5
assessment but is projected with greater confidence (medium
confidence). The impact literature contains little information
about the potential for human society to adapt to extreme
weather events, and hence it has not been possible to locate
the transition from `high' to `very high' risk within the context of
assessing impacts at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming. There
is thus low confidence in the level at which global warming could
lead to very high risks associated with extreme weather events in
the context of this report. {3.5}

TS

3.

With respect to the `Distribution of impacts' (RFC3) a
transition from moderate to high risk is now located
between 1.5C and 2C of global warming, compared with
between 1.6C and 2.6C global warming in AR5, owing to new
evidence about regionally differentiated risks to food security,
water resources, drought, heat exposure and coastal submergence
(high confidence). {3.5}

4.

In `global aggregate impacts' (RFC4) a transition from
moderate to high levels of risk is now located between
1.5C and 2.5C of global warming, as opposed to at 3.6C of
warming in AR5, owing to new evidence about global aggregate
economic impacts and risks to Earth's biodiversity (medium
confidence). {3.5}

5.

40

Finally, `large-scale singular events' (RFC5), moderate risk
is now located at 1C of global warming and high risk is
located at 2.5C of global warming, as opposed to at 1.6C
(moderate risk) and around 4C (high risk) in AR5, because of new
observations and models of the West Antarctic ice sheet (medium
confidence). {3.3.9, 3.5.2, 3.6.3}

TS.4

Strengthening and Implementing
the Global Response

Limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels would
require transformative systemic change, integrated with
sustainable development. Such change would require the
upscaling and acceleration of the implementation of farreaching, multilevel and cross-sectoral climate mitigation
and addressing barriers. Such systemic change would need
to be linked to complementary adaptation actions, including
transformational adaptation, especially for pathways that
temporarily overshoot 1.5C (medium evidence, high agreement)
{Chapter 2, Chapter 3, 4.2.1, 4.4.5, 4.5}. Current national pledges
on mitigation and adaptation are not enough to stay below the Paris
Agreement temperature limits and achieve its adaptation goals. While
transitions in energy efficiency, carbon intensity of fuels, electrification
and land-use change are underway in various countries, limiting
warming to 1.5C will require a greater scale and pace of change to
transform energy, land, urban and industrial systems globally. {4.3, 4.4,
Cross-Chapter Box 9 in this Chapter}
Although multiple communities around the world are
demonstrating the possibility of implementation consistent with
1.5C pathways {Boxes 4.1-4.10}, very few countries, regions,
cities, communities or businesses can currently make such
a claim (high confidence). To strengthen the global response,
almost all countries would need to significantly raise their level
of ambition. Implementation of this raised ambition would
require enhanced institutional capabilities in all countries,
including building the capability to utilize indigenous and
local knowledge (medium evidence, high agreement). In developing
countries and for poor and vulnerable people, implementing the
response would require financial, technological and other forms of
support to build capacity, for which additional local, national and
international resources would need to be mobilized (high confidence).
However, public, financial, institutional and innovation capabilities
currently fall short of implementing far-reaching measures at scale in
all countries (high confidence). Transnational networks that support
multilevel climate action are growing, but challenges in their scale-up
remain. {4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, Box 4.1, Box 4.2, Box 4.7}
Adaptation needs will be lower in a 1.5C world compared to
a 2C world (high confidence) {Chapter 3; Cross-Chapter Box 11
in this chapter}. Learning from current adaptation practices and
strengthening them through adaptive governance {4.4.1}, lifestyle
and behavioural change {4.4.3} and innovative financing mechanisms
{4.4.5} can help their mainstreaming within sustainable development
practices. Preventing maladaptation, drawing on bottom-up approaches
{Box 4.6} and using indigenous knowledge {Box 4.3} would effectively
engage and protect vulnerable people and communities. While
adaptation finance has increased quantitatively, significant further
expansion would be needed to adapt to 1.5C. Qualitative gaps in the
distribution of adaptation finance, readiness to absorb resources, and
monitoring mechanisms undermine the potential of adaptation finance
to reduce impacts. {Chapter 3, 4.4.2, 4.4.5, 4.6}

Technical Summary

System Transitions
The energy system transition that would be required to limit
global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial conditions is
underway in many sectors and regions around the world
(medium evidence, high agreement). The political, economic, social
and technical feasibility of solar energy, wind energy and electricity
storage technologies has improved dramatically over the past few
years, while that of nuclear energy and carbon dioxide capture
and storage (CCS) in the electricity sector have not shown similar
improvements. {4.3.1}
Electrification, hydrogen, bio-based feedstocks and substitution,
and, in several cases, carbon dioxide capture, utilization and
storage (CCUS) would lead to the deep emissions reductions
required in energy-intensive industries to limit warming to
1.5C. However, those options are limited by institutional, economic and
technical constraints, which increase financial risks to many incumbent
firms (medium evidence, high agreement). Energy efficiency in industry
is more economically feasible and helps enable industrial system
transitions but would have to be complemented with greenhouse gas
(GHG)-neutral processes or carbon dioxide removal (CDR) to make
energy-intensive industries consistent with 1.5C (high confidence).
{4.3.1, 4.3.4}
Global and regional land-use and ecosystems transitions and
associated changes in behaviour that would be required to
limit warming to 1.5C can enhance future adaptation and
land-based agricultural and forestry mitigation potential. Such
transitions could, however, carry consequences for livelihoods
that depend on agriculture and natural resources {4.3.2, CrossChapter Box 6 in Chapter 3}. Alterations of agriculture and forest
systems to achieve mitigation goals could affect current ecosystems
and their services and potentially threaten food, water and livelihood
security. While this could limit the social and environmental feasibility
of land-based mitigation options, careful design and implementation
could enhance their acceptability and support sustainable development
objectives (medium evidence, medium agreement). {4.3.2, 4.5.3}
Changing agricultural practices can be an effective climate
adaptation strategy. A diversity of adaptation options exists,
including mixed crop-livestock production systems which can be a
cost-effective adaptation strategy in many global agriculture systems
(robust evidence, medium agreement). Improving irrigation efficiency
could effectively deal with changing global water endowments,
especially if achieved via farmers adopting new behaviours and waterefficient practices rather than through large-scale infrastructural
interventions (medium evidence, medium agreement). Well-designed
adaptation processes such as community-based adaptation can be
effective depending upon context and levels of vulnerability. {4.3.2,
4.5.3}
Improving the efficiency of food production and closing yield
gaps have the potential to reduce emissions from agriculture,
reduce pressure on land, and enhance food security and future
mitigation potential (high confidence). Improving productivity of

existing agricultural systems generally reduces the emissions intensity
of food production and offers strong synergies with rural development,
poverty reduction and food security objectives, but options to reduce
absolute emissions are limited unless paired with demand-side
measures. Technological innovation including biotechnology, with
adequate safeguards, could contribute to resolving current feasibility
constraints and expand the future mitigation potential of agriculture.
{4.3.2, 4.4.4}
Shifts in dietary choices towards foods with lower emissions
and requirements for land, along with reduced food loss and
waste, could reduce emissions and increase adaptation options
(high confidence). Decreasing food loss and waste and changing
dietary behaviour could result in mitigation and adaptation (high
confidence) by reducing both emissions and pressure on land, with
significant co-benefits for food security, human health and sustainable
development {4.3.2, 4.4.5, 4.5.2, 4.5.3, 5.4.2}, but evidence of
successful policies to modify dietary choices remains limited.

Mitigation and Adaptation Options and Other Measures
A mix of mitigation and adaptation options implemented in a
participatory and integrated manner can enable rapid, systemic
transitions - in urban and rural areas - that are necessary
elements of an accelerated transition consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C. Such options and changes are most effective
when aligned with economic and sustainable development,
and when local and regional governments are supported by
national governments {4.3.3, 4.4.1, 4.4.3}. Various mitigation
options are expanding rapidly across many geographies. Although
many have development synergies, not all income groups have so
far benefited from them. Electrification, end-use energy efficiency
and increased share of renewables, amongst other options, are
lowering energy use and decarbonizing energy supply in the built
environment, especially in buildings. Other rapid changes needed in
urban environments include demotorization and decarbonization of
transport, including the expansion of electric vehicles, and greater use
of energy-efficient appliances (medium evidence, high agreement).
Technological and social innovations can contribute to limiting
warming to 1.5C, for example, by enabling the use of smart grids,
energy storage technologies and general-purpose technologies, such
as information and communication technology (ICT) that can be
deployed to help reduce emissions. Feasible adaptation options include
green infrastructure, resilient water and urban ecosystem services,
urban and peri-urban agriculture, and adapting buildings and land use
through regulation and planning (medium evidence, medium to high
agreement). {4.3.3, 4.4.3, 4.4.4}
Synergies can be achieved across systemic transitions through
several overarching adaptation options in rural and urban areas.
Investments in health, social security and risk sharing and spreading
are cost-effective adaptation measures with high potential for scaling
up (medium evidence, medium to high agreement). Disaster risk
management and education-based adaptation have lower prospects of
scalability and cost-effectiveness (medium evidence, high agreement)
but are critical for building adaptive capacity. {4.3.5, 4.5.3}

41

TS

Technical Summary

Converging adaptation and mitigation options can lead to
synergies and potentially increase cost-effectiveness, but
multiple trade-offs can limit the speed of and potential for
scaling up. Many examples of synergies and trade-offs exist in
all sectors and system transitions. For instance, sustainable water
management (high evidence, medium agreement) and investment in
green infrastructure (medium evidence, high agreement) to deliver
sustainable water and environmental services and to support urban
agriculture are less cost-effective than other adaptation options but
can help build climate resilience. Achieving the governance, finance
and social support required to enable these synergies and to avoid
trade-offs is often challenging, especially when addressing multiple
objectives, and attempting appropriate sequencing and timing of
interventions. {4.3.2, 4.3.4, 4.4.1, 4.5.2, 4.5.3, 4.5.4}
TS

Though CO2 dominates long-term warming, the reduction of
warming short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs), such as methane
and black carbon, can in the short term contribute significantly to
limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Reductions
of black carbon and methane would have substantial co-benefits
(high confidence), including improved health due to reduced air
pollution. This, in turn, enhances the institutional and sociocultural feasibility of such actions. Reductions of several warming
SLCFs are constrained by economic and social feasibility (low evidence,
high agreement). As they are often co-emitted with CO2, achieving the
energy, land and urban transitions necessary to limit warming to 1.5C
would see emissions of warming SLCFs greatly reduced. {2.3.3.2, 4.3.6}
Most CDR options face multiple feasibility constraints, which
differ between options, limiting the potential for any single
option to sustainably achieve the large-scale deployment
required in the 1.5C-consistent pathways described in
Chapter 2 (high confidence). Those 1.5C pathways typically rely
on bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), afforestation
and reforestation (AR), or both, to neutralize emissions that are
expensive to avoid, or to draw down CO2 emissions in excess of the
carbon budget {Chapter 2}. Though BECCS and AR may be technically
and geophysically feasible, they face partially overlapping yet different
constraints related to land use. The land footprint per tonne of CO2
removed is higher for AR than for BECCS, but given the low levels of
current deployment, the speed and scales required for limiting warming
to 1.5C pose a considerable implementation challenge, even if the
issues of public acceptance and absence of economic incentives were
to be resolved (high agreement, medium evidence). The large potential
of afforestation and the co-benefits if implemented appropriately (e.g.,
on biodiversity and soil quality) will diminish over time, as forests
saturate (high confidence). The energy requirements and economic
costs of direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS) and enhanced
weathering remain high (medium evidence, medium agreement). At the
local scale, soil carbon sequestration has co-benefits with agriculture
and is cost-effective even without climate policy (high confidence). Its
potential feasibility and cost-effectiveness at the global scale appears
to be more limited. {4.3.7}
Uncertainties surrounding solar radiation modification
(SRM) measures constrain their potential deployment. These
uncertainties include: technological immaturity; limited physical
42

understanding about their effectiveness to limit global warming; and
a weak capacity to govern, legitimize, and scale such measures. Some
recent model-based analysis suggests SRM would be effective but that
it is too early to evaluate its feasibility. Even in the uncertain case that
the most adverse side-effects of SRM can be avoided, public resistance,
ethical concerns and potential impacts on sustainable development
could render SRM economically, socially and institutionally undesirable
(low agreement, medium evidence). {4.3.8, Cross-Chapter Box 10 in
this chapter}

Enabling Rapid and Far-Reaching Change
The speed of transitions and of technological change required
to limit warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels has been
observed in the past within specific sectors and technologies
{4.2.2.1}. But the geographical and economic scales at which
the required rates of change in the energy, land, urban,
infrastructure and industrial systems would need to take place
are larger and have no documented historic precedent (limited
evidence, medium agreement). To reduce inequality and alleviate
poverty, such transformations would require more planning and
stronger institutions (including inclusive markets) than observed in the
past, as well as stronger coordination and disruptive innovation across
actors and scales of governance. {4.3, 4.4}
Governance consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C and the
political economy of adaptation and mitigation can enable and
accelerate systems transitions,behavioural change,innovation and
technology deployment (medium evidence, medium agreement).
For 1.5C-consistent actions, an effective governance framework
would include: accountable multilevel governance that includes nonstate actors, such as industry, civil society and scientific institutions;
coordinated sectoral and cross-sectoral policies that enable collaborative
multi-stakeholder partnerships; strengthened global-to-local financial
architecture that enables greater access to finance and technology;
addressing climate-related trade barriers; improved climate education
and greater public awareness; arrangements to enable accelerated
behaviour change; strengthened climate monitoring and evaluation
systems; and reciprocal international agreements that are sensitive
to equity and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). System
transitions can be enabled by enhancing the capacities of public, private
and financial institutions to accelerate climate change policy planning
and implementation, along with accelerated technological innovation,
deployment and upkeep. {4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.3, 4.4.4}
Behaviour change and demand-side management can
significantly reduce emissions, substantially limiting the
reliance on CDR to limit warming to 1.5C {Chapter 2, 4.4.3}.
Political and financial stakeholders may find climate actions more costeffective and socially acceptable if multiple factors affecting behaviour
are considered, including aligning these actions with people's core
values (medium evidence, high agreement). Behaviour- and lifestylerelated measures and demand-side management have already led
to emission reductions around the world and can enable significant
future reductions (high confidence). Social innovation through bottomup initiatives can result in greater participation in the governance of
systems transitions and increase support for technologies, practices

Technical Summary

and policies that are part of the global response to limit warming to
1.5C . {Chapter 2, 4.4.1, 4.4.3, Figure 4.3}

would help redirect capital away from potentially stranded assets
(medium evidence, medium agreement). {4.4.5}

This rapid and far-reaching response required to keep warming
below 1.5C and enhance the capacity to adapt to climate risks
would require large increases of investments in low-emission
infrastructure and buildings, along with a redirection of financial
flows towards low-emission investments (robust evidence, high
agreement). An estimated mean annual incremental investment of
around 1.5% of global gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) for the
energy sector is indicated between 2016 and 2035, as well as about
2.5% of global GFCF for other development infrastructure that could
also address SDG implementation. Though quality policy design and
effective implementation may enhance efficiency, they cannot fully
substitute for these investments. {2.5.2, 4.2.1, 4.4.5}

Knowledge Gaps

Enabling this investment requires the mobilization and better
integration of a range of policy instruments that include the
reduction of socially inefficient fossil fuel subsidy regimes and innovative
price and non-price national and international policy instruments. These
would need to be complemented by de-risking financial instruments
and the emergence of long-term low-emission assets. These instruments
would aim to reduce the demand for carbon-intensive services and shift
market preferences away from fossil fuel-based technology. Evidence
and theory suggest that carbon pricing alone, in the absence of
sufficient transfers to compensate their unintended distributional crosssector, cross-nation effects, cannot reach the incentive levels needed
to trigger system transitions (robust evidence, medium agreement).
But, embedded in consistent policy packages, they can help mobilize
incremental resources and provide flexible mechanisms that help reduce
the social and economic costs of the triggering phase of the transition
(robust evidence, medium agreement). {4.4.3, 4.4.4, 4.4.5}

Knowledge gaps around implementing and strengthening the
global response to climate change would need to be urgently
resolved if the transition to a 1.5C world is to become reality.
Remaining questions include: how much can be realistically expected
from innovation and behavioural and systemic political and economic
changes in improving resilience, enhancing adaptation and reducing
GHG emissions? How can rates of changes be accelerated and scaled
up? What is the outcome of realistic assessments of mitigation and
adaptation land transitions that are compliant with sustainable
development, poverty eradication and addressing inequality? What are
life-cycle emissions and prospects of early-stage CDR options? How
can climate and sustainable development policies converge, and how
can they be organised within a global governance framework and
financial system, based on principles of justice and ethics (including
`common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities'
(CBDR-RC)), reciprocity and partnership? To what extent would
limiting warming to 1.5C require a harmonization of macro-financial
and fiscal policies, which could include financial regulators such as
central banks? How can different actors and processes in climate
governance reinforce each other, and hedge against the fragmentation
of initiatives? {4.1, 4.3.7, 4.4.1, 4.4.5, 4.6}

Increasing evidence suggests that a climate-sensitive
realignment of savings and expenditure towards low-emission,
climate-resilient infrastructure and services requires an
evolution of global and national financial systems. Estimates
suggest that, in addition to climate-friendly allocation of public
investments, a potential redirection of 5% to 10% of the annual
capital revenues5 is necessary for limiting warming to 1.5C {4.4.5,
Table 1 in Box 4.8}. This could be facilitated by a change of incentives
for private day-to-day expenditure and the redirection of savings
from speculative and precautionary investments towards longterm productive low-emission assets and services. This implies the
mobilization of institutional investors and mainstreaming of climate
finance within financial and banking system regulation. Access by
developing countries to low-risk and low-interest finance through
multilateral and national development banks would have to be
facilitated (medium evidence, high agreement). New forms of public-
private partnerships may be needed with multilateral, sovereign and
sub-sovereign guarantees to de-risk climate-friendly investments,
support new business models for small-scale enterprises and help
households with limited access to capital. Ultimately, the aim is to
promote a portfolio shift towards long-term low-emission assets that

5

Annual capital revenues are the paid interests plus the increase of the asset value.

43

TS

Technical Summary

TS.5

Sustainable Development, Poverty
Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

This chapter takes sustainable development as the starting point and
focus for analysis. It considers the broad and multifaceted bi-directional
interplay between sustainable development, including its focus on
eradicating poverty and reducing inequality in their multidimensional
aspects, and climate actions in a 1.5C warmer world. These fundamental
connections are embedded in the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). The chapter also examines synergies and trade-offs of
adaptation and mitigation options with sustainable development and
the SDGs and offers insights into possible pathways, especially climateresilient development pathways towards a 1.5C warmer world.
TS

Sustainable Development, Poverty and Inequality
in a 1.5C Warmer World
Limiting global warming to 1.5C rather than 2C above preindustrial levels would make it markedly easier to achieve many
aspects of sustainable development, with greater potential to
eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities (medium evidence,
high agreement). Impacts avoided with the lower temperature
limit could reduce the number of people exposed to climate risks and
vulnerable to poverty by 62 to 457 million, and lessen the risks of
poor people to experience food and water insecurity, adverse health
impacts, and economic losses, particularly in regions that already face
development challenges (medium evidence, medium agreement).
{5.2.2, 5.2.3} Avoided impacts expected to occur between 1.5C and
2C warming would also make it easier to achieve certain SDGs, such as
those that relate to poverty, hunger, health, water and sanitation, cities
and ecosystems (SDGs 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 14 and 15) (medium evidence,
high agreement). {5.2.3, Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter}
Compared to current conditions, 1.5C of global warming would
nonetheless pose heightened risks to eradicating poverty,
reducing inequalities and ensuring human and ecosystem wellbeing (medium evidence, high agreement). Warming of 1.5C is
not considered `safe' for most nations, communities, ecosystems and
sectors and poses significant risks to natural and human systems as
compared to the current warming of 1C (high confidence). {CrossChapter Box 12 in Chapter 5} The impacts of 1.5C of warming would
disproportionately affect disadvantaged and vulnerable populations
through food insecurity, higher food prices, income losses, lost
livelihood opportunities, adverse health impacts and population
displacements (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.2.1} Some of
the worst impacts on sustainable development are expected to be
felt among agricultural and coastal dependent livelihoods, indigenous
people, children and the elderly, poor labourers, poor urban dwellers in
African cities, and people and ecosystems in the Arctic and Small Island
Developing States (SIDS) (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.2.1,
Box 5.3, Chapter 3, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4}

Climate Adaptation and Sustainable Development
Prioritization of sustainable development and meeting the
SDGs is consistent with efforts to adapt to climate change (high
44

confidence). Many strategies for sustainable development enable
transformational adaptation for a 1.5C warmer world, provided
attention is paid to reducing poverty in all its forms and to promoting
equity and participation in decision-making (medium evidence, high
agreement). As such, sustainable development has the potential
to significantly reduce systemic vulnerability, enhance adaptive
capacity, and promote livelihood security for poor and disadvantaged
populations (high confidence). {5.3.1}
Synergies between adaptation strategies and the SDGs are
expected to hold true in a 1.5C warmer world, across sectors
and contexts (medium evidence, medium agreement). Synergies
between adaptation and sustainable development are significant
for agriculture and health, advancing SDGs 1 (extreme poverty),
2 (hunger), 3 (healthy lives and well-being) and 6 (clean water) (robust
evidence, medium agreement). {5.3.2} Ecosystem- and communitybased adaptation, along with the incorporation of indigenous and
local knowledge, advances synergies with SDGs 5 (gender equality),
10 (reducing inequalities) and 16 (inclusive societies), as exemplified
in drylands and the Arctic (high evidence, medium agreement). {5.3.2,
Box 5.1, Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4}
Adaptation strategies can result in trade-offs with and among
the SDGs (medium evidence, high agreement). Strategies that
advance one SDG may create negative consequences for other
SDGs, for instance SDGs 3 (health) versus 7 (energy consumption)
and agricultural adaptation and SDG 2 (food security) versus SDGs 3
(health), 5 (gender equality), 6 (clean water), 10 (reducing inequalities),
14 (life below water) and 15 (life on the land) (medium evidence,
medium agreement). {5.3.2}
Pursuing place-specific adaptation pathways towards a 1.5C
warmer world has the potential for significant positive outcomes
for well-being in countries at all levels of development (medium
evidence, high agreement). Positive outcomes emerge when
adaptation pathways (i) ensure a diversity of adaptation options based
on people's values and the trade-offs they consider acceptable, (ii)
maximize synergies with sustainable development through inclusive,
participatory and deliberative processes, and (iii) facilitate equitable
transformation. Yet such pathways would be difficult to achieve
without redistributive measures to overcome path dependencies,
uneven power structures, and entrenched social inequalities (medium
evidence, high agreement). {5.3.3}

Mitigation and Sustainable Development
The deployment of mitigation options consistent with 1.5C
pathways leads to multiple synergies across a range of
sustainable development dimensions. At the same time, the
rapid pace and magnitude of change that would be required
to limit warming to 1.5C, if not carefully managed, would lead
to trade-offs with some sustainable development dimensions
(high confidence). The number of synergies between mitigation
response options and sustainable development exceeds the number
of trade-offs in energy demand and supply sectors; agriculture, forestry
and other land use (AFOLU); and for oceans (very high confidence).
{Figure 5.2, Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter} The 1.5C

Technical Summary

pathways indicate robust synergies, particularly for the SDGs 3 (health),
7 (energy), 12 (responsible consumption and production) and 14
(oceans) (very high confidence). {5.4.2, Figure 5.3} For SDGs 1 (poverty),
2 (hunger), 6 (water) and 7 (energy), there is a risk of trade-offs or
negative side effects from stringent mitigation actions compatible with
1.5C of warming (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.2}
Appropriately designed mitigation actions to reduce energy
demand can advance multiple SDGs simultaneously. Pathways
compatible with 1.5C that feature low energy demand show the
most pronounced synergies and the lowest number of trade-offs
with respect to sustainable development and the SDGs (very high
confidence). Accelerating energy efficiency in all sectors has synergies
with SDGs 7 (energy), 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure),
11 (sustainable cities and communities), 12 (responsible consumption
and production), 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions), and
17 (partnerships for the goals) (robust evidence, high agreement).
{5.4.1, Figure 5.2, Table 5.2} Low-demand pathways, which would
reduce or completely avoid the reliance on bioenergy with carbon
capture and storage (BECCS) in 1.5C pathways, would result in
significantly reduced pressure on food security, lower food prices and
fewer people at risk of hunger (medium evidence, high agreement).
{5.4.2, Figure 5.3}
The impacts of carbon dioxide removal options on SDGs depend
on the type of options and the scale of deployment (high
confidence). If poorly implemented, carbon dioxide removal (CDR)
options such as bioenergy, BECCS and AFOLU would lead to tradeoffs. Appropriate design and implementation requires considering
local people's needs, biodiversity and other sustainable development
dimensions (very high confidence). {5.4.1.3, Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
Chapter 3}
The design of the mitigation portfolios and policy instruments
to limit warming to 1.5C will largely determine the overall
synergies and trade-offs between mitigation and sustainable
development (very high confidence). Redistributive policies
that shield the poor and vulnerable can resolve trade-offs for
a range of SDGs (medium evidence, high agreement). Individual
mitigation options are associated with both positive and negative
interactions with the SDGs (very high confidence). {5.4.1} However,
appropriate choices across the mitigation portfolio can help to
maximize positive side effects while minimizing negative side effects
(high confidence). {5.4.2, 5.5.2} Investment needs for complementary
policies resolving trade-offs with a range of SDGs are only a small
fraction of the overall mitigation investments in 1.5C pathways
(medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.2, Figure 5.4} Integration of
mitigation with adaptation and sustainable development compatible
with 1.5C warming requires a systems perspective (high confidence).
{5.4.2, 5.5.2}
Mitigation consistent with 1.5C of warming create high risks
for sustainable development in countries with high dependency
on fossil fuels for revenue and employment generation (high
confidence). These risks are caused by the reduction of global demand
affecting mining activity and export revenues and challenges to rapidly
decrease high carbon intensity of the domestic economy (robust

evidence, high agreement). {5.4.1.2, Box 5.2} Targeted policies that
promote diversification of the economy and the energy sector could
ease this transition (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.1.2,
Box 5.2}

Sustainable Development Pathways to 1.5C
Sustainable development broadly supports and often enables
the fundamental societal and systems transformations that
would be required for limiting warming to 1.5C above preindustrial levels (high confidence). Simulated pathways that
feature the most sustainable worlds (e.g., Shared Socio-Economic
Pathways (SSP) 1) are associated with relatively lower mitigation and
adaptation challenges and limit warming to 1.5C at comparatively
lower mitigation costs. In contrast, development pathways with high
fragmentation, inequality and poverty (e.g., SSP3) are associated with
comparatively higher mitigation and adaptation challenges. In such
pathways, it is not possible to limit warming to 1.5C for the vast
majority of the integrated assessment models (medium evidence,
high agreement). {5.5.2} In all SSPs, mitigation costs substantially
increase in 1.5C pathways compared to 2C pathways. No pathway
in the literature integrates or achieves all 17 SDGs (high confidence).
{5.5.2} Real-world experiences at the project level show that the
actual integration between adaptation, mitigation and sustainable
development is challenging as it requires reconciling trade-offs across
sectors and spatial scales (very high confidence). {5.5.1}
Without societal transformation and rapid implementation
of ambitious greenhouse gas reduction measures, pathways
to limiting warming to 1.5C and achieving sustainable
development will be exceedingly difficult, if not impossible,
to achieve (high confidence). The potential for pursuing such
pathways differs between and within nations and regions, due to
different development trajectories, opportunities and challenges (very
high confidence). {5.5.3.2, Figure 5.1} Limiting warming to 1.5C
would require all countries and non-state actors to strengthen their
contributions without delay. This could be achieved through sharing
efforts based on bolder and more committed cooperation, with support
for those with the least capacity to adapt, mitigate and transform
(medium evidence, high agreement). {5.5.3.1, 5.5.3.2} Current
efforts towards reconciling low-carbon trajectories and reducing
inequalities, including those that avoid difficult trade-offs associated
with transformation, are partially successful yet demonstrate notable
obstacles (medium evidence, medium agreement). {5.5.3.3, Box 5.3,
Cross-Chapter Box 13 in this chapter}
Social justice and equity are core aspects of climate-resilient
development pathways for transformational social change.
Addressing challenges and widening opportunities between
and within countries and communities would be necessary
to achieve sustainable development and limit warming to
1.5C, without making the poor and disadvantaged worse off
(high confidence). Identifying and navigating inclusive and socially
acceptable pathways towards low-carbon, climate-resilient futures is a
challenging yet important endeavour, fraught with moral, practical and
political difficulties and inevitable trade-offs (very high confidence).
{5.5.2, 5.5.3.3, Box 5.3} It entails deliberation and problem-solving
45

TS

Technical Summary

processes to negotiate societal values, well-being, risks and resilience
and to determine what is desirable and fair, and to whom (medium
evidence, high agreement). Pathways that encompass joint, iterative
planning and transformative visions, for instance in Pacific SIDS
like Vanuatu and in urban contexts, show potential for liveable and
sustainable futures (high confidence). {5.5.3.1, 5.5.3.3, Figure 5.5,
Box 5.3, Cross-Chapter Box 13 in this chapter}

TS

The fundamental societal and systemic changes to achieve
sustainable development, eradicate poverty and reduce
inequalities while limiting warming to 1.5C would require
meeting a set of institutional, social, cultural, economic and
technological conditions (high confidence). The coordination
and monitoring of policy actions across sectors and spatial scales
is essential to support sustainable development in 1.5C warmer
conditions (very high confidence). {5.6.2, Box 5.3} External funding
and technology transfer better support these efforts when they
consider recipients' context-specific needs (medium evidence, high
agreement). {5.6.1} Inclusive processes can facilitate transformations
by ensuring participation, transparency, capacity building and iterative
social learning (high confidence). {5.5.3.3, Cross-Chapter Box 13,
5.6.3} Attention to power asymmetries and unequal opportunities
for development, among and within countries, is key to adopting
1.5C-compatible development pathways that benefit all populations
(high confidence). {5.5.3, 5.6.4, Box 5.3} Re-examining individual and
collective values could help spur urgent, ambitious and cooperative
change (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.5.3, 5.6.5}

46

Chapters

1

Framing and Context
Coordinating Lead Authors:
Myles R. Allen (UK), Opha Pauline Dube (Botswana), William Solecki (USA)

Lead Authors:
Fernando Aragon-Durand (Mexico), Wolfgang Cramer (France/Germany), Stephen Humphreys (UK/
Ireland), Mikiko Kainuma (Japan), Jatin Kala (Australia), Natalie Mahowald (USA), Yacob Mulugetta
(UK/Ethiopia), Rosa Perez (Philippines), Morgan Wairiu (Solomon Islands), Kirsten Zickfeld (Canada/
Germany)

Contributing Authors:
Purnamita Dasgupta (India), Haile Eakin (USA), Bronwyn Hayward (New Zealand), Diana Liverman
(USA), Richard Millar (UK), Graciela Raga (Mexico/Argentina), Aurelien Ribes (France), Mark Richardson
(USA/UK), Maisa Rojas (Chile), Roland Seferian (France), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Christopher
Smith (UK), Will Steffen (Australia), Peter Thorne (Ireland/UK)

Chapter Scientist:
Richard Millar (UK)

Review Editors:
Ismail Elgizouli Idris (Sudan), Andreas Fischlin (Switzerland), Xuejie Gao (China)

This chapter should be cited as:
Allen, M.R., O.P. Dube, W. Solecki, F. Aragon-Durand, W. Cramer, S. Humphreys, M. Kainuma, J. Kala, N. Mahowald,
Y. Mulugetta, R. Perez, M. Wairiu, and K. Zickfeld, 2018: Framing and Context. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC
Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse
gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla,
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy,
T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

49

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

Table of Contents
Executive Summary......................................................................51

1

1.1


Assessing the Knowledge Base
for a 1.5C Warmer World.............................................53

Box 1.1: The Anthropocene: Strengthening the
Global Response to 1.5C Global Warming.............................54

1.5




Assessment Frameworks and Emerging
Methodologies that Integrate Climate
Change Mitigation and Adaptation
with Sustainable Development...................................75

1.5.1


Knowledge Sources and Evidence
Used in the Report........................................................75

1.5.2

Assessment Frameworks and Methodologies................76

1.1.1

Equity and a 1.5C Warmer World.................................54

1.1.2

Eradication of Poverty...................................................55

1.6

Confidence, Uncertainty and Risk...............................77

1.1.3


Sustainable Development and a 1.5C
Warmer World...............................................................55

1.7

Storyline of the Report..................................................77

1.2



Understanding 1.5C: Reference Levels,
Probability, Transience, Overshoot,
and Stabilization..............................................................56

1.2.1


Working Definitions of 1.5C and 2C
Warming Relative to Pre-Industrial Levels.....................56

1.2.2

Global versus Regional and Seasonal Warming.............59

1.2.3


Definition of 1.5C Pathways: Probability,
Transience, Stabilization and Overshoot........................59

Cross-Chapter Box 1: Scenarios and Pathways.......................62
1.2.4

Geophysical Warming Commitment..............................64

Cross-Chapter Box 2: Measuring Progress to Net Zero
Emissions Combining Long-Lived and Short-Lived
Climate Forcers...........................................................................66

1.3

Impacts at 1.5C and Beyond......................................68

1.3.1

Definitions.....................................................................68

1.3.2

Drivers of Impacts.........................................................69

1.3.3

Uncertainty and Non-Linearity of Impacts.....................69

1.4

Strengthening the Global Response..........................70

1.4.1

Classifying Response Options........................................70

1.4.2

Governance, Implementation and Policies.....................71

Cross-Chapter Box 3: Framing Feasibility:
Key Concepts and Conditions for Limiting
Global Temperature Increases to 1.5C...................................71
1.4.3




Transformation, Transformation Pathways,
and Transition: Evaluating Trade-Offs and
Synergies Between Mitigation, Adaptation
and Sustainable Development Goals.............................73

Cross-Chapter Box 4: Sustainable Development
and the Sustainable Development Goals................................73

50

Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 1.1: Why are we Talking about 1.5C?......................... 79
FAQ 1.2: How Close are we to 1.5C?.................................. 81

References ......................................................................................83

Framing and Context

Executive Summary
This chapter frames the context, knowledge-base and assessment
approaches used to understand the impacts of 1.5C global warming
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas
emission pathways, building on the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report
(AR5), in the context of strengthening the global response to the
threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to
eradicate poverty.
Human-induced warming reached approximately 1C (likely
between 0.8C and 1.2C) above pre-industrial levels in 2017,
increasing at 0.2C (likely between 0.1C and 0.3C) per
decade (high confidence). Global warming is defined in this report
as an increase in combined surface air and sea surface temperatures
averaged over the globe and over a 30-year period. Unless otherwise
specified, warming is expressed relative to the period 1850-1900,
used as an approximation of pre-industrial temperatures in AR5.
For periods shorter than 30 years, warming refers to the estimated
average temperature over the 30 years centred on that shorter
period, accounting for the impact of any temperature fluctuations
or trend within those 30 years. Accordingly, warming from preindustrial levels to the decade 2006-2015 is assessed to be 0.87C
(likely between 0.75C and 0.99C). Since 2000, the estimated level
of human-induced warming has been equal to the level of observed
warming with a likely range of 20% accounting for uncertainty due
to contributions from solar and volcanic activity over the historical
period (high confidence). {1.2.1}
Warming greater than the global average has already been
experienced in many regions and seasons, with higher average
warming over land than over the ocean (high confidence). Most
land regions are experiencing greater warming than the global average,
while most ocean regions are warming at a slower rate. Depending
on the temperature dataset considered, 20-40% of the global human
population live in regions that, by the decade 2006-2015, had already
experienced warming of more than 1.5C above pre-industrial in at
least one season (medium confidence). {1.2.1, 1.2.2}
Past emissions alone are unlikely to raise global-mean
temperature to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels (medium
confidence), but past emissions do commit to other changes,
such as further sea level rise (high confidence). If all
anthropogenic emissions (including aerosol-related) were reduced
to zero immediately, any further warming beyond the 1C already
experienced would likely be less than 0.5C over the next two to
three decades (high confidence), and likely less than 0.5C on a
century time scale (medium confidence), due to the opposing effects
of different climate processes and drivers. A warming greater than
1.5C is therefore not geophysically unavoidable: whether it will
occur depends on future rates of emission reductions. {1.2.3, 1.2.4}
1.5C emission pathways are defined as those that, given
current knowledge of the climate response, provide a onein-two to two-in-three chance of warming either remaining
below 1.5C or returning to 1.5C by around 2100 following

Chapter 1

an overshoot. Overshoot pathways are characterized by the peak
magnitude of the overshoot, which may have implications for
impacts. All 1.5C pathways involve limiting cumulative emissions
of long-lived greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide and nitrous
oxide, and substantial reductions in other climate forcers (high
confidence). Limiting cumulative emissions requires either reducing
net global emissions of long-lived greenhouse gases to zero before
the cumulative limit is reached, or net negative global emissions
(anthropogenic removals) after the limit is exceeded. {1.2.3, 1.2.4,
Cross-Chapter Boxes 1 and 2}
This report assesses projected impacts at a global average
warming of 1.5C and higher levels of warming. Global warming
of 1.5C is associated with global average surface temperatures
fluctuating naturally on either side of 1.5C, together with warming
substantially greater than 1.5C in many regions and seasons (high
confidence), all of which must be considered in the assessment of
impacts. Impacts at 1.5C of warming also depend on the emission
pathway to 1.5C. Very different impacts result from pathways
that remain below 1.5C versus pathways that return to 1.5C
after a substantial overshoot, and when temperatures stabilize at
1.5C versus a transient warming past 1.5C (medium confidence).
{1.2.3, 1.3}
Ethical considerations, and the principle of equity in particular,
are central to this report, recognizing that many of the impacts
of warming up to and beyond 1.5C, and some potential
impacts of mitigation actions required to limit warming to
1.5C, fall disproportionately on the poor and vulnerable (high
confidence). Equity has procedural and distributive dimensions and
requires fairness in burden sharing both between generations and
between and within nations. In framing the objective of holding the
increase in the global average temperature rise to well below 2C
above pre-industrial levels, and to pursue efforts to limit warming to
1.5C, the Paris Agreement associates the principle of equity with the
broader goals of poverty eradication and sustainable development,
recognising that effective responses to climate change require a
global collective effort that may be guided by the 2015 United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals. {1.1.1}
Climate adaptation refers to the actions taken to manage
impacts of climate change by reducing vulnerability and
exposure to its harmful effects and exploiting any potential
benefits. Adaptation takes place at international, national and
local levels. Subnational jurisdictions and entities, including urban
and rural municipalities, are key to developing and reinforcing
measures for reducing weather- and climate-related risks. Adaptation
implementation faces several barriers including lack of up-to-date and
locally relevant information, lack of finance and technology, social
values and attitudes, and institutional constraints (high confidence).
Adaptation is more likely to contribute to sustainable development
when policies align with mitigation and poverty eradication goals
(medium confidence). {1.1, 1.4}
Ambitious mitigation actions are indispensable to limit
warming to 1.5C while achieving sustainable development
and poverty eradication (high confidence). Ill-designed responses,
51

1

Chapter 1

1

however, could pose challenges especially - but not exclusively - for
countries and regions contending with poverty and those requiring
significant transformation of their energy systems. This report focuses
on `climate-resilient development pathways', which aim to meet the
goals of sustainable development, including climate adaptation and
mitigation, poverty eradication and reducing inequalities. But any
feasible pathway that remains within 1.5C involves synergies and
trade-offs (high confidence). Significant uncertainty remains as to
which pathways are more consistent with the principle of equity.
{1.1.1, 1.4}
Multiple forms of knowledge, including scientific evidence,
narrative scenarios and prospective pathways, inform the
understanding of 1.5C. This report is informed by traditional
evidence of the physical climate system and associated impacts and
vulnerabilities of climate change, together with knowledge drawn
from the perceptions of risk and the experiences of climate impacts
and governance systems. Scenarios and pathways are used to
explore conditions enabling goal-oriented futures while recognizing
the significance of ethical considerations, the principle of equity, and
the societal transformation needed. {1.2.3, 1.5.2}
There is no single answer to the question of whether it
is feasible to limit warming to 1.5C and adapt to the
consequences. Feasibility is considered in this report as the
capacity of a system as a whole to achieve a specific outcome. The
global transformation that would be needed to limit warming to
1.5C requires enabling conditions that reflect the links, synergies
and trade-offs between mitigation, adaptation and sustainable
development. These enabling conditions are assessed across many
dimensions of feasibility - geophysical, environmental-ecological,
technological, economic, socio-cultural and institutional - that
may be considered through the unifying lens of the Anthropocene,
acknowledging profound, differential but increasingly geologically
significant human influences on the Earth system as a whole. This
framing also emphasises the global interconnectivity of past, present
and future human-environment relations, highlighting the need and
opportunities for integrated responses to achieve the goals of the
Paris Agreement. {1.1, Cross-Chapter Box 1}

52

Framing and Context

Framing and Context

1.1

Assessing the Knowledge Base
for a 1.5C Warmer World

Human influence on climate has been the dominant cause of observed
warming since the mid-20th century, while global average surface
temperature warmed by 0.85C between 1880 and 2012, as reported
in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, or AR5 (IPCC, 2013b). Many
regions of the world have already greater regional-scale warming,
with 20-40% of the global population (depending on the temperature
dataset used) having experienced over 1.5C of warming in at least
one season (Figure 1.1; Chapter 3 Section 3.3.2.1). Temperature rise
to date has already resulted in profound alterations to human and
natural systems, including increases in droughts, floods, and some
other types of extreme weather; sea level rise; and biodiversity loss -
these changes are causing unprecedented risks to vulnerable persons
and populations (IPCC, 2012a, 2014a; Mysiak et al., 2016; Chapter
3 Sections 3.4.5-3.4.13). The most affected people live in low and
middle income countries, some of which have experienced a decline
in food security, which in turn is partly linked to rising migration and
poverty (IPCC, 2012a). Small islands, megacities, coastal regions, and
high mountain ranges are likewise among the most affected (Albert
et al., 2017). Worldwide, numerous ecosystems are at risk of severe
impacts, particularly warm-water tropical reefs and Arctic ecosystems
(IPCC, 2014a).
This report assesses current knowledge of the environmental, technical,
economic, financial, socio-cultural, and institutional dimensions of a
1.5C warmer world (meaning, unless otherwise specified, a world
in which warming has been limited to 1.5C relative to pre-industrial
levels). Differences in vulnerability and exposure arise from numerous

Chapter 1

non-climatic factors (IPCC, 2014a). Global economic growth has been
accompanied by increased life expectancy and income in much of
the world; however, in addition to environmental degradation and
pollution, many regions remain characterised by significant poverty
and severe inequality in income distribution and access to resources,
amplifying vulnerability to climate change (Dryzek, 2016; Pattberg
and Zelli, 2016; Backstrand et al., 2017; Lovbrand et al., 2017). World
population continues to rise, notably in hazard-prone small and
medium-sized cities in low- and moderate-income countries (Birkmann
et al., 2016). The spread of fossil-fuel-based material consumption and
changing lifestyles is a major driver of global resource use, and the
main contributor to rising greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Fleurbaey
et al., 2014).
The overarching context of this report is this: human influence has
become a principal agent of change on the planet, shifting the world
out of the relatively stable Holocene period into a new geological
era, often termed the Anthropocene (Box 1.1). Responding to climate
change in the Anthropocene will require approaches that integrate
multiple levels of interconnectivity across the global community.
This chapter is composed of seven sections linked to the remaining
four chapters of the report. This introductory Section 1.1 situates the
basic elements of the assessment within the context of sustainable
development; considerations of ethics, equity and human rights; and the
problem of poverty. Section 1.2 focuses on understanding 1.5C, global
versus regional warming, 1.5C pathways, and associated emissions.
Section 1.3 frames the impacts at 1.5C and beyond on natural and
human systems. The section on strengthening the global response (1.4)
frames responses, governance and implementation, and trade-offs
and synergies between mitigation, adaptation, and the Sustainable

Figure 1.1 | Human experience of present-day warming. Different shades of pink to purple indicated by the inset histogram show estimated warming for the season
that has warmed the most at a given location between the periods 1850-1900 and 2006-2015, during which global average temperatures rose by 0.91C in this dataset
(Cowtan and Way, 2014) and 0.87C in the multi-dataset average (Table 1.1 and Figure 1.3). The density of dots indicates the population (in 2010) in any 1 x 1 grid box.
The underlay shows national Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Global Index Scores indicating performance across the 17 SDGs. Hatching indicates missing SDG index data
(e.g., Greenland). The histogram shows the population (in 2010) living in regions experiencing different levels of warming (at 0.25C increments). See Supplementary Material
1.SM for further details.

53

1

Chapter 1

Development Goals (SDGs) under transformation, transformation
pathways, and transition. Section 1.5 provides assessment frameworks
and emerging methodologies that integrate climate change mitigation

Framing and Context

and adaptation with sustainable development. Section 1.6 defines
approaches used to communicate confidence, uncertainty and risk,
while 1.7 presents the storyline of the whole report.

Box 1.1 | The Anthropocene: Strengthening the Global Response to 1.5C Global Warming

1

Introduction
The concept of the Anthropocene can be linked to the aspiration of the Paris Agreement. The abundant empirical evidence of the
unprecedented rate and global scale of impact of human influence on the Earth System (Steffen et al., 2016; Waters et al., 2016) has
led many scientists to call for an acknowledgement that the Earth has entered a new geological epoch: the Anthropocene (Crutzen
and Stoermer, 2000; Crutzen, 2002; Gradstein et al., 2012). Although rates of change in the Anthropocene are necessarily assessed
over much shorter periods than those used to calculate long-term baseline rates of change, and therefore present challenges for direct
comparison, they are nevertheless striking. The rise in global CO2 concentration since 2000 is about 20 ppm per decade, which is up to
10 times faster than any sustained rise in CO2 during the past 800,000 years (Luthi et al., 2008; Bereiter et al., 2015). AR5 found that
the last geological epoch with similar atmospheric CO2 concentration was the Pliocene, 3.3 to 3.0 Ma (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2013).
Since 1970 the global average temperature has been rising at a rate of 1.7C per century, compared to a long-term decline over the
past 7,000 years at a baseline rate of 0.01C per century (NOAA, 2016; Marcott et al., 2013). These global-level rates of human-driven
change far exceed the rates of change driven by geophysical or biosphere forces that have altered the Earth System trajectory in the past
(e.g., Summerhayes, 2015; Foster et al., 2017); even abrupt geophysical events do not approach current rates of human-driven change.
The Geological Dimension of the Anthropocene and 1.5C Global Warming
The process of formalising the Anthropocene is on-going (Zalasiewicz et al., 2017), but a strong majority of the Anthropocene Working
Group (AWG) established by the Subcommission on Quaternary Stratigraphy of the International Commission on Stratigraphy have
agreed that: (i) the Anthropocene has a geological merit; (ii) it should follow the Holocene as a formal epoch in the Geological Time
Scale; and, (iii) its onset should be defined as the mid-20th century. Potential markers in the stratigraphic record include an array of
novel manufactured materials of human origin, and "these combined signals render the Anthropocene stratigraphically distinct from
the Holocene and earlier epochs" (Waters et al., 2016). The Holocene period, which itself was formally adopted in 1885 by geological
science community, began 11,700 years ago with a more stable warm climate providing for emergence of human civilisation and
growing human-nature interactions that have expanded to give rise to the Anthropocene (Waters et al., 2016).
The Anthropocene and the Challenge of a 1.5 C Warmer World
The Anthropocene can be employed as a "boundary concept" (Brondizio et al., 2016) that frames critical insights into understanding the
drivers, dynamics and specific challenges in responding to the ambition of keeping global temperature well below 2C while pursuing
efforts towards and adapting to a 1.5C warmer world. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and
its Paris Agreement recognize the ability of humans to influence geophysical planetary processes (Chapter 2, Cross-Chapter Box 1 in this
chapter). The Anthropocene offers a structured understanding of the culmination of past and present human-environmental relations
and provides an opportunity to better visualize the future to minimize pitfalls (Pattberg and Zelli, 2016; Delanty and Mota, 2017), while
acknowledging the differentiated responsibility and opportunity to limit global warming and invest in prospects for climate-resilient
sustainable development (Harrington, 2016) (Chapter 5). The Anthropocene also provides an opportunity to raise questions regarding
the regional differences, social inequities, and uneven capacities and drivers of global social-environmental changes, which in turn
inform the search for solutions as explored in Chapter 4 of this report (Biermann et al., 2016). It links uneven influences of human
actions on planetary functions to an uneven distribution of impacts (assessed in Chapter 3) as well as the responsibility and response
capacity to, for example, limit global warming to no more than a 1.5C rise above pre-industrial levels. Efforts to curtail greenhouse gas
emissions without incorporating the intrinsic interconnectivity and disparities associated with the Anthropocene world may themselves
negatively affect the development ambitions of some regions more than others and negate sustainable development efforts (see
Chapter 2 and Chapter 5).

1.1.1

Equity and a 1.5C Warmer World

The AR5 suggested that equity, sustainable development, and
poverty eradication are best understood as mutually supportive
and co-achievable within the context of climate action and are
underpinned by various other international hard and soft law
instruments (Denton et al., 2014; Fleurbaey et al., 2014; Klein et al.,
54

2014; Olsson et al., 2014; Porter et al., 2014; Stavins et al., 2014).
The aim of the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC to `pursue
efforts to limit' the rise in global temperatures to 1.5C above preindustrial levels raises ethical concerns that have long been central
to climate debates (Fleurbaey et al., 2014; Kolstad et al., 2014).
The Paris Agreement makes particular reference to the principle
of equity, within the context of broader international goals of

Framing and Context

sustainable development and poverty eradication. Equity is a longstanding principle within international law and climate change law
in particular (Shelton, 2008; Bodansky et al., 2017).
The AR5 describes equity as having three dimensions: intergenerational
(fairness between generations), international (fairness between
states), and national (fairness between individuals) (Fleurbaey et al.,
2014). The principle is generally agreed to involve both procedural
justice (i.e., participation in decision making) and distributive justice
(i.e., how the costs and benefits of climate actions are distributed)
(Kolstad et al., 2014; Savaresi, 2016; Reckien et al., 2017). Concerns
regarding equity have frequently been central to debates around
mitigation, adaptation and climate governance (Caney, 2005;
Schroeder et al., 2012; Ajibade, 2016; Reckien et al., 2017; Shue,
2018). Hence, equity provides a framework for understanding the
asymmetries between the distributions of benefits and costs relevant
to climate action (Schleussner et al., 2016; Aaheim et al., 2017).
Four key framing asymmetries associated with the conditions of a
1.5C warmer world have been noted (Okereke, 2010; Harlan et al.,
2015; Ajibade, 2016; Savaresi, 2016; Reckien et al., 2017) and are
reflected in the report's assessment. The first concerns differential
contributions to the problem: the observation that the benefits from
industrialization have been unevenly distributed and those who
benefited most historically also have contributed most to the current
climate problem and so bear greater responsibility (Shue, 2013;
McKinnon, 2015; Otto et al., 2017; Skeie et al., 2017). The second
asymmetry concerns differential impact: the worst impacts tend to
fall on those least responsible for the problem, within states, between
states, and between generations (Fleurbaey et al., 2014; Shue, 2014;
Ionesco et al., 2016). The third is the asymmetry in capacity to shape
solutions and response strategies, such that the worst-affected states,
groups, and individuals are not always well represented (Robinson
and Shine, 2018). Fourth, there is an asymmetry in future response
capacity: some states, groups, and places are at risk of being left
behind as the world progresses to a low-carbon economy (Fleurbaey
et al., 2014; Shue, 2014; Humphreys, 2017).
A sizeable and growing literature exists on how best to
operationalize climate equity considerations, drawing on other
concepts mentioned in the Paris Agreement, notably its explicit
reference to human rights (OHCHR, 2009; Caney, 2010; Adger et
al., 2014; Fleurbaey et al., 2014; IBA, 2014; Knox, 2015; Duyck
et al., 2018; Robinson and Shine, 2018). Human rights comprise
internationally agreed norms that align with the Paris ambitions of
poverty eradication, sustainable development, and the reduction of
vulnerability (Caney, 2010; Fleurbaey et al., 2014; OHCHR, 2015).
In addition to defining substantive rights (such as to life, health,
and shelter) and procedural rights (such as to information and
participation), human rights instruments prioritise the rights of
marginalized groups, children, vulnerable and indigenous persons,
and those discriminated against on grounds such as gender, race,
age or disability (OHCHR, 2017). Several international human
rights obligations are relevant to the implementation of climate
actions and consonant with UNFCCC undertakings in the areas
of mitigation, adaptation, finance, and technology transfer (Knox,
2015; OHCHR, 2015; Humphreys, 2017).

Chapter 1

Much of this literature is still new and evolving (Holz et al., 2017;
Dooley et al., 2018; Klinsky and Winkler, 2018), permitting the
present report to examine some broader equity concerns raised
both by possible failure to limit warming to 1.5C and by the range
of ambitious mitigation efforts that may be undertaken to achieve
that limit. Any comparison between 1.5C and higher levels of
warming implies risk assessments and value judgements and cannot
straightforwardly be reduced to a cost-benefit analysis (Kolstad et
al., 2014). However, different levels of warming can nevertheless be
understood in terms of their different implications for equity - that
is, in the comparative distribution of benefits and burdens for specific
states, persons, or generations, and in terms of their likely impacts
on sustainable development and poverty (see especially Sections
2.3.4.2, 2.5, 3.4.5-3.4.13, 3.6, 5.4.1, 5.4.2, 5.6 and Cross-Chapter
boxes 6 in Chapter 3 and 12 in Chapter 5).

1.1.2

Eradication of Poverty

This report assesses the role of poverty and its eradication in the
context of strengthening the global response to the threat of
climate change and sustainable development. A wide range of
definitions for poverty exist. The AR5 discussed `poverty' in terms
of its multidimensionality, referring to `material circumstances'
(e.g., needs, patterns of deprivation, or limited resources), as well
as to economic conditions (e.g., standard of living, inequality, or
economic position), and/or social relationships (e.g., social class,
dependency, lack of basic security, exclusion, or lack of entitlement;
Olsson et al., 2014). The UNDP now uses a Multidimensional Poverty
Index and estimates that about 1.5 billion people globally live in
multidimensional poverty, especially in rural areas of South Asia and
Sub-Saharan Africa, with an additional billion at risk of falling into
poverty (UNDP, 2016).
A large and rapidly growing body of knowledge explores the
connections between climate change and poverty. Climatic
variability and climate change are widely recognized as factors that
may exacerbate poverty, particularly in countries and regions where
poverty levels are high (Leichenko and Silva, 2014). The AR5 noted
that climate change-driven impacts often act as a threat multiplier
in that the impacts of climate change compound other drivers of
poverty (Olsson et al., 2014). Many vulnerable and poor people are
dependent on activities such as agriculture that are highly susceptible
to temperature increases and variability in precipitation patterns
(Shiferaw et al., 2014; Miyan, 2015). Even modest changes in rainfall
and temperature patterns can push marginalized people into poverty
as they lack the means to recover from associated impacts. Extreme
events, such as floods, droughts, and heat waves, especially when
they occur in series, can significantly erode poor people's assets and
further undermine their livelihoods in terms of labour productivity,
housing, infrastructure and social networks (Olsson et al., 2014).

1.1.3

Sustainable Development and a 1.5C
Warmer World

AR5 (IPCC, 2014c) noted with high confidence that `equity is an
integral dimension of sustainable development' and that `mitigation
and adaptation measures can strongly affect broader sustainable
55

1

Chapter 1

1

development and equity objectives' (Fleurbaey et al., 2014). Limiting
global warming to 1.5C would require substantial societal and
technological transformations, dependent in turn on global and
regional sustainable development pathways. A range of pathways,
both sustainable and not, are explored in this report, including
implementation strategies to understand the enabling conditions and
challenges required for such a transformation. These pathways and
connected strategies are framed within the context of sustainable
development, and in particular the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (UN, 2015b) and Cross-Chapter Box 4 on
SDGs (in this chapter). The feasibility of staying within 1.5C depends
upon a range of enabling conditions with geophysical, environmental-
ecological, technological, economic, socio-cultural, and institutional
dimensions. Limiting warming to 1.5C also involves identifying
technology and policy levers to accelerate the pace of transformation
(see Chapter 4). Some pathways are more consistent than others with
the requirements for sustainable development (see Chapter 5). Overall,
the three-pronged emphasis on sustainable development, resilience,
and transformation provides Chapter 5 an opportunity to assess
the conditions of simultaneously reducing societal vulnerabilities,
addressing entrenched inequalities, and breaking the circle of poverty.
The feasibility of any global commitment to a 1.5C pathway depends,
in part, on the cumulative influence of the nationally determined
contributions (NDCs), committing nation states to specific GHG
emission reductions. The current NDCs, extending only to 2030, do
not limit warming to 1.5C. Depending on mitigation decisions after
2030, they cumulatively track toward a warming of 3-4C above
pre-industrial temperatures by 2100, with the potential for further
warming thereafter (Rogelj et al., 2016a; UNFCCC, 2016). The analysis
of pathways in this report reveals opportunities for greater decoupling
of economic growth from GHG emissions. Progress towards limiting
warming to 1.5C requires a significant acceleration of this trend. AR5
concluded that climate change constrains possible development paths,
that synergies and trade-offs exist between climate responses and
socio-economic contexts, and that opportunities for effective climate
responses overlap with opportunities for sustainable development,
noting that many existing societal patterns of consumption are
intrinsically unsustainable (Fleurbaey et al., 2014).

1.2

Understanding 1.5C: Reference
Levels, Probability, Transience,
Overshoot, and Stabilization

1.2.1

Working Definitions of 1.5C and 2C
Warming Relative to Pre-Industrial Levels

Framing and Context

on continental scales (Deser et al., 2012) and primarily affects the
historical period, particularly that prior to the early 20th century when
data is sparse and of less certain quality. Most practical mitigation
and adaptation decisions do not depend on quantifying historical
warming to this level of precision, but a consistent working definition
is necessary to ensure consistency across chapters and figures. We
adopt definitions that are as consistent as possible with key findings
of AR5 with respect to historical warming.
This report defines `warming', unless otherwise qualified, as an
increase in multi-decade global mean surface temperature (GMST)
above pre-industrial levels. Specifically, warming at a given point
in time is defined as the global average of combined land surface
air and sea surface temperatures for a 30-year period centred on
that time, expressed relative to the reference period 1850-1900
(adopted for consistency with Box SPM.1 Figure 1 of IPCC (2014a))
`as an approximation of pre-industrial levels', excluding the impact of
natural climate fluctuations within that 30-year period and assuming
any secular trend continues throughout that period, extrapolating
into the future if necessary. There are multiple ways of accounting
for natural fluctuations and trends (e.g., Foster and Rahmstorf, 2011;
Haustein et al., 2017; Medhaug et al., 2017; Folland et al., 2018;
Visser et al., 2018), but all give similar results. A major volcanic
eruption might temporarily reduce observed global temperatures,
but would not reduce warming as defined here (Bethke et al., 2017).
Likewise, given that the level of warming is currently increasing at
0.3C-0.7C per 30 years (likely range quoted in Kirtman et al., 2013
and supported by Folland et al., 2018), the level of warming in 2017
was 0.15C-0.35C higher than average warming over the 30-year
period 1988-2017.
In summary, this report adopts a working definition of `1.5C relative
to pre-industrial levels' that corresponds to global average combined
land surface air and sea surface temperatures either 1.5C warmer
than the average of the 51-year period 1850-1900, 0.87C warmer
than the 20-year period 1986-2005, or 0.63C warmer than the
decade 2006-2015. These offsets are based on all available published
global datasets, combined and updated, which show that 1986-
2005 was 0.63C warmer than 1850-1900 (with a 5-95% range
of 0.57C-0.69C based on observational uncertainties alone), and
2006-2015 was 0.87C warmer than 1850-1900 (with a likely range
of 0.75C-0.99C, also accounting for the possible impact of natural
fluctuations). Where possible, estimates of impacts and mitigation
pathways are evaluated relative to these more recent periods. Note
that the 5-95% intervals often quoted in square brackets in AR5
correspond to very likely ranges, while likely ranges correspond to
17-83%, or the central two-thirds, of the distribution of uncertainty.

1.2.1.1 Definition of global average temperature
What is meant by `the increase in global average temperature... above
pre-industrial levels' referred to in the Paris Agreement depends on
the choice of pre-industrial reference period, whether 1.5C refers to
total warming or the human-induced component of that warming,
and which variables and geographical coverage are used to define
global average temperature change. The cumulative impact of these
definitional ambiguities (e.g., Hawkins et al., 2017; Pfleiderer et al.,
2018) is comparable to natural multi-decadal temperature variability
56

The IPCC has traditionally defined changes in observed GMST as a
weighted average of near-surface air temperature (SAT) changes
over land and sea surface temperature (SST) changes over the oceans
(Morice et al., 2012; Hartmann et al., 2013), while modelling studies
have typically used a simple global average SAT. For ambitious
mitigation goals, and under conditions of rapid warming or declining
sea ice (Berger et al., 2017), the difference can be significant. Cowtan

Framing and Context

et al. (2015) and Richardson et al. (2016) show that the use of
blended SAT/SST data and incomplete coverage together can give
approximately 0.2C less warming from the 19th century to the
present relative to the use of complete global-average SAT (Stocker
et al., 2013, Figure TFE8.1 and Figure 1.2). However, Richardson et al.
(2018) show that this is primarily an issue for the interpretation of
the historical record to date, with less absolute impact on projections
of future changes, or estimated emissions budgets, under ambitious
mitigation scenarios.
The three GMST reconstructions used in AR5 differ in their treatment
of missing data. GISTEMP (Hansen et al., 2010) uses interpolation
to infer trends in poorly observed regions like the Arctic (although
even this product is spatially incomplete in the early record), while
NOAAGlobalTemp (Vose et al., 2012) and HadCRUT (Morice et al.,
2012) are progressively closer to a simple average of available
observations. Since the AR5, considerable effort has been devoted
to more sophisticated statistical modelling to account for the impact

Chapter 1

of incomplete observation coverage (Rohde et al., 2013; Cowtan and
Way, 2014; Jones, 2016). The main impact of statistical infilling is to
increase estimated warming to date by about 0.1C (Richardson et
al., 2018 and Table 1.1).
We adopt a working definition of warming over the historical period
based on an average of the four available global datasets that are
supported by peer-reviewed publications: the three datasets used in the
AR5, updated (Karl et al., 2015), together with the Cowtan-Way infilled
dataset (Cowtan and Way, 2014). A further two datasets, Berkeley
Earth (Rohde et al., 2013) and that of the Japan Meteorological Agency
(JMA), are provided in Table 1.1. This working definition provides an
updated estimate of 0.86C for the warming over the period 1880-
2012 based on a linear trend. This quantity was quoted as 0.85C in
the AR5. Hence the inclusion of the Cowtan-Way dataset does not
introduce any inconsistency with the AR5, whereas redefining GMST
to represent global SAT could increase this figure by up to 20% (Table
1.1, blue lines in Figure 1.2 and Richardson et al., 2016).

Figure 1.2 | Evolution of global mean surface temperature (GMST) over the period of instrumental observations. Grey shaded line shows monthly mean GMST
in the HadCRUT4, NOAAGlobalTemp, GISTEMP and Cowtan-Way datasets, expressed as departures from 1850-1900, with varying grey line thickness indicating inter-dataset
range. All observational datasets shown represent GMST as a weighted average of near surface air temperature over land and sea surface temperature over oceans. Humaninduced (yellow) and total (human- and naturally-forced, orange) contributions to these GMST changes are shown calculated following Otto et al. (2015) and Haustein et al.
(2017). Fractional uncertainty in the level of human-induced warming in 2017 is set equal to 20% based on multiple lines of evidence. Thin blue lines show the modelled
global mean surface air temperature (dashed) and blended surface air and sea surface temperature accounting for observational coverage (solid) from the CMIP5 historical
ensemble average extended with RCP8.5 forcing (Cowtan et al., 2015; Richardson et al., 2018). The pink shading indicates a range for temperature fluctuations over the
Holocene (Marcott et al., 2013). Light green plume shows the AR5 prediction for average GMST over 2016-2035 (Kirtman et al., 2013). See Supplementary Material 1.SM for
further details.

1.2.1.2 Choice of reference period
Any choice of reference period used to approximate `preindustrial' conditions is a compromise between data coverage
and representativeness of typical pre-industrial solar and volcanic
forcing conditions. This report adopts the 51-year reference period,
1850-1900 inclusive, assessed as an approximation of pre-industrial
levels in AR5 (Box TS.5, Figure 1 of Field et al., 2014). The years
1880-1900 are subject to strong but uncertain volcanic forcing, but

in the HadCRUT4 dataset, average temperatures over 1850-1879,
prior to the largest eruptions, are less than 0.01C from the average
for 1850-1900. Temperatures rose by 0.0C-0.2C from 1720-
1800 to 1850-1900 (Hawkins et al., 2017), but the anthropogenic
contribution to this warming is uncertain (Abram et al., 2016; Schurer
et al., 2017). The 18th century represents a relatively cool period in
the context of temperatures since the mid-Holocene (Marcott et al.,
2013; Luning and Vahrenholt, 2017; Marsicek et al., 2018), which is
indicated by the pink shaded region in Figure 1.2.
57

1

Chapter 1

1

Framing and Context

Projections of responses to emission scenarios, and associated
impacts, may use a more recent reference period, offset by historical
observations, to avoid conflating uncertainty in past and future
changes (e.g., Hawkins et al., 2017; Millar et al., 2017b; Simmons
et al., 2017). Two recent reference periods are used in this report:
1986-2005 and 2006-2015. In the latter case, when using a single
decade to represent a 30-year average centred on that decade, it
is important to consider the potential impact of internal climate
variability. The years 2008-2013 were characterised by persistent
cool conditions in the Eastern Pacific (Kosaka and Xie, 2013; Medhaug
et al., 2017), related to both the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
and, potentially, multi-decadal Pacific variability (e.g., England et al.,
2014), but these were partially compensated for by El Nino conditions
in 2006 and 2015. Likewise, volcanic activity depressed temperatures
in 1986-2005, partly offset by the very strong El Nino event in 1998.
Figure 1.2 indicates that natural variability (internally generated and
externally driven) had little net impact on average temperatures
over 2006-2015, in that the average temperature of the decade

is similar to the estimated externally driven warming. When solar,
volcanic and ENSO-related variability is taken into account following
the procedure of Foster and Rahmstorf (2011), there is no indication
of average temperatures in either 1986-2005 or 2006-2015 being
substantially biased by short-term variability (see Supplementary
Material 1.SM.2). The temperature difference between these two
reference periods (0.21C-0.27C over 15 years across available
datasets) is also consistent with the AR5 assessment of the current
warming rate of 0.3C-0.7C over 30 years (Kirtman et al., 2013).
On the definition of warming used here, warming to the decade
2006-2015 comprises an estimate of the 30-year average centred
on this decade, or 1996-2025, assuming the current trend continues
and that any volcanic eruptions that might occur over the final seven
years are corrected for. Given this element of extrapolation, we use
the AR5 near-term projection to provide a conservative uncertainty
range. Combining the uncertainty in observed warming to 1986-
2005 (0.06C) with the likely range in the current warming trend as

Table 1.1 | Observed increase in global average surface temperature in various datasets.
Numbers in square brackets correspond to 5-95% uncertainty ranges from individual datasets, encompassing known sources of observational uncertainty only.

1850-1900
to (1)
2006-2015

1850-1900
to (2)
1986-2005

1986-2005
to (3)
2006-2015

1850-1900
to (4)
1981-2010

1850-1900
to (5)
1998-2017

Trend (6)
1880-2012

Trend (6)
1880-2015

0.84
[0.79-0.89]

0.60
[0.57-0.66]

0.22
[0.21-0.23]

0.62
[0.58-0.67]

0.83
[0.78-0.88]

0.83
[0.77-0.90]

0.88
[0.83-0.95]

NOAAGlobalTemp
(7)

0.86

0.62

0.22

0.63

0.85

0.85

0.91

GISTEMP (7)

0.89

0.65

0.23

0.66

0.88

0.89

0.94

Cowtan-Way

0.91
[0.85-0.99]

0.65
[0.60-0.72]

0.26
[0.25-0.27]

0.65
[0.60-0.72]

0.88
[0.82-0.96]

0.88
[0.79-0.98]

0.93
[0.85-1.03]

Average (8)

0.87

0.63

0.23

0.64

0.86

0.86

0.92

Berkeley (9)

0.98

0.73

0.25

0.73

0.97

0.97

1.02

JMA (9)

0.82

0.59

0.17

0.60

0.81

0.82

0.87

ERA-Interim

N/A

N/A

0.26

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Diagnostic
/ dataset
HadCRUT4.6

JRA-55

N/A

N/A

0.23

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

CMIP5 global
SAT (10)

0.99
[0.65-1.37]

0.62
[0.38-0.94]

0.38
[0.24-0.62]

0.62
[0.34-0.93]

0.89
[0.62-1.29]

0.81
[0.58-1.31]

0.86
[0.63-1.39]

CMIP5 SAT/SST
blend-masked

0.86
[0.54-1.18]

0.50
[0.31-0.79]

0.34
[0.19-0.54]

0.48
[0.26-0.79]

0.75
[0.52-1.11]

0.68
[0.45-1.08]

0.74
[0.51-1.14]

Notes:
1) Most recent reference period used in this report.
2) Most recent reference period used in AR5.
3) Difference between recent reference periods.
4) Current WMO standard reference periods.
5) Most recent 20-year period.
6) Linear trends estimated by a straight-line fit, expressed in degrees yr-1 multiplied by 133 or 135 years respectively, with uncertainty ranges incorporating observational uncertainty only.
7) To estimate changes in the NOAAGlobalTemp and GISTEMP datasets relative to the 1850-1900 reference period, warming is computed relative to 1850-1900 using the HadCRUT4.6
 dataset and scaled by the ratio of the linear trend 1880-2015 in the NOAAGlobalTemp or GISTEMP dataset with the corresponding linear trend computed from HadCRUT4.
8) Average of diagnostics derived - see (7) - from four peer-reviewed global datasets, HadCRUT4.6, NOAA, GISTEMP & Cowtan-Way. Note that differences between averages may not
 coincide with average differences because of rounding.
9) No peer-reviewed publication available for these global combined land-sea datasets.
10) CMIP5 changes estimated relative to 1861-80 plus 0.02C for the offset in HadCRUT4.6 from 1850-1900. CMIP5 values are the mean of the RCP8.5 ensemble, with 5-95% ensemble
 range. They are included to illustrate the difference between a complete global surface air temperature record (SAT) and a blended surface air and sea surface temperature (SST) record
 accounting for incomplete coverage (masked), following Richardson et al. (2016). Note that 1986-2005 temperatures in CMIP5 appear to have been depressed more than observed temperatures
by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo.

58

Framing and Context

assessed by AR5 (0.2C/30 years), assuming these are uncorrelated,
and using observed warming relative to 1850-1900 to provide the
central estimate (no evidence of bias from short-term variability),
gives an assessed warming to the decade 2006-2015 of 0.87C with
a 0.12C likely range. This estimate has the advantage of traceability
to the AR5, but more formal methods of quantifying externally driven
warming (e.g., Bindoff et al., 2013; Jones et al., 2016; Haustein et
al., 2017; Ribes et al., 2017), which typically give smaller ranges of
uncertainty, may be adopted in the future.

1.2.1.3 Total versus human-induced warming and
warming rates
Total warming refers to the actual temperature change, irrespective
of cause, while human-induced warming refers to the component
of that warming that is attributable to human activities. Mitigation
studies focus on human-induced warming (that is not subject to
internal climate variability), while studies of climate change impacts
typically refer to total warming (often with the impact of internal
variability minimised through the use of multi-decade averages).
In the absence of strong natural forcing due to changes in solar or
volcanic activity, the difference between total and human-induced
warming is small: assessing empirical studies quantifying solar and
volcanic contributions to GMST from 1890 to 2010, AR5 (Figure 10.6
of Bindoff et al., 2013) found their net impact on warming over the
full period to be less than plus or minus 0.1C. Figure 1.2 shows that
the level of human-induced warming has been indistinguishable from
total observed warming since 2000, including over the decade 2006-
2015. Bindoff et al. (2013) assessed the magnitude of human-induced
warming over the period 1951-2010 to be 0.7C (likely between
0.6C and 0.8C), which is slightly greater than the 0.65C observed
warming over this period (Figures 10.4 and 10.5) with a likely range
of 14%. The key surface temperature attribution studies underlying
this finding (Gillett et al., 2013; Jones et al., 2013; Ribes and Terray,
2013) used temperatures since the 19th century to constrain humaninduced warming, and so their results are equally applicable to the
attribution of causes of warming over longer periods. Jones et al.
(2016) show (Figure 10) human-induced warming trends over the
period 1905-2005 to be indistinguishable from the corresponding
total observed warming trend accounting for natural variability using
spatio-temporal detection patterns from 12 out of 15 CMIP5 models
and from the multi-model average. Figures from Ribes and Terray
(2013), show the anthropogenic contribution to the observed linear
warming trend 1880-2012 in the HadCRUT4 dataset (0.83C in Table
1.1) to be 0.86C using a multi-model average global diagnostic, with
a 5-95% confidence interval of 0.72C-1.00C (see figure 1.SM.6).
In all cases, since 2000 the estimated combined contribution of solar
and volcanic activity to warming relative to 1850-1900 is found to be
less than 0.1C (Gillett et al., 2013), while anthropogenic warming
is indistinguishable from, and if anything slightly greater than, the
total observed warming, with 5-95% confidence intervals typically
around 20%.
Haustein et al. (2017) give a 5-95% confidence interval for
human-induced warming in 2017 of 0.87C-1.22C, with a best
estimate of 1.02C, based on the HadCRUT4 dataset accounting

Chapter 1

for observational and forcing uncertainty and internal variability.
Applying their method to the average of the four datasets shown in
Figure 1.2 gives an average level of human-induced warming in 2017
of 1.04C. They also estimate a human-induced warming trend over
the past 20 years of 0.17C (0.13C-0.33C) per decade, consistent
with estimates of the total observed trend of Foster and Rahmstorf
(2011) (0.17  0.03C per decade, uncertainty in linear trend only),
Folland et al. (2018) and Kirtman et al. (2013) (0.3C-0.7C over 30
years, or 0.1C-0.23C per decade, likely range), and a best-estimate
warming rate over the past five years of 0.215C/decade (Leach et al.,
2018). Drawing on these multiple lines of evidence, human-induced
warming is assessed to have reached 1.0C in 2017, having increased
by 0.13C from the mid-point of 2006-2015, with a likely range
of 0.8C to 1.2C (reduced from 5-95% to account for additional
forcing and model uncertainty), increasing at 0.2C per decade (with
a likely range of 0.1C to 0.3C per decade: estimates of humaninduced warming given to 0.1C precision only).
Since warming is here defined in terms of a 30-year average, corrected
for short-term natural fluctuations, when warming is considered to be
at 1.5C, global temperatures would fluctuate equally on either side
of 1.5C in the absence of a large cooling volcanic eruption (Bethke et
al., 2017). Figure 1.2 indicates there is a substantial chance of GMST in
a single month fluctuating over 1.5C between now and 2020 (or, by
2030, for a longer period: Henley and King, 2017), but this would not
constitute temperatures `reaching 1.5C' on our working definition.
Rogelj et al. (2017) show limiting the probability of annual GMST
exceeding 1.5C to less than one-year-in-20 would require limiting
warming, on the definition used here, to 1.31C or lower.

1.2.2

Global versus Regional and Seasonal Warming

Warming is not observed or expected to be spatially or seasonally
uniform (Collins et al., 2013). A 1.5C increase in GMST will be
associated with warming substantially greater than 1.5C in many
land regions, and less than 1.5C in most ocean regions. This is
illustrated by Figure 1.3, which shows an estimate of the observed
change in annual and seasonal average temperatures between
the 1850-1900 pre-industrial reference period and the decade
2006-2015 in the Cowtan-Way dataset. These regional changes are
associated with an observed GMST increase of 0.91C in the dataset
shown here, or 0.87C in the four-dataset average (Table 1.1). This
observed pattern reflects an on-going transient warming: features
such as enhanced warming over land may be less pronounced, but still
present, in equilibrium (Collins et al., 2013). This figure illustrates the
magnitude of spatial and seasonal differences, with many locations,
particularly in Northern Hemisphere mid-latitude winter (December-
February), already experiencing regional warming more than double
the global average. Individual seasons may be substantially warmer,
or cooler, than these expected changes in the long-term average.

1.2.3

Definition of 1.5C Pathways: Probability,
Transience, Stabilization and Overshoot

Pathways considered in this report, consistent with available literature
on 1.5C, primarily focus on the time scale up to 2100, recognising
that the evolution of GMST after 2100 is also important. Two broad
59

1

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

1

Figure 1.3 | Spatial and seasonal pattern of present-day warming: Regional warming for the 2006-2015 decade relative to 1850-1900 for the annual mean (top),
the average of December, January, and February (bottom left) and for June, July, and August (bottom right). Warming is evaluated by regressing regional changes in the Cowtan
and Way (2014) dataset onto the total (combined human and natural) externally forced warming (yellow line in Figure 1.2). See Supplementary Material 1.SM for further details
and versions using alternative datasets. The definition of regions (green boxes and labels in top panel) is adopted from the AR5 (Christensen et al., 2013).

categories of 1.5C pathways can be used to characterise mitigation
options and impacts: pathways in which warming (defined as 30-year
averaged GMST relative to pre-industrial levels, see Section 1.2.1)
remains below 1.5C throughout the 21st century, and pathways
in which warming temporarily exceeds (`overshoots') 1.5C and
returns to 1.5C either before or soon after 2100. Pathways in which
warming exceeds 1.5C before 2100, but might return to that level in
some future century, are not considered 1.5C pathways.
Because of uncertainty in the climate response, a `prospective'
mitigation pathway (see Cross-Chapter Box 1 in this chapter), in which
emissions are prescribed, can only provide a level of probability of
warming remaining below a temperature threshold. This probability
cannot be quantified precisely since estimates depend on the method
used (Rogelj et al., 2016b; Millar et al., 2017b; Goodwin et al., 2018;
Tokarska and Gillett, 2018). This report defines a `1.5C pathway'
as a pathway of emissions and associated possible temperature
responses in which the majority of approaches using presently
available information assign a probability of approximately one-intwo to two-in-three to warming remaining below 1.5C or, in the case
of an overshoot pathway, to warming returning to 1.5C by around
2100 or earlier. Recognizing the very different potential impacts and
risks associated with high-overshoot pathways, this report singles
60

out 1.5C pathways with no or limited (<0.1C) overshoot in many
instances and pursues efforts to ensure that when the term `1.5C
pathway' is used, the associated overshoot is made explicit where
relevant. In Chapter 2, the classification of pathways is based on one
modelling approach to avoid ambiguity, but probabilities of exceeding
1.5C are checked against other approaches to verify that they lie
within this approximate range. All these absolute probabilities are
imprecise, depend on the information used to constrain them, and
hence are expected to evolve in the future. Imprecise probabilities
can nevertheless be useful for decision-making, provided the
imprecision is acknowledged (Hall et al., 2007; Kriegler et al., 2009;
Simpson et al., 2016). Relative and rank probabilities can be assessed
much more consistently: approaches may differ on the absolute
probability assigned to individual outcomes, but typically agree on
which outcomes are more probable.
Importantly, 1.5C pathways allow a substantial (up to one-in-two)
chance of warming still exceeding 1.5C. An `adaptive' mitigation
pathway in which emissions are continuously adjusted to achieve
a specific temperature outcome (e.g., Millar et al., 2017b) reduces
uncertainty in the temperature outcome while increasing uncertainty
in the emissions required to achieve it. It has been argued (Otto et
al., 2015; Xu and Ramanathan, 2017) that achieving very ambitious

Framing and Context

temperature goals will require such an adaptive approach to
mitigation, but very few studies have been performed taking this
approach (e.g., Jarvis et al., 2012).
Figure 1.4 illustrates categories of (a) 1.5C pathways and associated
(b) annual and (c) cumulative emissions of CO2. It also shows (d)
an example of a `time-integrated impact' that continues to increase
even after GMST has stabilised, such as sea level rise. This schematic
assumes for the purposes of illustration that the fractional contribution
of non-CO2 climate forcers to total anthropogenic forcing (which is
currently increasing, Myhre et al., 2017) is approximately constant
from now on. Consequently, total human-induced warming is
proportional to cumulative CO2 emissions (solid line in c), and GMST
stabilises when emissions reach zero. This is only the case in the most
ambitious scenarios for non-CO2 mitigation (Leach et al., 2018). A
simple way of accounting for varying non-CO2 forcing in Figure 1.4
would be to note that every 1 W m-2 increase in non-CO2 forcing
between now and the decade or two immediately prior to the time
of peak warming reduces cumulative CO2 emissions consistent with
the same peak warming by approximately 1100 GtCO2, with a range
of 900-1500 GtCO2 (using values from AR5: Myhre et al., 2013; Allen
et al., 2018; Jenkins et al., 2018; Cross-Chapter Box 2 in this chapter).

Chapter 1

time. Hence every year's delay before initiating emission reductions
decreases by approximately two years the remaining time available
to reach zero emissions on a pathway still remaining below 1.5C
(Allen and Stocker, 2013; Leach et al., 2018).

1.2.3.2 Pathways temporarily exceeding 1.5C
With the pathways in this category, also referred to as overshoot
pathways, GMST rises above 1.5C relative to pre-industrial before
peaking and returning to 1.5C around or before 2100 (Figure 1.4,
blue lines), subsequently either stabilising or continuing to fall. This
allows initially slower or delayed emission reductions, but lowering
GMST requires net negative global CO2 emissions (net anthropogenic
removal of CO2; Figure 1.4b). Cooling, or reduced warming, through
sustained reductions of net non-CO2 climate forcing (Cross-Chapter
Box 2 in this chapter) is also required, but their role is limited because
emissions of most non-CO2 forcers cannot be reduced to below zero.
Hence the feasibility and availability of large-scale CO2 removal
limits the possible rate and magnitude of temperature decline. In
this report, overshoot pathways are referred to as 1.5C pathways,
but qualified by the amount of the temperature overshoot, which
can have a substantial impact on irreversible climate change impacts
(Mathesius et al., 2015; Tokarska and Zickfeld, 2015).

1.2.3.1 Pathways remaining below 1.5C
In this category of 1.5C pathways, human-induced warming either
rises monotonically to stabilise at 1.5C (Figure 1.4, brown lines)
or peaks at or below 1.5C and then declines (yellow lines). Figure
1.4b demonstrates that pathways remaining below 1.5C require net
annual CO2 emissions to peak and decline to near zero or below,
depending on the long-term adjustment of the carbon cycle and
non-CO2 emissions (Bowerman et al., 2013; Wigley, 2018). Reducing
emissions to zero corresponds to stabilizing cumulative CO2 emissions
(Figure 1.4c, solid lines) and falling concentrations of CO2 in the
atmosphere (panel c dashed lines) (Matthews and Caldeira, 2008;
Solomon et al., 2009), which is required to stabilize GMST if non-CO2
climate forcings are constant and positive. Stabilizing atmospheric
greenhouse gas concentrations would result in continued warming
(see Section 1.2.4).
If emission reductions do not begin until temperatures are close to
the proposed limit, pathways remaining below 1.5C necessarily
involve much faster rates of net CO2 emission reductions (Figure 1.4,
green lines), combined with rapid reductions in non-CO2 forcing and
these pathways also reach 1.5C earlier. Note that the emissions
associated with these schematic temperature pathways may not
correspond to feasible emission scenarios, but they do illustrate the
fact that the timing of net zero emissions does not in itself determine
peak warming: what matters is total cumulative emissions up to that

1.2.3.3 Impacts at 1.5C warming associated with different
pathways: transience versus stabilisation
Figure 1.4 also illustrates time scales associated with different
impacts. While many impacts scale with the change in GMST itself,
some (such as those associated with ocean acidification) scale with
the change in atmospheric CO2 concentration, indicated by the
fraction of cumulative CO2 emissions remaining in the atmosphere
(dotted lines in Figure 1.4c). Others may depend on the rate of
change of GMST, while `time-integrated impacts', such as sea level
rise, shown in Figure 1.4d continue to increase even after GMST has
stabilised.
Hence impacts that occur when GMST reaches 1.5C could be very
different depending on the pathway to 1.5C. CO2 concentrations will
be higher as GMST rises past 1.5C (transient warming) than when
GMST has stabilized at 1.5C, while sea level and, potentially, global
mean precipitation (Pendergrass et al., 2015) would both be lower
(see Figure 1.4). These differences could lead to very different impacts
on agriculture, on some forms of extreme weather (e.g., Baker et al.,
2018), and on marine and terrestrial ecosystems (e.g., Mitchell et al.,
2017 and Boxes 3.1 and 3.2). Sea level would be higher still if GMST
returns to 1.5C after an overshoot (Figure 1.4 d), with potentially
significantly different impacts in vulnerable regions. Temperature
overshoot could also cause irreversible impacts (see Chapter 3).

61

1

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

1

Figure 1.4 | Different 1.5C pathways1: Schematic illustration of the relationship between (a) global mean surface temperature (GMST) change; (b) annual rates of CO2
emissions, assuming constant fractional contribution of non-CO2 forcing to total human-induced warming; (c) total cumulative CO2 emissions (solid lines) and the fraction
thereof remaining in the atmosphere (dashed lines; these also indicates changes in atmospheric CO2 concentrations); and (d) a time-integrated impact, such as sea level rise,
that continues to increase even after GMST has stabilized. Colours indicate different 1.5C pathways. Brown: GMST remaining below and stabilizing at 1.5C in 2100; Green: a
delayed start but faster emission reductions pathway with GMST remaining below and reaching 1.5C earlier; Blue: a pathway temporarily exceeding 1.5C, with temperatures
reduced to 1.5C by net negative CO2 emissions after temperatures peak; and Yellow: a pathway peaking at 1.5C and subsequently declining. Temperatures are anchored
to 1C above pre-industrial in 2017; emissions-temperature relationships are computed using a simple climate model (Myhre et al., 2013; Millar et al., 2017a; Jenkins et al.,
2018) with a lower value of the Transient Climate Response (TCR) than used in the quantitative pathway assessments in Chapter 2 to illustrate qualitative differences between
pathways: this figure is not intended to provide quantitative information. The time-integrated impact is illustrated by the semi-empirical sea level rise model of Kopp et al. (2016).

Cross-Chapter Box 1 | Scenarios and Pathways
Contributing Authors:
Mikiko Kainuma (Japan), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Elmar Kriegler (Germany), Keywan Riahi (Austria), Joeri Rogelj
(Austria/Belgium), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria), Rachel Warren (UK)
Climate change scenarios have been used in IPCC assessments since the First Assessment Report (Leggett et al., 1992). The SRES
scenarios (named after the IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios published in 2000; IPCC, 2000), consist of four scenarios that
do not take into account any future measures to limit greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Subsequently, many policy scenarios have been
developed based upon them (Morita et al., 2001). The SRES scenarios are superseded by a set of scenarios based on the Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) and Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs) (Riahi et al., 2017). The RCPs comprise a set of four GHG
concentration trajectories that jointly span a large range of plausible human-caused climate forcing ranging from 2.6 W m-2 (RCP2.6)
to 8.5 W m-2 (RCP8.5) by the end of the 21st century (van Vuuren et al., 2011). They were used to develop climate projections in the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5; Taylor et al., 2012) and were assessed in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report
(AR5). Based on the CMIP5 ensemble, RCP2.6, provides a better than two-in-three chance of staying below 2C and a median warming
of 1.6C relative to 1850-1900 in 2100 (Collins et al., 2013).
The SSPs were developed to complement the RCPs with varying socio-economic challenges to adaptation and mitigation. SSP-based
scenarios were developed for a range of climate forcing levels, including the end-of-century forcing levels of the RCPs (Riahi et al., 2017)
and a level below RCP2.6 to explore pathways limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels (Rogelj et al., 2018). The SSP-based
1.5C pathways are assessed in Chapter 2 of this report. These scenarios offer an integrated perspective on socio-economic, energysystem (Bauer et al., 2017), land use (Popp et al., 2017), air pollution (Rao et al., 2017) and, GHG emissions developments (Riahi et al.,

1

62

An animated version of Figure 1.4 will be embedded in the web-based version of this Special Report

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 1 (continued)

2017). Because of their harmonised assumptions, scenarios developed with the SSPs facilitate the integrated analysis of future climate
impacts, vulnerabilities, adaptation and mitigation.
Scenarios and Pathways in this Report
This report focuses on pathways that could limit the increase of global mean surface temperature (GMST) to 1.5C above pre-industrial
levels and pathways that align with the goals of sustainable development and poverty eradication. The pace and scale of mitigation
and adaptation are assessed in the context of historical evidence to determine where unprecedented change is required (see Chapter
4). Other scenarios are also assessed, primarily as benchmarks for comparison of mitigation, impacts, and/or adaptation requirements.
These include baseline scenarios that assume no climate policy; scenarios that assume some kind of continuation of current climate
policy trends and plans, many of which are used to assess the implications of the nationally determined contributions (NDCs); and
scenarios holding warming below 2C above pre-industrial levels. This report assesses the spectrum from global mitigation scenarios
to local adaptation choices - complemented by a bottom-up assessment of individual mitigation and adaptation options, and their
implementation (policies, finance, institutions, and governance, see Chapter 4). Regional, national, and local scenarios, as well as
decision-making processes involving values and difficult trade-offs are important for understanding the challenges of limiting GMST
increase to 1.5C and are thus indispensable when assessing implementation.

1

Different climate policies result in different temperature pathways, which result in different levels of climate risks and actual climate
impacts with associated long-term implications. Temperature pathways are classified into continued warming pathways (in the cases of
baseline and reference scenarios), pathways that keep the temperature increase below a specific limit (like 1.5C or 2C), and pathways
that temporarily exceed and later fall to a specific limit (overshoot pathways). In the case of a temperature overshoot, net negative CO2
emissions are required to remove excess CO2 from the atmosphere (Section 1.2.3).
In a `prospective' mitigation pathway, emissions (or sometimes concentrations) are prescribed, giving a range of GMST outcomes
because of uncertainty in the climate response. Prospective pathways are considered `1.5C pathways' in this report if, based on current
knowledge, the majority of available approaches assign an approximate probability of one-in-two to two-in-three to temperatures
either remaining below 1.5C or returning to 1.5C either before or around 2100. Most pathways assessed in Chapter 2 are prospective
pathways, and therefore even `1.5C pathways' are also associated with risks of warming higher than 1.5C, noting that many risks
increase non-linearly with increasing GMST. In contrast, the `risks of warming of 1.5C' assessed in Chapter 3 refer to risks in a
world in which GMST is either passing through (transient) or stabilized at 1.5C, without considering probabilities of different GMST
levels (unless otherwise qualified). To stay below any desired temperature limit, mitigation measures and strategies would need to
be adjusted as knowledge of the climate response is updated (Millar et al., 2017b; Emori et al., 2018). Such pathways can be called
`adaptive' mitigation pathways. Given there is always a possibility of a greater-than-expected climate response (Xu and Ramanathan,
2017), adaptive mitigation pathways are important to minimise climate risks, but need also to consider the risks and feasibility (see
Cross-Chapter Box 3 in this chapter) of faster-than-expected emission reductions. Chapter 5 includes assessments of two related topics:
aligning mitigation and adaptation pathways with sustainable development pathways, and transformative visions for the future that
would support avoiding negative impacts on the poorest and most disadvantaged populations and vulnerable sectors.
Definitions of Scenarios and Pathways
Climate scenarios and pathways are terms that are sometimes used interchangeably, with a wide range of overlapping definitions
(Rosenbloom, 2017).
A `scenario' is an internally consistent, plausible, and integrated description of a possible future of the human-environment system,
including a narrative with qualitative trends and quantitative projections (IPCC, 2000). Climate change scenarios provide a framework
for developing and integrating projections of emissions, climate change, and climate impacts, including an assessment of their inherent
uncertainties. The long-term and multi-faceted nature of climate change requires climate scenarios to describe how socio-economic
trends in the 21st century could influence future energy and land use, resulting emissions and the evolution of human vulnerability and
exposure. Such driving forces include population, GDP, technological innovation, governance and lifestyles. Climate change scenarios
are used for analysing and contrasting climate policy choices.
The notion of a `pathway' can have multiple meanings in the climate literature. It is often used to describe the temporal evolution
of a set of scenario features, such as GHG emissions and socio-economic development. As such, it can describe individual scenario
components or sometimes be used interchangeably with the word `scenario'. For example, the RCPs describe GHG concentration
trajectories (van Vuuren et al., 2011) and the SSPs are a set of narratives of societal futures augmented by quantitative projections
of socio-economic determinants such as population, GDP and urbanization (Kriegler et al., 2012; O'Neill et al., 2014). Socio-economic

63

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

Cross-Chapter Box 1 (continued)

driving forces consistent with any of the SSPs can be combined with a set of climate policy assumptions (Kriegler et al., 2014) that
together would lead to emissions and concentration outcomes consistent with the RCPs (Riahi et al., 2017). This is at the core of the
scenario framework for climate change research that aims to facilitate creating scenarios integrating emissions and development
pathways dimensions (Ebi et al., 2014; van Vuuren et al., 2014).

1

In other parts of the literature, `pathway' implies a solution-oriented trajectory describing a pathway from today's world to achieving a
set of future goals. Sustainable Development Pathways describe national and global pathways where climate policy becomes part of
a larger sustainability transformation (Shukla and Chaturvedi, 2013; Fleurbaey et al., 2014; van Vuuren et al., 2015). The AR5 presented
climate-resilient pathways as sustainable development pathways that combine the goals of adaptation and mitigation (Denton et
al., 2014), more broadly defined as iterative processes for managing change within complex systems in order to reduce disruptions
and enhance opportunities associated with climate change (IPCC, 2014a). The AR5 also introduced the notion of climate-resilient
development pathways, with a more explicit focus on dynamic livelihoods, multi-dimensional poverty, structural inequalities, and
equity among poor and non-poor people (Olsson et al., 2014). Adaptation pathways are understood as a series of adaptation choices
involving trade-offs between short-term and long-term goals and values (Reisinger et al., 2014). They are decision-making processes
sequenced over time with the purpose of deliberating and identifying socially salient solutions in specific places (Barnett et al., 2014;
Wise et al., 2014; Fazey et al., 2016). There is a range of possible pathways for transformational change, often negotiated through
iterative and inclusive processes (Harris et al., 2017; Fazey et al., 2018; Tabara et al., 2018).

1.2.4

Geophysical Warming Commitment

It is frequently asked whether limiting warming to 1.5C is `feasible'
(Cross-Chapter Box 3 in this chapter). There are many dimensions to
this question, including the warming `commitment' from past emissions
of greenhouse gases and aerosol precursors. Quantifying commitment
from past emissions is complicated by the very different behaviour of
different climate forcers affected by human activity: emissions of longlived greenhouse gases such as CO2 and nitrous oxide (N2O) have a
very persistent impact on radiative forcing (Myhre et al., 2013), lasting
from over a century (in the case of N2O) to hundreds of thousands
of years (for CO2). The radiative forcing impact of short-lived climate
forcers (SLCFs) such as methane (CH4) and aerosols, in contrast,
persists for at most about a decade (in the case of methane) down to
only a few days. These different behaviours must be taken into account
in assessing the implications of any approach to calculating aggregate
emissions (Cross-Chapter Box 2 in this chapter).
Geophysical warming commitment is defined as the unavoidable
future warming resulting from physical Earth system inertia. Different
variants are discussed in the literature, including (i) the `constant
composition commitment' (CCC), defined by Meehl et al. (2007) as
the further warming that would result if atmospheric concentrations
of GHGs and other climate forcers were stabilised at the current level;
and (ii) and the `zero emissions commitment' (ZEC), defined as the
further warming that would still occur if all future anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosol precursors were
eliminated instantaneously (Meehl et al., 2007; Collins et al., 2013).
The CCC is primarily associated with thermal inertia of the ocean
(Hansen et al., 2005), and has led to the misconception that
substantial future warming is inevitable (Matthews and Solomon,
2013). The CCC takes into account the warming from past emissions,
but also includes warming from future emissions (declining but still
non-zero) that are required to maintain a constant atmospheric
64

composition. It is therefore not relevant to the warming commitment
from past emissions alone.
The ZEC, although based on equally idealised assumptions, allows
for a clear separation of the response to past emissions from the
effects of future emissions. The magnitude and sign of the ZEC
depend on the mix of GHGs and aerosols considered. For CO2, which
takes hundreds of thousands of years to be fully removed from the
atmosphere by natural processes following its emission (Eby et al.,
2009; Ciais et al., 2013), the multi-century warming commitment
from emissions to date in addition to warming already observed
is estimated to range from slightly negative (i.e., a slight cooling
relative to present-day) to slightly positive (Matthews and Caldeira,
2008; Lowe et al., 2009; Gillett et al., 2011; Collins et al., 2013).
Some studies estimate a larger ZEC from CO2, but for cumulative
emissions much higher than those up to present day (Frolicher et al.,
2014; Ehlert and Zickfeld, 2017). The ZEC from past CO2 emissions
is small because the continued warming effect from ocean thermal
inertia is approximately balanced by declining radiative forcing due
to CO2 uptake by the ocean (Solomon et al., 2009; Goodwin et al.,
2015; Williams et al., 2017). Thus, although present-day CO2-induced
warming is irreversible on millennial time scales (without human
intervention such as active carbon dioxide removal or solar radiation
modification; Section 1.4.1), past CO2 emissions do not commit to
substantial further warming (Matthews and Solomon, 2013).
Sustained net zero anthropogenic emissions of CO2 and declining net
anthropogenic non-CO2 radiative forcing over a multi-decade period
would halt anthropogenic global warming over that period, although
it would not halt sea level rise or many other aspects of climate system
adjustment. The rate of decline of non-CO2 radiative forcing must be
sufficient to compensate for the ongoing adjustment of the climate
system to this forcing (assuming it remains positive) due to ocean
thermal inertia. It therefore depends on deep ocean response time
scales, which are uncertain but of order centuries, corresponding to

Framing and Context

decline rates of non-CO2 radiative forcing of less than 1% per year. In
the longer term, Earth system feedbacks such as the release of carbon
from melting permafrost may require net negative CO2 emissions to
maintain stable temperatures (Lowe and Bernie, 2018).
For warming SLCFs, meaning those associated with positive radiative
forcing such as methane, the ZEC is negative. Eliminating emissions
of these substances results in an immediate cooling relative to the
present (Figure 1.5, magenta lines) (Frolicher and Joos, 2010; Matthews
and Zickfeld, 2012; Mauritsen and Pincus, 2017). Cooling SLCFs (those
associated with negative radiative forcing) such as sulphate aerosols
create a positive ZEC, as elimination of these forcers results in rapid
increase in radiative forcing and warming (Figure 1.5, green lines)
(Matthews and Zickfeld, 2012; Mauritsen and Pincus, 2017; Samset
et al., 2018). Estimates of the warming commitment from eliminating
aerosol emissions are affected by large uncertainties in net aerosol
radiative forcing (Myhre et al., 2013, 2017) and the impact of other

Chapter 1

measures affecting aerosol loading (e.g., Fernandez et al., 2017).
If present-day emissions of all GHGs (short- and long-lived) and
aerosols (including sulphate, nitrate and carbonaceous aerosols) are
eliminated (Figure 1.5, yellow lines) GMST rises over the following
decade, driven by the removal of negative aerosol radiative forcing.
This initial warming is followed by a gradual cooling driven by the
decline in radiative forcing of short-lived greenhouse gases (Matthews
and Zickfeld, 2012; Collins et al., 2013). Peak warming following
elimination of all emissions was assessed at a few tenths of a degree in
AR5, and century-scale warming was assessed to change only slightly
relative to the time emissions are reduced to zero (Collins et al., 2013).
New evidence since AR5 suggests a larger methane forcing (Etminan
et al., 2016) but no revision in the range of aerosol forcing (although
this remains an active field of research, e.g., Myhre et al., 2017). This
revised methane forcing estimate results in a smaller peak warming
and a faster temperature decline than assessed in AR5 (Figure 1.5,
yellow line).

Figure 1.5 | Warming commitment from past emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols: Radiative forcing (top) and global mean surface temperature change
(bottom) for scenarios with different combinations of greenhouse gas and aerosol precursor emissions reduced to zero in 2020. Variables were calculated using a simple
climate-carbon cycle model (Millar et al., 2017a) with a simple representation of atmospheric chemistry (Smith et al., 2018). The bars on the right-hand side indicate the median
warming in 2100 and 5-95% uncertainty ranges (also indicated by the plume around the yellow line) taking into account one estimate of uncertainty in climate response,
effective radiative forcing and carbon cycle sensitivity, and constraining simple model parameters with response ranges from AR5 combined with historical climate observations
(Smith et al., 2018). Temperatures continue to increase slightly after elimination of CO2 emissions (blue line) in response to constant non-CO2 forcing. The dashed blue line
extrapolates one estimate of the current rate of warming, while dotted blue lines show a case where CO2 emissions are reduced linearly to zero assuming constant non-CO2
forcing after 2020. Under these highly idealized assumptions, the time to stabilize temperatures at 1.5C is approximately double the time remaining to reach 1.5C at the
current warming rate.

65

1

Chapter 1

Expert judgement based on the available evidence (including model
simulations, radiative forcing and climate sensitivity) suggests that if
all anthropogenic emissions were reduced to zero immediately, any
further warming beyond the 1C already experienced would likely be
less than 0.5C over the next two to three decades, and also likely
less than 0.5C on a century time scale.

1

Since most sources of emissions cannot, in reality, be brought to
zero instantaneously due to techno-economic inertia, the current
rate of emissions also constitutes a conditional commitment to
future emissions and consequent warming depending on achievable
rates of emission reductions. The current level and rate of humaninduced warming determines both the time left before a temperature
threshold is exceeded if warming continues (dashed blue line
in Figure 1.5) and the time over which the warming rate must be
reduced to avoid exceeding that threshold (approximately indicated
by the dotted blue line in Figure 1.5). Leach et al. (2018) use a central
estimate of human-induced warming of 1.02C in 2017, increasing
at 0.215C per decade (Haustein et al., 2017), to argue that it will
take 13-32 years (one-standard-error range) to reach 1.5C if the
current warming rate continues, allowing 25-64 years to stabilise
temperatures at 1.5C if the warming rate is reduced at a constant

Framing and Context

rate of deceleration starting immediately. Applying a similar approach
to the multi-dataset average GMST used in this report gives an
assessed likely range for the date at which warming reaches 1.5C
of 2030 to 2052. The lower bound on this range, 2030, is supported
by multiple lines of evidence, including the AR5 assessment for the
likely range of warming (0.3C-0.7C) for the period 2016-2035
relative to 1986-2005. The upper bound, 2052, is supported by fewer
lines of evidence, so we have used the upper bound of the 5-95%
confidence interval given by the Leach et al. (2018) method applied to
the multi-dataset average GMST, expressed as the upper limit of the
likely range, to reflect the reliance on a single approach. Results are
sensitive both to the confidence level chosen and the number of years
used to estimate the current rate of anthropogenic warming (5 years
used here, to capture the recent acceleration due to rising non-CO2
forcing). Since the rate of human-induced warming is proportional
to the rate of CO2 emissions (Matthews et al., 2009; Zickfeld et al.,
2009) plus a term approximately proportional to the rate of increase
in non-CO2 radiative forcing (Gregory and Forster, 2008; Allen et al.,
2018; Cross-Chapter Box 2 in this chapter), these time scales also
provide an indication of minimum emission reduction rates required
if a warming greater than 1.5C is to be avoided (see Figure 1.5,
Supplementary Material 1.SM.6 and FAQ 1.2).

Cross-Chapter Box 2 | Measuring Progress to Net Zero Emissions Combining Long-Lived and ShortLived Climate Forcers
Contributing Authors:
Piers Forster (UK), Myles R. Allen (UK), Elmar Kriegler (Germany), Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Seth Schultz (USA), Drew Shindell
(USA), Kirsten Zickfeld (Canada/Germany)
Emissions of many different climate forcers will affect the rate and magnitude of climate change over the next few decades (Myhre et al.,
2013). Since these decades will determine when 1.5C is reached or whether a warming greater than 1.5C is avoided, understanding
the aggregate impact of different forcing agents is particularly important in the context of 1.5C pathways. Paragraph 17 of Decision 1
of the 21st Conference of the Parties on the adoption of the Paris Agreement specifically states that this report is to identify aggregate
greenhouse gas emission levels compatible with holding the increase in global average temperatures to 1.5C above pre-industrial
levels (see Chapter 2). This request highlights the need to consider the implications of different methods of aggregating emissions of
different gases, both for future temperatures and for other aspects of the climate system (Levasseur et al., 2016; Ocko et al., 2017).
To date, reporting of GHG emissions under the UNFCCC has used Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) evaluated over a 100-year time
horizon (GWP100) to combine multiple climate forcers. IPCC Working Group 3 reports have also used GWP100 to represent multi-gas
pathways (Clarke et al., 2014). For reasons of comparability and consistency with current practice, Chapter 2 in this Special Report
continues to use this aggregation method. Numerous other methods of combining different climate forcers have been proposed, such
as the Global Temperature-change Potential (GTP; Shine et al., 2005) and the Global Damage Potential (Tol et al., 2012; Deuber et al.,
2013).
Climate forcers fall into two broad categories in terms of their impact on global temperature (Smith et al., 2012): long-lived GHGs, such
as CO2 and nitrous oxide (N2O), whose warming impact depends primarily on the total cumulative amount emitted over the past century
or the entire industrial epoch; and short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs), such as methane and black carbon, whose warming impact
depends primarily on current and recent annual emission rates (Reisinger et al., 2012; Myhre et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2013; Strefler et
al., 2014). These different dependencies affect the emissions reductions required of individual forcers to limit warming to 1.5C or any
other level.
Natural processes that remove CO2 permanently from the climate system are so slow that reducing the rate of CO2-induced warming
to zero requires net zero global anthropogenic CO2 emissions (Archer and Brovkin, 2008; Matthews and Caldeira, 2008; Solomon et al.,

66

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 2 (continued)

2009), meaning almost all remaining anthropogenic CO2 emissions must be compensated for by an equal rate of anthropogenic carbon
dioxide removal (CDR). Cumulative CO2 emissions are therefore an accurate indicator of CO2-induced warming, except in periods of
high negative CO2 emissions (Zickfeld et al., 2016), and potentially in century-long periods of near-stable temperatures (Bowerman et
al., 2011; Wigley, 2018). In contrast, sustained constant emissions of a SLCF such as methane, would (after a few decades) be consistent
with constant methane concentrations and hence very little additional methane-induced warming (Allen et al., 2018; Fuglestvedt et al.,
2018). Both GWP and GTP would equate sustained SLCF emissions with sustained constant CO2 emissions, which would continue to
accumulate in the climate system, warming global temperatures indefinitely. Hence nominally `equivalent' emissions of CO2 and SLCFs,
if equated conventionally using GWP or GTP, have very different temperature impacts, and these differences are particularly evident
under ambitious mitigation characterizing 1.5C pathways.

1

Since the AR5, a revised usage of GWP has been proposed (Lauder et al., 2013; Allen et al., 2016), denoted GWP* (Allen et al.,
2018), that addresses this issue by equating a permanently sustained change in the emission rate of an SLCF or SLCF-precursor (in
tonnes-per-year), or other non-CO2 forcing (in watts per square metre), with a one-off pulse emission (in tonnes) of a fixed amount
of CO2. Specifically, GWP* equates a 1 tonne-per-year increase in emission rate of an SLCF with a pulse emission of GWPH x H tonnes
of CO2, where GWPH is the conventional GWP of that SLCF evaluated over time GWPH for SLCFs decreases with increasing time H,
GWPH x H for SLCFs is less dependent on the choice of time horizon. Similarly, a permanent 1 W m-2 increase in radiative forcing has
a similar temperature impact as the cumulative emission of H/AGWPH tonnes of CO2, where AGWPH is the Absolute Global Warming
Potential of CO2 (Shine et al., 2005; Myhre et al., 2013; Allen et al., 2018). This indicates approximately how future changes in nonCO2 radiative forcing affect cumulative CO2 emissions consistent with any given level of peak warming.
When combined using GWP*, cumulative aggregate GHG emissions are closely proportional to total GHG-induced warming, while
the annual rate of GHG-induced warming is proportional to the annual rate of aggregate GHG emissions (see Cross-Chapter Box 2,
Figure 1). This is not the case when emissions are aggregated using GWP or GTP, with discrepancies particularly pronounced when
SLCF emissions are falling. Persistent net zero CO2-equivalent emissions containing a residual positive forcing contribution from
SLCFs and aggregated using GWP100 or GTP would result in a steady decline of GMST. Net zero global emissions aggregated using
GWP* (which corresponds to zero net emissions of CO2 and other long-lived GHGs like nitrous oxide, combined with near-constant
SLCF forcing - see Figure 1.5) results in approximately stable GMST (Allen et al., 2018; Fuglestvedt et al., 2018 and Cross-Chapter
Box 2, Figure 1, below).
Whatever method is used to relate emissions of different greenhouse gases, scenarios achieving stable GMST well below 2C
require both near-zero net emissions of long-lived greenhouse gases and deep reductions in warming SLCFs (Chapter 2), in part to
compensate for the reductions in cooling SLCFs that are expected to accompany reductions in CO2 emissions (Rogelj et al., 2016b;
Hienola et al., 2018). Understanding the implications of different methods of combining emissions of different climate forcers is,
however, helpful in tracking progress towards temperature stabilisation and `balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources
and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases' as stated in Article 4 of the Paris Agreement. Fuglestvedt et al. (2018) and Tanaka and
O'Neill (2018) show that when, and even whether, aggregate GHG emissions need to reach net zero before 2100 to limit warming
to 1.5C depends on the scenario, aggregation method and mix of long-lived and short-lived climate forcers.
The comparison of the impacts of different climate forcers can also consider more than their effects on GMST (Johansson, 2012; Tol
et al., 2012; Deuber et al., 2013; Myhre et al., 2013; Cherubini and Tanaka, 2016). Climate impacts arise from both magnitude and
rate of climate change, and from other variables such as precipitation (Shine et al., 2015). Even if GMST is stabilised, sea level rise
and associated impacts will continue to increase (Sterner et al., 2014), while impacts that depend on CO2 concentrations such as
ocean acidification may begin to reverse. From an economic perspective, comparison of different climate forcers ideally reflects the
ratio of marginal economic damages if used to determine the exchange ratio of different GHGs under multi-gas regulation (Tol et
al., 2012; Deuber et al., 2013; Kolstad et al., 2014).
Emission reductions can interact with other dimensions of sustainable development (see Chapter 5). In particular, early action on
some SLCFs (including actions that may warm the climate, such as reducing sulphur dioxide emissions) may have considerable
societal co-benefits, such as reduced air pollution and improved public health with associated economic benefits (OECD, 2016;
Shindell et al., 2016). Valuation of broadly defined social costs attempts to account for many of these additional non-climate factors
along with climate-related impacts (Shindell, 2015; Sarofim et al., 2017; Shindell et al., 2017). See Chapter 4, Section 4.3.6, for a
discussions of mitigation options, noting that mitigation priorities for different climate forcers depend on multiple economic and
social criteria that vary between sectors, regions and countries.

67

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

Cross-Chapter Box 2 (continued)

1

Cross-Chapter Box 2, Figure 1 | Implications of different approaches to calculating aggregate greenhouse gas emissions on a pathway to net
zero. (a) Aggregate emissions of well-mixed greenhouse gases (WMGHGs) under the RCP2.6 mitigation scenario expressed as CO2-equivalent using GWP100 (blue);
GTP100 (green) and GWP* (yellow). Aggregate WMGHG emissions appear to fall more rapidly if calculated using GWP* than using either GWP or GTP, primarily
because GWP* equates a falling methane emission rate with negative CO2 emissions, as only active CO2 removal would have the same impact on radiative forcing
and GMST as a reduction in methane emission rate. (b) Cumulative emissions of WMGHGs combined as in panel (a) (blue, green and yellow lines & left hand axis)
and warming response to combined emissions (black dotted line and right hand axis, Millar et al. (2017a). The temperature response under ambitious mitigation is
closely correlated with cumulative WMGHG emissions aggregated using GWP*, but with neither emission rate nor cumulative emissions if aggregated using GWP
or GTP.

1.3

Impacts at 1.5C and Beyond

1.3.1

Definitions

Consistent with the AR5 (IPCC, 2014a), `impact' in this report refers
to the effects of climate change on human and natural systems.
Impacts may include the effects of changing hazards, such as the
frequency and intensity of heat waves. `Risk' refers to potential
negative impacts of climate change where something of value is at
stake, recognizing the diversity of values. Risks depend on hazards,
exposure, vulnerability (including sensitivity and capacity to respond)
and likelihood. Climate change risks can be managed through efforts
to mitigate climate change forcers, adaptation of impacted systems,
and remedial measures (Section 1.4.1).
In the context of this report, regional impacts of global warming at
1.5C and 2C are assessed in Chapter 3. The `warming experience at
1.5C' is that of regional climate change (temperature, rainfall, and
other changes) at the time when global average temperatures, as
defined in Section 1.2.1, reach 1.5C above pre-industrial (the same
principle applies to impacts at any other global mean temperature).
Over the decade 2006-2015, many regions have experienced higher
than average levels of warming and some are already now 1.5C or
more warmer with respect to the pre-industrial period (Figure 1.3).
68

At a global warming of 1.5C, some seasons will be substantially
warmer than 1.5C above pre-industrial (Seneviratne et al., 2016).
Therefore, most regional impacts of a global mean warming of 1.5C
will be different from those of a regional warming by 1.5C.
The impacts of 1.5C global warming will vary in both space and
time (Ebi et al., 2016). For many regions, an increase in global
mean temperature by 1.5C or 2C implies substantial increases
in the occurrence and/or intensity of some extreme events (Fischer
and Knutti, 2015; Karmalkar and Bradley, 2017; King et al., 2017;
Chevuturi et al., 2018), resulting in different impacts (see Chapter
3). By comparing impacts at 1.5C versus those at 2C, this report
discusses the `avoided impacts' by maintaining global temperature
increase at or below 1.5C as compared to 2C, noting that these
also depend on the pathway taken to 1.5C (see Section 1.2.3 and
Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3 on 1.5C warmer worlds). Many
impacts take time to observe, and because of the warming trend,
impacts over the past 20 years were associated with a level of humaninduced warming that was, on average, 0.1C-0.23C colder than
its present level, based on the AR5 estimate of the warming trend
over this period (Section 1.2.1 and Kirtman et al., 2013). Attribution
studies (e.g., van Oldenborgh et al., 2017) can address this bias, but
informal estimates of `recent impact experience' in a rapidly warming
world necessarily understate the temperature-related impacts of the
current level of warming.

Framing and Context

1.3.2

Drivers of Impacts

Impacts of climate change are due to multiple environmental drivers
besides rising temperatures, such as rising atmospheric CO2, shifting
rainfall patterns (Lee et al., 2018), rising sea levels, increasing ocean
acidification, and extreme events, such as floods, droughts, and heat
waves (IPCC, 2014a). Changes in rainfall affect the hydrological cycle
and water availability (Schewe et al., 2014; Doll et al., 2018; Saeed
et al., 2018). Several impacts depend on atmospheric composition,
increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide levels leading to changes in
plant productivity (Forkel et al., 2016), but also to ocean acidification
(Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2007). Other impacts are driven by changes
in ocean heat content such as the destabilization of coastal ice sheets
and sea level rise (Bindoff et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2017), whereas
impacts due to heat waves depend directly on ambient air or ocean
temperature (Matthews et al., 2017). Impacts can be direct, such as
coral bleaching due to ocean warming, and indirect, such as reduced
tourism due to coral bleaching. Indirect impacts can also arise from
mitigation efforts such as changed agricultural management (Section
3.6.2) or remedial measures such as solar radiation modification
(Section 4.3.8, Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4).
Impacts may also be triggered by combinations of factors, including
`impact cascades' (Cramer et al., 2014) through secondary
consequences of changed systems. Changes in agricultural water
availability caused by upstream changes in glacier volume are a
typical example. Recent studies also identify compound events
(e.g., droughts and heat waves), that is, when impacts are induced
by the combination of several climate events (AghaKouchak et al.,
2014; Leonard et al., 2014; Martius et al., 2016; Zscheischler and
Seneviratne, 2017).
There are now techniques to attribute impacts formally to
anthropogenic global warming and associated rainfall changes
(Rosenzweig et al., 2008; Cramer et al., 2014; Hansen et al., 2016),
taking into account other drivers such as land-use change (Oliver and
Morecroft, 2014) and pollution (e.g., tropospheric ozone; Sitch et al.,
2007). There are multiple lines of evidence that climate change has
observable and often severely negative effects on people, especially
where climate-sensitive biophysical conditions and socio-economic
and political constraints on adaptive capacities combine to create
high vulnerabilities (IPCC, 2012a, 2014a; World Bank, 2013). The
character and severity of impacts depend not only on the hazards
(e.g., changed climate averages and extremes) but also on the
vulnerability (including sensitivities and adaptive capacities) of
different communities and their exposure to climate threats. These
impacts also affect a range of natural and human systems, such
as terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems and their services;
agricultural production; infrastructure; the built environment; human
health; and other socio-economic systems (Rosenzweig et al., 2017).
Sensitivity to changing drivers varies markedly across systems
and regions. Impacts of climate change on natural and managed
ecosystems can imply loss or increase in growth, biomass or diversity
at the level of species populations, interspecific relationships such as
pollination, landscapes or entire biomes. Impacts occur in addition
to the natural variation in growth, ecosystem dynamics, disturbance,

Chapter 1

succession and other processes, rendering attribution of impacts
at lower levels of warming difficult in certain situations. The same
magnitude of warming can be lethal during one phase of the life
of an organism and irrelevant during another. Many ecosystems
(notably forests, coral reefs and others) undergo long-term
successional processes characterised by varying levels of resilience
to environmental change over time. Organisms and ecosystems may
adapt to environmental change to a certain degree, through changes
in physiology, ecosystem structure, species composition or evolution.
Large-scale shifts in ecosystems may cause important feedbacks,
in terms of changing water and carbon fluxes through impacted
ecosystems - these can amplify or dampen atmospheric change at
regional to continental scale. Of particular concern is the response of
most of the world's forests and seagrass ecosystems, which play key
roles as carbon sinks (Settele et al., 2014; Marba et al., 2015).
Some ambitious efforts to constrain atmospheric greenhouse gas
concentrations may themselves impact ecosystems. In particular,
changes in land use, potentially required for massively enhanced
production of biofuels (either as simple replacement of fossil fuels, or
as part of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage, BECCS) impact
all other land ecosystems through competition for land (e.g., Creutzig,
2016) (see Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3, Section 3.6.2.1).
Human adaptive capacity to a 1.5C warmer world varies markedly
for individual sectors and across sectors such as water supply, public
health, infrastructure, ecosystems and food supply. For example, density and risk exposure, infrastructure vulnerability and resilience, governance, and institutional capacity all drive different impacts across
a range of human settlement types (Dasgupta et al., 2014; Revi et al.,
2014; Rosenzweig et al., 2018). Additionally, the adaptive capacity of
communities and human settlements in both rural and urban areas,
especially in highly populated regions, raises equity, social justice and
sustainable development issues. Vulnerabilities due to gender, age,
level of education and culture act as compounding factors (AroraJonsson, 2011; Cardona et al., 2012; Resurreccion, 2013; Olsson et
al., 2014; Vincent et al., 2014).

1.3.3

Uncertainty and Non-Linearity of Impacts

Uncertainties in projections of future climate change and impacts
come from a variety of different sources, including the assumptions
made regarding future emission pathways (Moss et al., 2010), the
inherent limitations and assumptions of the climate models used for
the projections, including limitations in simulating regional climate
variability (James et al., 2017), downscaling and bias-correction
methods (Ekstrom et al., 2015), the assumption of a linear scaling
of impacts with GMST used in many studies (Lewis et al., 2017; King
et al., 2018b), and in impact models (e.g., Asseng et al., 2013). The
evolution of climate change also affects uncertainty with respect
to impacts. For example, the impacts of overshooting 1.5C and
stabilization at a later stage compared to stabilization at 1.5C
without overshoot may differ in magnitude (Schleussner et al., 2016).
AR5 (IPCC, 2013b) and World Bank (2013) underscored the nonlinearity of risks and impacts as temperature rises from 2C to 4C of
warming, particularly in relation to water availability, heat extremes,
69

1

Chapter 1

1

bleaching of coral reefs, and more. Recent studies (Schleussner et al.,
2016; James et al., 2017; Barcikowska et al., 2018; King et al., 2018a)
assess the impacts of 1.5C versus 2C warming, with the same
message of non-linearity. The resilience of ecosystems, meaning
their ability either to resist change or to recover after a disturbance,
may change, and often decline, in a non-linear way. An example
are reef ecosystems, with some studies suggesting that reefs will
change, rather than disappear entirely, and with particular species
showing greater tolerance to coral bleaching than others (Portner
et al., 2014). A key issue is therefore whether ecosystems such as
coral reefs survive an overshoot scenario, and to what extent they
would be able to recover after stabilization at 1.5C or higher levels
of warming (see Box 3.4).

1.4

Strengthening the Global Response

This section frames the implementation options, enabling conditions
(discussed further in Cross-Chapter Box 3 on feasibility in this
chapter), capacities and types of knowledge and their availability
(Blicharska et al., 2017) that can allow institutions, communities
and societies to respond to the 1.5C challenge in the context of
sustainable development and the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). It also addresses other relevant international agreements
such as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. Equity and
ethics are recognised as issues of importance in reducing vulnerability
and eradicating poverty.
The connection between the enabling conditions for limiting global
warming to 1.5C and the ambitions of the SDGs are complex across
scale and multi-faceted (Chapter 5). Climate mitigation-adaptation
linkages, including synergies and trade-offs, are important when
considering opportunities and threats for sustainable development.
The IPCC AR5 acknowledged that `adaptation and mitigation
have the potential to both contribute to and impede sustainable
development, and sustainable development strategies and choices
have the potential to both contribute to and impede climate change
responses' (Denton et al., 2014). Climate mitigation and adaptation
measures and actions can reflect and enforce specific patterns
of development and governance that differ amongst the world's
regions (Gouldson et al., 2015; Termeer et al., 2017). The role of
limited adaptation and mitigation capacity, limits to adaptation and
mitigation, and conditions of mal-adaptation and mal-mitigation are
assessed in this report (Chapters 4 and 5).

1.4.1

includes changes that could reduce emissions in the short-term but
could lock in technology choices or practices that include significant
trade-offs for effectiveness of future adaptation and other forms of
mitigation (Chapters 2 and 4).
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) or `negative emissions' activities
are considered in this report as distinct from the above mitigation
activities. While most mitigation activities focus on reducing the
amount of carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases emitted,
CDR aims to reduce concentrations already in the atmosphere.
Technologies for CDR are mostly in their infancy despite their
importance to ambitious climate change mitigation pathways (Minx
et al., 2017). Although some CDR activities such as reforestation
and ecosystem restoration are well understood, the feasibility of
massive-scale deployment of many CDR technologies remains an
open question (IPCC, 2014b; Leung et al., 2014) (Chapters 2 and 4).
Technologies for the active removal of other greenhouse gases, such
as methane, are even less developed, and are briefly discussed in
Chapter 4.
Climate change adaptation refers to the actions taken to manage
the impacts of climate change (IPCC, 2014a). The aim is to reduce
vulnerability and exposure to the harmful effects of climate change
(e.g., sea level rise, more intense extreme weather events or food
insecurity). It also includes exploring the potential beneficial
opportunities associated with climate change (for example, longer
growing seasons or increased yields in some regions). Different
adaptation pathways can be undertaken. Adaptation can be
incremental, or transformational, meaning fundamental attributes
of the system are changed (Chapter 3 and 4). There can be limits
to ecosystem-based adaptation or the ability of humans to adapt
(Chapter 4). If there is no possibility for adaptive actions that can
be applied to avoid an intolerable risk, these are referred to as
hard adaptation limits, while soft adaptation limits are identified
when there are currently no options to avoid intolerable risks, but
they are theoretically possible (Chapter 3 and 4). While climate
change is a global issue, impacts are experienced locally. Cities and
municipalities are at the frontline of adaptation (Rosenzweig et al.,
2018), focusing on reducing and managing disaster risks due to
extreme and slow-onset weather and climate events, installing flood
and drought early warning systems, and improving water storage
and use (Chapters 3 and 4 and Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5).
Agricultural and rural areas, including often highly vulnerable remote
and indigenous communities, also need to address climate-related
risks by strengthening and making more resilient agricultural and
other natural resource extraction systems.

Classifying Response Options

Key broad categories of responses to the climate change problem are
framed here. Mitigation refers to efforts to reduce or prevent the
emission of greenhouse gases, or to enhance the absorption of gases
already emitted, thus limiting the magnitude of future warming
(IPCC, 2014b). Mitigation requires the use of new technologies,
clean energy sources, reduced deforestation, improved sustainable
agricultural methods, and changes in individual and collective
behaviour. Many of these may provide substantial co-benefits for air
quality, biodiversity and sustainable development. Mal-mitigation
70

Framing and Context

Remedial measures are distinct from mitigation or adaptation, as
the aim is to temporarily reduce or offset warming (IPCC, 2012b).
One such measure is solar radiation modification (SRM), also referred
to as solar radiation management in the literature, which involves
deliberate changes to the albedo of the Earth system, with the net
effect of increasing the amount of solar radiation reflected from the
Earth to reduce the peak temperature from climate change (The Royal
Society, 2009; Smith and Rasch, 2013; Schafer et al., 2015). It should
be noted that while some radiation modification measures, such as
cirrus cloud thinning (Kristjansson et al., 2016), aim at enhancing

Framing and Context

outgoing long-wave radiation, SRM is used in this report to refer to
all direct interventions on the planetary radiation budget. This report
does not use the term `geo-engineering' because of inconsistencies
in the literature, which uses this term to cover SRM, CDR or both,
whereas this report explicitly differentiates between CDR and SRM.
Large-scale SRM could potentially be used to supplement mitigation
in overshoot scenarios to keep the global mean temperature below
1.5C and temporarily reduce the severity of near-term impacts (e.g.,
MacMartin et al., 2018). The impacts of SRM (both biophysical and
societal), costs, technical feasibility, governance and ethical issues
associated need to be carefully considered (Schafer et al., 2015;
Section 4.3.8 and Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4).

1.4.2

Governance, Implementation and Policies

A challenge in creating the enabling conditions of a 1.5C warmer
world is the governance capacity of institutions to develop, implement
and evaluate the changes needed within diverse and highly
interlinked global social-ecological systems (Busby, 2016) (Chapter
4). Policy arenas, governance structures and robust institutions are
key enabling conditions for transformative climate action (Chapter
4). It is through governance that justice, ethics and equity within
the adaptation-mitigation-sustainable development nexus can be
addressed (von Stechow et al., 2016) (Chapter 5).
Governance capacity includes a wide range of activities and efforts
needed by different actors to develop coordinated climate mitigation
and adaptation strategies in the context of sustainable development,
taking into account equity, justice and poverty eradication. Significant
governance challenges include the ability to incorporate multiple
stakeholder perspectives in the decision-making process to reach
meaningful and equitable decisions, interactions and coordination

Chapter 1

between different levels of government, and the capacity to raise
financing and support for both technological and human resource
development. For example, Lovbrand et al. (2017), argue that the
voluntary pledges submitted by states and non-state actors to meet
the conditions of the Paris Agreement will need to be more firmly
coordinated, evaluated and upscaled.
Barriers for transitioning from climate change mitigation and
adaptation planning to practical policy implementation include
finance, information, technology, public attitudes, social values
and practices (Whitmarsh et al., 2011; Corner and Clarke, 2017),
and human resource constraints. Institutional capacity to deploy
available knowledge and resources is also needed (Mimura et al.,
2014). Incorporating strong linkages across sectors, devolution of
power and resources to sub-national and local governments with
the support of national government, and facilitating partnerships
among public, civic, private sectors and higher education institutions
(Leal Filho et al., 2018) can help in the implementation of identified
response options (Chapter 4). Implementation challenges of 1.5C
pathways are larger than for those that are consistent with limiting
warming to well below 2C, particularly concerning scale and speed
of the transition and the distributional impacts on ecosystems and
socio-economic actors. Uncertainties in climate change at different
scales and capacities to respond combined with the complexities of
coupled social and ecological systems point to a need for diverse and
adaptive implementation options within and among different regions
involving different actors. The large regional diversity between highly
carbon-invested economies and emerging economies are important
considerations for sustainable development and equity in pursuing
efforts to limit warming to 1.5C. Key sectors, including energy, food
systems, health, and water supply, also are critical to understanding
these connections.

Cross-Chapter Box 3 | Framing Feasibility: Key Concepts and Conditions for Limiting Global Temperature
Increases to 1.5C
Contributing Authors:
William Solecki (USA), Anton Cartwright (South Africa), Wolfgang Cramer (France/Germany), James Ford (UK/Canada), Kejun Jiang
(China), Joana Portugal Pereira (UK/Portugal), Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Linda Steg (Netherlands), Henri Waisman (France)
This Cross-Chapter Box describes the concept of feasibility in relation to efforts to limit global warming to 1.5C in the context of
sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty and draws from the understanding of feasibility emerging within the IPCC
(IPCC, 2017). Feasibility can be assessed in different ways, and no single answer exists as to the question of whether it is feasible to limit
warming to 1.5C. This implies that an assessment of feasibility would go beyond a `yes' or a `no'. Rather, feasibility provides a frame
to understand the different conditions and potential responses for implementing adaptation and mitigation pathways, and options
compatible with a 1.5C warmer world. This report assesses the overall feasibility of limiting warming to 1.5C, and the feasibility of
adaptation and mitigation options compatible with a 1.5C warmer world, in six dimensions:
Geophysical: What global emission pathways could be consistent with conditions of a 1.5C warmer world? What are the physical
potentials for adaptation?
Environmental-ecological: What are the ecosystem services and resources, including geological storage capacity and related rate
of needed land-use change, available to promote transformations, and to what extent are they compatible with enhanced resilience?
Technological: What technologies are available to support transformation?
Economic: What economic conditions could support transformation?

71

1

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

Cross-Chapter Box 3 (continued)

Socio-cultural: What conditions could support transformations in behaviour and lifestyles? To what extent are the transformations
socially acceptable and consistent with equity?
Institutional: What institutional conditions are in place to support transformations, including multi-level governance, institutional
capacity, and political support?

1

Assessment of feasibility in this report starts by evaluating the unavoidable warming from past emissions (Section 1.2.4) and identifying
mitigation pathways that would lead to a 1.5C world, which indicates that rapid and deep deviations from current emission pathways
are necessary (Chapter 2). In the case of adaptation, an assessment of feasibility starts from an evaluation of the risks and impacts of
climate change (Chapter 3). To mitigate and adapt to climate risks, system-wide technical, institutional and socio-economic transitions
would be required, as well as the implementation of a range of specific mitigation and adaptation options. Chapter 4 applies various
indicators categorised in these six dimensions to assess the feasibility of illustrative examples of relevant mitigation and adaptation
options (Section 4.5.1). Such options and pathways have different effects on sustainable development, poverty eradication and
adaptation capacity (Chapter 5).
The six feasibility dimensions interact in complex and place-specific ways. Synergies and trade-offs may occur between the feasibility
dimensions, and between specific mitigation and adaptation options (Section 4.5.4). The presence or absence of enabling conditions
would affect the options that comprise feasibility pathways (Section 4.4), and can reduce trade-offs and amplify synergies between
options.
Sustainable development, eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities are not only preconditions for feasible transformations, but
the interplay between climate action (both mitigation and adaptation options) and the development patterns to which they apply may
actually enhance the feasibility of particular options (see Chapter 5).
The connections between the feasibility dimensions can be specified across three types of effects (discussed below). Each of these
dimensions presents challenges and opportunities in realizing conditions consistent with a 1.5C warmer world.
Systemic effects: Conditions that have embedded within them system-level functions that could include linear and non-linear
connections and feedbacks. For example, the deployment of technology and large installations (e.g., renewable or low carbon energy
mega-projects) depends upon economic conditions (costs, capacity to mobilize investments for R&D), social or cultural conditions
(acceptability), and institutional conditions (political support; e.g., Sovacool et al., 2015). Case studies can demonstrate system-level
interactions and positive or negative feedback effects between the different conditions (Jacobson et al., 2015; Loftus et al., 2015). This
suggests that each set of conditions and their interactions need to be considered to understand synergies, inequities and unintended
consequences.
Dynamic effects: Conditions that are highly dynamic and vary over time, especially under potential conditions of overshoot or no
overshoot. Some dimensions might be more time sensitive or sequential than others (i.e., if conditions are such that it is no longer
geophysically feasible to avoid overshooting 1.5C, the social and institutional feasibility of avoiding overshoot will be no longer
relevant). Path dependencies, risks of legacy lock-ins related to existing infrastructures, and possibilities of acceleration permitted by
cumulative effects (e.g., dramatic cost decreases driven by learning-by-doing) are all key features to be captured. The effects can play
out over various time scales and thus require understanding the connections between near-term (meaning within the next several years
to two decades) and long-term implications (meaning over the next several decades) when assessing feasibility conditions.
Spatial effects: Conditions that are spatially variable and scale dependent, according to context-specific factors such as regionalscale environmental resource limits and endowment; economic wealth of local populations; social organisation, cultural beliefs, values
and worldviews; spatial organisation, including conditions of urbanisation; and financial and institutional and governance capacity.
This means that the conditions for achieving the global transformation required for a 1.5C world will be heterogeneous and vary
according to the specific context. On the other hand, the satisfaction of these conditions may depend upon global-scale drivers, such as
international flows of finance, technologies or capacities. This points to the need for understanding feasibility to capture the interplay
between the conditions at different scales.
With each effect, the interplay between different conditions influences the feasibility of both pathways (Chapter 2) and options (Chapter
4), which in turn affect the likelihood of limiting warming to 1.5C. The complexity of these interplays triggers unavoidable uncertainties,
requiring transformations that remain robust under a range of possible futures that limit warming to 1.5C.

72

Framing and Context

1.4.3

Transformation, Transformation Pathways,
and Transition: Evaluating Trade-Offs and
Synergies Between Mitigation, Adaptation
and Sustainable Development Goals

Embedded in the goal of limiting warming to 1.5C is the
opportunity for intentional societal transformation (see Box 1.1
on the Anthropocene). The form and process of transformation are
varied and multifaceted (Pelling, 2011; O'Brien et al., 2012; O'Brien
and Selboe, 2015; Pelling et al., 2015). Fundamental elements of
1.5C-related transformation include a decoupling of economic
growth from energy demand and CO2 emissions; leap-frogging
development to new and emerging low-carbon, zero-carbon and
carbon-negative technologies; and synergistically linking climate
mitigation and adaptation to global scale trends (e.g., global trade
and urbanization) that will enhance the prospects for effective
climate action, as well as enhanced poverty reduction and greater
equity (Tschakert et al., 2013; Rogelj et al., 2015; Patterson et al.,
2017) (Chapters 4 and 5). The connection between transformative
climate action and sustainable development illustrates a complex
coupling of systems that have important spatial and time scale lag
effects and implications for process and procedural equity, including
intergenerational equity and for non-human species (Cross-Chapter
Box 4 in this chapter, Chapter 5). Adaptation and mitigation transition
pathways highlight the importance of cultural norms and values,
sector-specific context, and proximate (i.e., occurrence of an extreme
event) drivers that when acting together enhance the conditions for
societal transformation (Solecki et al., 2017; Rosenzweig et al., 2018)
(Chapters 4 and 5).
Diversity and flexibility in implementation choices exist for adaptation,
mitigation (including carbon dioxide removal, CDR) and remedial
measures (such as solar radiation modification, SRM), and a potential
for trade-offs and synergies between these choices and sustainable
development (IPCC, 2014d; Olsson et al., 2014). The responses

Chapter 1

chosen could act to synergistically enhance mitigation, adaptation
and sustainable development, or they may result in trade-offs
which positively impact some aspects and negatively impact others.
Climate change is expected to decrease the likelihood of achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). While some strategies
limiting warming towards 1.5C are expected to significantly increase
the likelihood of meeting those goals while also providing synergies
for climate adaptation and mitigation (Chapter 5).
Dramatic transformations required to achieve the enabling conditions
for a 1.5C warmer world could impose trade-offs on dimensions
of development (IPCC, 2014d; Olsson et al., 2014). Some choices
of adaptation methods also could adversely impact development
(Olsson et al., 2014). This report recognizes the potential for adverse
impacts and focuses on finding the synergies between limiting
warming, sustainable development, and eradicating poverty, thus
highlighting pathways that do not constrain other goals, such as
sustainable development and eradicating poverty.
The report is framed to address these multiple goals simultaneously
and assesses the conditions to achieve a cost-effective and socially
acceptable solution, rather than addressing these goals piecemeal
(von Stechow et al., 2016) (Section 4.5.4 and Chapter 5), although
there may be different synergies and trade-offs between a 2C (von
Stechow et al., 2016) and 1.5C warmer world (Kainuma et al.,
2017). Climate-resilient development pathways (see Cross-Chapter
Box 12 in Chapter 5 and Glossary) are trajectories that strengthen
sustainable development, including mitigating and adapting to
climate change and efforts to eradicate poverty while promoting
fair and cross-scalar resilience in a changing climate. They take into
account dynamic livelihoods; the multiple dimensions of poverty,
structural inequalities; and equity between and among poor and
non-poor people (Olsson et al., 2014). Climate-resilient development
pathways can be considered at different scales, including cities, rural
areas, regions or at global level (Denton et al., 2014; Chapter 5).

Cross-Chapter Box 4 | Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals
Contributing Authors:
Diana Liverman (USA), Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Purnamita Dasgupta (India), Riyanti Djanlante (Japan/Indonesia), Stephen Humphreys
(UK/Ireland), Natalie Mahowald (USA), Yacob Mulugetta (UK/Ethiopia), Virginia Villarino (Argentina), Henri Waisman (France)
Sustainable development is most often defined as `development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability
of future generations to meet their own needs' (WCED, 1987) and includes balancing social well-being, economic prosperity and
environmental protection. The AR5 used this definition and linked it to climate change (Denton et al., 2014). The most significant step
since AR5 is the adoption of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, and the emergence of literature that links them to climate (von
Stechow et al., 2015; Wright et al., 2015; Epstein and Theuer, 2017; Hammill and Price-Kelly, 2017; Kelman, 2017; Lofts et al., 2017;
Maupin, 2017; Gomez-Echeverri, 2018).
In September 2015, the UN endorsed a universal agenda - `Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development'
- which aims `to take the bold and transformative steps which are urgently needed to shift the world onto a sustainable and resilient
path'. Based on a participatory process, the resolution in support of the 2030 agenda adopted 17 non-legally-binding Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets to support people, prosperity, peace, partnerships and the planet (Kanie and Biermann,
2017).

73

1

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

Cross-Chapter Box 4 (continued)

The SDGs expanded efforts to reduce poverty and other deprivations under the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). There were
improvements under the MDGs between 1990 and 2015, including reducing overall poverty and hunger, reducing infant mortality, and
improving access to drinking water (UN, 2015a). However, greenhouse gas emissions increased by more than 50% from 1990 to 2015,
and 1.6 billion people were still living in multidimensional poverty with persistent inequalities in 2015 (Alkire et al., 2015).

1

The SDGs raise the ambition for eliminating poverty, hunger, inequality and other societal problems while protecting the environment.
They have been criticised: as too many and too complex, needing more realistic targets, overly focused on 2030 at the expense of
longer-term objectives, not embracing all aspects of sustainable development, and even contradicting each other (Horton, 2014; Death
and Gabay, 2015; Biermann et al., 2017; Weber, 2017; Winkler and Satterthwaite, 2017).
Climate change is an integral influence on sustainable development, closely related to the economic, social and environmental
dimensions of the SDGs. The IPCC has woven the concept of sustainable development into recent assessments, showing how climate
change might undermine sustainable development, and the synergies between sustainable development and responses to climate
change (Denton et al., 2014). Climate change is also explicit in the SDGs. SDG13 specifically requires `urgent action to address climate
change and its impacts'. The targets include strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural
disasters; integrating climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning; and improving education, awarenessraising and human and institutional capacity.
Targets also include implementing the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the UNFCCC to the goal of mobilizing
jointly 100 billion USD annually by 2020 and operationalizing the Green Climate Fund, as well as promoting mechanisms for raising
capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least developed countries and Small Island Developing
States, including focusing on women, youth and local and marginalised communities. SDG13 also acknowledges that the UNFCCC is
the primary international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global response to climate change.
Climate change is also mentioned in SDGs beyond SDG13, for example in goal targets 1.5, 2.4, 11.B, 12.8.1 related to poverty, hunger,
cities and education respectively. The UNFCCC addresses other SDGs in commitments to `control, reduce or prevent anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases [...] in all relevant sectors, including the energy, transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste
management sectors' (Art4, 1(c)) and to work towards `the conservation and enhancement, as appropriate, of [...] biomass, forests and
oceans as well as other terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems' (Art4, 1(d)). This corresponds to SDGs that seek clean energy for all
(Goal 7), sustainable industry (Goal 9) and cities (Goal 11) and the protection of life on land and below water (14 and 15).
The SDGs and UNFCCC also differ in their time horizons. The SDGs focus primarily on 2030 whereas the Paris Agreement sets out that
`Parties aim [...] to achieve a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases in the
second half of this century'.
The IPCC decision to prepare this report on the impacts of 1.5C and associated emission pathways explicitly asked for the assessment
to be in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty. Chapter 1 frames the interaction between sustainable
development, poverty eradication and ethics and equity. Chapter 2 assesses how risks and synergies of individual mitigation measures
interact with 1.5C pathways within the context of the SDGs and how these vary according to the mix of measures in alternative
mitigation portfolios (Section 2.5). Chapter 3 examines the impacts of 1.5C global warming on natural and human systems with
comparison to 2C and provides the basis for considering the interactions of climate change with sustainable development in Chapter 5.
Chapter 4 analyses strategies for strengthening the response to climate change, many of which interact with sustainable development.
Chapter 5 takes sustainable development, eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities as its focal point for the analysis of pathways
to 1.5C and discusses explicitly the linkages between achieving SDGs while eradicating poverty and reducing inequality.

74

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 4 (continued)

1

Cross-Chapter Box 4, Figure 1 | Climate action is number 13 of the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

1.5

Assessment Frameworks and Emerging
Methodologies that Integrate Climate
Change Mitigation and Adaptation
with Sustainable Development

This report employs information and data that are global in scope
and include region-scale analysis. It also includes syntheses of
municipal, sub-national, and national case studies. Global level
statistics including physical and social science data are used, as
well as detailed and illustrative case study material of particular
conditions and contexts. The assessment provides the state of
knowledge, including an assessment of confidence and uncertainty.
The main time scale of the assessment is the 21st century and the
time is separated into the near-, medium-, and long-term. Near-term
refers to the coming decade, medium-term to the period 2030-2050,
while long-term refers to 2050-2100. Spatial and temporal contexts
are illustrated throughout, including: assessment tools that include
dynamic projections of emission trajectories and the underlying
energy and land transformation (Chapter 2); methods for assessing
observed impacts and projected risks in natural and managed
ecosystems and at 1.5C and higher levels of warming in natural and
managed ecosystems and human systems (Chapter 3); assessments
of the feasibility of mitigation and adaptation options (Chapter 4);
and linkages of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) and
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Cross-Chapter Boxes 1 and
4 in this chapter, Chapter 2 and Chapter 5).

1.5.1

Knowledge Sources and Evidence
Used in the Report

This report is based on a comprehensive assessment of documented
evidence of the enabling conditions to pursuing efforts to limit the
global average temperature rise to 1.5C and adapting to this level
of warming in the overarching context of the Anthropocene (Delanty
and Mota, 2017). Two sources of evidence are used: peer-reviewed
scientific literature and `grey' literature in accordance with procedure
on the use of literature in IPCC reports (IPCC, 2013a, Annex 2 to
Appendix A), with the former being the dominant source. Grey
literature is largely used on key issues not covered in peer-reviewed
literature.
The peer-reviewed literature includes the following sources: 1)
knowledge regarding the physical climate system and human-induced
changes, associated impacts, vulnerabilities, and adaptation options,
established from work based on empirical evidence, simulations,
modelling, and scenarios, with emphasis on new information since
the publication of the IPCC AR5 to the cut-off date for this report
(15th of May 2018); 2) humanities and social science theory and
knowledge from actual human experiences of climate change
risks and vulnerability in the context of social-ecological systems,
development, equity, justice, and governance, and from indigenous
knowledge systems; and 3) mitigation pathways based on climate
projections into the future.

75

Chapter 1

1

The grey literature category extends to empirical observations,
interviews, and reports from government, industry, research institutes,
conference proceedings and international or other organisations.
Incorporating knowledge from different sources, settings and
information channels while building awareness at various levels will
advance decision-making and motivate implementation of contextspecific responses to 1.5C warming (Somanathan et al., 2014).
The assessment does not assess non-written evidence and does not
use oral evidence, media reports or newspaper publications. With
important exceptions, such as China, published knowledge from
the most vulnerable parts of the world to climate change is limited
(Czerniewicz et al., 2017).

1.5.2

Assessment Frameworks and Methodologies

Climate models and associated simulations
The multiple sources of climate model information used in this
assessment are provided in Chapter 2 (Section 2.2) and Chapter
3 (Section 3.2). Results from global simulations, which have also
been assessed in previous IPCC reports and that are conducted as
part of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) Coupled
Models Intercomparison Project (CMIP) are used. The IPCC AR4 and
Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance
Climate Change Adaptation (SREX) reports were mostly based on
simulations from the CMIP3 experiment, while the AR5 was mostly
based on simulations from the CMIP5 experiment. The simulations
of the CMIP3 and CMIP5 experiments were found to be very
similar (e.g., Knutti and Sedlaek, 2012; Mueller and Seneviratne,
2014). In addition to the CMIP3 and CMIP5 experiments, results
from coordinated regional climate model experiments (e.g., the
Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment, CORDEX)
have been assessed and are available for different regions (Giorgi and
Gutowski, 2015). For instance, assessments based on publications
from an extension of the IMPACT2C project (Vautard et al., 2014;
Jacob and Solman, 2017) are newly available for 1.5C projections.
Recently, simulations from the `Half a degree Additional warming,
Prognosis and Projected Impacts' (HAPPI) multimodel experiment
have been performed to specifically assess climate changes at 1.5C
vs 2C global warming (Mitchell et al., 2016). The HAPPI protocol
consists of coupled land-atmosphere initial condition ensemble
simulations with prescribed sea surface temperatures (SSTs); sea ice,
GHG and aerosol concentrations; and solar and volcanic activity that
coincide with three forced climate states: present-day (2006-2015)
(see Section 1.2.1) and future (2091-2100) either with 1.5C or 2C
global warming (prescribed by modified SSTs).
Detection and attribution of change in climate and impacted systems
Formalized scientific methods are available to detect and attribute
impacts of greenhouse gas forcing on observed changes in climate
(e.g., Hegerl et al., 2007; Seneviratne et al., 2012; Bindoff et al., 2013)
and impacts of climate change on natural and human systems (e.g.,
Stone et al., 2013; Hansen and Cramer, 2015; Hansen et al., 2016).
The reader is referred to these sources, as well as to the AR5 for more
background on these methods.

76

Framing and Context

Global climate warming has already reached approximately 1C
(see Section 1.2.1) relative to pre-industrial conditions, and thus
`climate at 1.5C global warming' corresponds to approximately
the addition of only half a degree of warming compared to the
present day, comparable to the warming that has occurred since
the 1970s (Bindoff et al., 2013). Methods used in the attribution of
observed changes associate with this recent warming are therefore
also applicable to assessments of future changes in climate at 1.5C
warming, especially in cases where no climate model simulations or
analyses are available.
Impacts of 1.5C global warming can be assessed in part from
regional and global climate changes that have already been detected
and attributed to human influence (e.g., Schleussner et al., 2017) and
are components of the climate system that are most responsive to
current and projected future forcing. For this reason, when specific
projections are missing for 1.5C global warming, some of the
assessments of climate change provided in Chapter 3 (Section 3.3)
build upon joint assessments of (i) changes that were observed and
attributed to human influence up to the present, that is, for 1C
global warming and (ii) projections for higher levels of warming (e.g.,
2C, 3C or 4C) to assess the changes at 1.5C. Such assessments
are for transient changes only (see Chapter 3, Section 3.3).
Besides quantitative detection and attribution methods, assessments
can also be based on indigenous and local knowledge (see Chapter 4,
Box 4.3). While climate observations may not be available to assess
impacts from a scientific perspective, local community knowledge
can also indicate actual impacts (Brinkman et al., 2016; Kabir et al.,
2016). The challenge is that a community's perception of loss due
to the impacts of climate change is an area that requires further
research (Tschakert et al., 2017).
Costs and benefits analysis
Cost-benefit analyses are common tools used for decision-making,
whereby the costs of impacts are compared to the benefits from
different response actions (IPCC, 2014a, b). However, for the
case of climate change, recognising the complex inter-linkages
of the Anthropocene, cost-benefit analysis tools can be difficult
to use because of disparate impacts versus costs and complex
interconnectivity within the global social-ecological system (see
Box 1.1 and Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 2). Some costs are
relatively easily quantifiable in monetary terms but not all. Climate
change impacts human lives and livelihoods, culture and values, and
whole ecosystems. It has unpredictable feedback loops and impacts
on other regions (IPCC, 2014a), giving rise to indirect, secondary,
tertiary and opportunity costs that are typically extremely difficult to
quantify. Monetary quantification is further complicated by the fact
that costs and benefits can occur in different regions at very different
times, possibly spanning centuries, while it is extremely difficult if not
impossible to meaningfully estimate discount rates for future costs
and benefits. Thus standard cost-benefit analyses become difficult
to justify (IPCC, 2014a; Dietz et al., 2016) and are not used as an
assessment tool in this report.

Framing and Context

1.6

Confidence, Uncertainty and Risk

This report relies on the IPCC's uncertainty guidance provided in
Mastrandrea et al. (2011) and sources given therein. Two metrics for
qualifying key findings are used:
Confidence: Five qualifiers are used to express levels of confidence
in key findings, ranging from very low, through low, medium,
high, to very high. The assessment of confidence involves at least
two dimensions, one being the type, quality, amount or internal
consistency of individual lines of evidence, and the second being
the level of agreement between different lines of evidence. Very
high confidence findings must either be supported by a high level
of agreement across multiple lines of mutually independent and
individually robust lines of evidence or, if only a single line of evidence
is available, by a very high level of understanding underlying that
evidence. Findings of low or very low confidence are presented only
if they address a topic of major concern.
Likelihood: A calibrated language scale is used to communicate
assessed probabilities of outcomes, ranging from exceptionally
unlikely (<1%), extremely unlikely (<5%), very unlikely (<10%),
unlikely (<33%), about as likely as not (33-66%), likely (>66%), very
likely (>90%), extremely likely (>95%) to virtually certain (>99%).
These terms are normally only applied to findings associated with
high or very high confidence. Frequency of occurrence within a model
ensemble does not correspond to actual assessed probability of
outcome unless the ensemble is judged to capture and represent the
full range of relevant uncertainties.
Three specific challenges arise in the treatment of uncertainty and
risk in this report. First, the current state of the scientific literature on
1.5C means that findings based on multiple lines of robust evidence
for which quantitative probabilistic results can be expressed may be
few in number, and those that do exist may not be the most policyrelevant. Hence many key findings are expressed using confidence
qualifiers alone.
Second, many of the most important findings of this report are
conditional because they refer to ambitious mitigation scenarios,
potentially involving large-scale technological or societal
transformation. Conditional probabilities often depend strongly on
how conditions are specified, such as whether temperature goals
are met through early emission reductions, reliance on negative
emissions, or through a low climate response. Whether a certain
risk is considered high at 1.5C may therefore depend strongly on
how 1.5C is specified, whereas a statement that a certain risk may
be substantially higher at 2C relative to 1.5C may be much more
robust.
Third, achieving ambitious mitigation goals will require active,
goal-directed efforts aiming explicitly for specific outcomes and
incorporating new information as it becomes available (Otto et
al., 2015). This shifts the focus of uncertainty from the climate
outcome itself to the level of mitigation effort that may be required
to achieve it. Probabilistic statements about human decisions are

Chapter 1

always problematic, but in the context of robust decision-making,
many near-term policies that are needed to keep open the option of
limiting warming to 1.5C may be the same, regardless of the actual
probability that the goal will be met (Knutti et al., 2015).

1.7

1

Storyline of the Report

The storyline of this report (Figure 1.6) includes a set of interconnected
components. The report consists of five chapters (plus Supplementary
Material for Chapters 1 through 4), a Technical Summary and a
Summary for Policymakers. It also includes a set of boxes to elucidate
specific or cross-cutting themes, as well as Frequently Asked
Questions for each chapter, a Glossary, and several other Annexes.
At a time of unequivocal and rapid global warming, this report
emerges from the long-term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement
- strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change
by pursuing efforts to limit warming to 1.5C through reducing
emissions to achieve a balance between anthropogenic emissions by
sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases. The assessment
focuses first, in Chapter 1, on how 1.5C is defined and understood,
what is the current level of warming to date, and the present
trajectory of change. The framing presented in Chapter 1 provides the
basis through which to understand the enabling conditions of a 1.5C
warmer world and connections to the SDGs, poverty eradication, and
equity and ethics.
In Chapter 2, scenarios of a 1.5C warmer world and the associated
pathways are assessed. The pathways assessment builds upon
the AR5 with a greater emphasis on sustainable development in
mitigation pathways. All pathways begin now and involve rapid
and unprecedented societal transformation. An important framing
device for this report is the recognition that choices that determine
emissions pathways, whether ambitious mitigation or `no policy'
scenarios, do not occur independently of these other changes and
are, in fact, highly interdependent.
Projected impacts that emerge in a 1.5C warmer world and beyond
are dominant narrative threads of the report and are assessed in
Chapter 3. The chapter focuses on observed and attributable global
and regional climate changes and impacts and vulnerabilities. The
projected impacts have diverse and uneven spatial, temporal, human,
economic, and ecological system-level manifestations. Central to the
assessment is the reporting of impacts at 1.5C and 2C, potential
impacts avoided through limiting warming to 1.5C, and, where
possible, adaptation potential and limits to adaptive capacity.
Response options and associated enabling conditions emerge next, in
Chapter 4. Attention is directed to exploring questions of adaptation
and mitigation implementation, integration, and transformation in
a highly interdependent world, with consideration of synergies and
trade-offs. Emission pathways, in particular, are broken down into
policy options and instruments. The role of technological choices,
institutional capacity and global-scale trends like urbanization and
changes in ecosystems are assessed.
77

Chapter 1

1

Chapter 5 covers linkages between achieving the SDGs and a 1.5C
warmer world and turns toward identifying opportunities and
challenges of transformation. This is assessed within a transition to
climate-resilient development pathways and connection between the
evolution towards 1.5C, associated impacts, and emission pathways.
Positive and negative effects of adaptation and mitigation response
measures and pathways for a 1.5C warmer world are examined.

Figure 1.6 | Schematic of report storyline.

78

Framing and Context

Progress along these pathways involves inclusive processes,
institutional integration, adequate finance and technology, and
attention to issues of power, values, and inequalities to maximize
the benefits of pursuing climate stabilisation at 1.5C and the goals
of sustainable development at multiple scales of human and natural
systems from global, regional, national to local and community
levels.

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 1.1 | Why are we Talking about 1.5C?
Summary: Climate change represents an urgent and potentially irreversible threat to human societies and the
planet. In recognition of this, the overwhelming majority of countries around the world adopted the Paris Agreement in December 2015, the central aim of which includes pursuing efforts to limit global temperature rise
to 1.5C. In doing so, these countries, through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), also invited the IPCC to provide a Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above preindustrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emissions pathways.

1

At the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) in December 2015, 195 nations adopted the Paris Agreement2. The
first instrument of its kind, the landmark agreement includes the aim to strengthen the global response to the
threat of climate change by `holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2C above
pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels'.
The first UNFCCC document to mention a limit to global warming of 1.5C was the Cancun Agreement, adopted
at the sixteenth COP (COP16) in 2010. The Cancun Agreement established a process to periodically review the
`adequacy of the long-term global goal (LTGG) in the light of the ultimate objective of the Convention and the
overall progress made towards achieving the LTGG, including a consideration of the implementation of the
commitments under the Convention'. The definition of LTGG in the Cancun Agreement was `to hold the increase
in global average temperature below 2C above pre-industrial levels'. The agreement also recognised the need
to consider `strengthening the long-term global goal on the basis of the best available scientific knowledge...to
a global average temperature rise of 1.5C'.
Beginning in 2013 and ending at the COP21 in Paris in 2015, the first review period of the long-term global goal
largely consisted of the Structured Expert Dialogue (SED). This was a fact-finding, face-to-face exchange of views
between invited experts and UNFCCC delegates. The final report of the SED3 concluded that `in some regions and
vulnerable ecosystems, high risks are projected even for warming above 1.5C'. The SED report also suggested
that Parties would profit from restating the temperature limit of the long-term global goal as a `defence line'
or `buffer zone', instead of a `guardrail' up to which all would be safe, adding that this new understanding
would `probably also favour emission pathways that will limit warming to a range of temperatures below 2C'.
Specifically on strengthening the temperature limit of 2C, the SED's key message was: `While science on the
1.5C warming limit is less robust, efforts should be made to push the defence line as low as possible'. The
findings of the SED, in turn, fed into the draft decision adopted at COP21.
With the adoption of the Paris Agreement, the UNFCCC invited the IPCC to provide a Special Report in 2018 on
`the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emissions
pathways'. The request was that the report, known as SR1.5, should not only assess what a 1.5C warmer world
would look like but also the different pathways by which global temperature rise could be limited to 1.5C. In
2016, the IPCC accepted the invitation, adding that the Special Report would also look at these issues in the
context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development and
efforts to eradicate poverty.
The combination of rising exposure to climate change and the fact that there is a limited capacity to adapt to its
impacts amplifies the risks posed by warming of 1.5C and 2C. This is particularly true for developing and island
countries in the tropics and other vulnerable countries and areas. The risks posed by global warming of 1.5C are
greater than for present-day conditions but lower than at 2C.
(continued on next page)

2

Paris Agreement FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1 https://unfccc.int/documents/9097

3

Structured Expert Dialogue (SED) final report FCCC/SB/2015/INF.1 https://unfccc.int/documents/8707

79

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

FAQ 1.1 (continued)

1

FAQ 1.1, Figure 1 | Timeline of notable dates in preparing the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C (blue) embedded within processes and milestones
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC; grey), including events that may be relevant for discussion of temperature limits.

80

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 1.2 | How Close are we to 1.5C?
Summary: Human-induced warming has already reached about 1C above pre-industrial levels at the time of writing of this Special Report. By the decade 2006-2015, human activity had warmed the world by 0.87C (0.12C)
compared to pre-industrial times (1850-1900). If the current warming rate continues, the world would reach
human-induced global warming of 1.5C around 2040.

1

Under the 2015 Paris Agreement, countries agreed to cut greenhouse gas emissions with a view to `holding the
increase in the global average temperature to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels'. While the overall intention of strengthening
the global response to climate change is clear, the Paris Agreement does not specify precisely what is meant by
`global average temperature', or what period in history should be considered `pre-industrial'. To answer the
question of how close are we to 1.5C of warming, we need to first be clear about how both terms are defined
in this Special Report.
The choice of pre-industrial reference period, along with the method used to calculate global average
temperature, can alter scientists' estimates of historical warming by a couple of tenths of a degree Celsius. Such
differences become important in the context of a global temperature limit just half a degree above where we are
now. But provided consistent definitions are used, they do not affect our understanding of how human activity
is influencing the climate.
In principle, `pre-industrial levels' could refer to any period of time before the start of the industrial revolution.
But the number of direct temperature measurements decreases as we go back in time. Defining a `pre-industrial'
reference period is, therefore, a compromise between the reliability of the temperature information and how
representative it is of truly pre-industrial conditions. Some pre-industrial periods are cooler than others for
purely natural reasons. This could be because of spontaneous climate variability or the response of the climate
to natural perturbations, such as volcanic eruptions and variations in the sun's activity. This IPCC Special Report
on Global Warming of 1.5C uses the reference period 1850-1900 to represent pre-industrial temperature. This
is the earliest period with near-global observations and is the reference period used as an approximation of preindustrial temperatures in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.
Once scientists have defined `pre-industrial', the next step is to calculate the amount of warming at any given
time relative to that reference period. In this report, warming is defined as the increase in the 30-year global
average of combined air temperature over land and water temperature at the ocean surface. The 30-year
timespan accounts for the effect of natural variability, which can cause global temperatures to fluctuate from
one year to the next. For example, 2015 and 2016 were both affected by a strong El Nino event, which amplified
the underlying human-caused warming.
In the decade 2006-2015, warming reached 0.87C (0.12C) relative to 1850-1900, predominantly due to human
activity increasing the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Given that global temperature is currently
rising by 0.2C (0.1C) per decade, human-induced warming reached 1C above pre-industrial levels around
2017 and, if this pace of warming continues, would reach 1.5C around 2040.
While the change in global average temperature tells researchers about how the planet as a whole is changing,
looking more closely at specific regions, countries and seasons reveals important details. Since the 1970s, most
land regions have been warming faster than the global average, for example. This means that warming in
many regions has already exceeded 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Over a fifth of the global population live
in regions that have already experienced warming in at least one season that is greater than 1.5C above preindustrial levels.
(continued on next page)

81

Chapter 1

Framing and Context

FAQ 1.2 (continued)

FAQ1.2:How close are we to 1.5C?

Human-induced warming reached approximately 1C above
pre-industrial levels in 2017

1

2.00

Current
warming rate

Global temperature change
relative to 1850-1900 (C)

1.75
1.50

2017

1.25
1.00
0.75

Human-induced
warming

Climate uncertainty
for 1.5C pathway

0.50
Observed
warming

0.25
0.00

1960

1980

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

FAQ 1.2, Figure 1 | Human-induced warming reached approximately 1C above pre-industrial levels in 2017. At the present rate, global temperatures would
reach 1.5C around 2040. Stylized 1.5C pathway shown here involves emission reductions beginning immediately, and CO2 emissions reaching zero by 2055.

82

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

References
Aaheim, A., T. Wei, and B. Romstad, 2017: Conflicts of economic interests by
limiting global warming to +3C. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for
Global Change, 22(8), 1131-1148, doi:10.1007/s11027-016-9718-8.
Abram, N.J. et al., 2016: Early onset of industrial-era warming across the oceans
and continents. Nature, 536, 411-418, doi:10.1038/nature19082.
Adger, W.N. et al., 2014: Human Security. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 755-791.
AghaKouchak, A., L. Cheng, O. Mazdiyasni, and A. Farahmand, 2014: Global
warming and changes in risk of concurrent climate extremes: Insights from
the 2014 California drought. Geophysical Research Letters, 41(24), 8847-
8852, doi:10.1002/2014gl062308.
Ajibade, I., 2016: Distributive justice and human rights in climate policy: the long
road to Paris. Journal of Sustainable Development Law and Policy (The), 7(2),
65-80, doi:10.4314/jsdlp.v7i2.4.
Albert, S. et al., 2017: Heading for the hills: climate-driven community relocations
in the Solomon Islands and Alaska provide insight for a 1.5C future. Regional
Environmental Change, 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1256-8.
Alkire, S., C. Jindra, G. Robles Aguilar, S. Seth, and A. Vaz, 2015: Global
Multidimensional Poverty Index 2015. Briefing 31, Oxford Poverty & Human
Development Initiative, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 8 pp.
Allen, M.R. and T.F. Stocker, 2013: Impact of delay in reducing carbon dioxide
emissions. Nature Climate Change, 4(1), 23-26, doi:10.1038/nclimate2077.
Allen, M.R. et al., 2016: New use of global warming potentials to compare
cumulative and short-lived climate pollutants. Nature Climate Change, 6,
1-5, doi:10.1038/nclimate2998.
Allen, M.R. et al., 2018: A solution to the misrepresentations of CO2-equivalent
emissions of short-lived climate pollutants under ambitious mitigation. npj
Climate and Atmospheric Science, 1(1), 16, doi:10.1038/s41612-018-0026-8.
Archer, D. and V. Brovkin, 2008: The millennial atmospheric lifetime of
anthropogenic CO2. Climatic Change, 90(3), 283-297,
doi:10.1007/s10584-008-9413-1.
Arora-Jonsson, S., 2011: Virtue and vulnerability: Discourses on women, gender
and climate change. Global Environmental Change, 21(2), 744-751,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.01.005.
Asseng, S. et al., 2013: Uncertainty in simulating wheat yields under climate
change. Nature Climate Change, 3(9), 827-832, doi:10.1038/nclimate1916.
Backstrand, K., J.W. Kuyper, B.-O. Linner, and E. Lovbrand, 2017: Non-state actors
in global climate governance: from Copenhagen to Paris and beyond.
Environmental Politics, 26(4), 561-579,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1327485.
Baker, H.S. et al., 2018: Higher CO2 concentrations increase extreme event risk in a
1.5C world. Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 604-608,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0190-1.
Barcikowska, M.J. et al., 2018: Euro-Atlantic winter storminess and precipitation
extremes under 1.5C vs. 2C warming scenarios. Earth System Dynamics,
9(2), 679-699, doi:10.5194/esd-9-679-2018.
Barnett, J. et al., 2014: A local coastal adaptation pathway. Nature Climate
Change, 4(12), 1103-1108, doi:10.1038/nclimate2383.
Bauer, N. et al., 2017: Shared Socio-Economic Pathways of the Energy Sector -
Quantifying the Narratives. Global Environmental Change, 42, 316-330,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.07.006.
Bereiter, B. et al., 2015: Revision of the EPICA Dome C CO2 record from 800 to
600-kyr before present. Geophysical Research Letters, 42(2), 542-549,
doi:10.1002/2014gl061957.
Berger, A., Q. Yin, H. Nifenecker, and J. Poitou, 2017: Slowdown of global surface
air temperature increase and acceleration of ice melting. Earth's Future, 5(7),
811-822, doi:10.1002/2017ef000554.
Bethke, I. et al., 2017: Potential volcanic impacts on future climate variability.
Nature Climate Change, 7(11), 799-805, doi:10.1038/nclimate3394.
Biermann, F., N. Kanie, and R.E. Kim, 2017: Global governance by goal-setting: the
novel approach of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 26-27, 26-31, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.01.010.

Biermann, F. et al., 2016: Down to Earth: Contextualizing the Anthropocene. Global
Environmental Change, 39, 341-350,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.11.004.
Bindoff, N.L. et al., 2007: Observations: Oceanic Climate Change and Sea Level. In:
Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 385-432.
Bindoff, N.L. et al., 2013: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change: from Global
to Regional. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor,
S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 426-488.
Birkmann, J., T. Welle, W. Solecki, S. Lwasa, and M. Garschagen, 2016: Boost
resilience of small and mid-sized cities. Nature, 537(7622), 605-608,
doi:10.1038/537605a.
Blicharska, M. et al., 2017: Steps to overcome the North-South divide in research
relevant to climate change policy and practice. Nature Climate Change, 7(1),
21-27, doi:10.1038/nclimate3163.
Bodansky, D., J. Brunnee, and L. Rajamani, 2017: International Climate Change
Law. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 416 pp.
Bowerman, N.H.A., D.J. Frame, C. Huntingford, J.A. Lowe, and M.R. Allen, 2011:
Cumulative carbon emissions, emissions floors and short-term rates of
warming: implications for policy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 369(1934),
45-66, doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0288.
Bowerman, N.H.A. et al., 2013: The role of short-lived climate pollutants in meeting
temperature goals. Nature Climate Change, 3(12), 1021-1024,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2034.
Brinkman, T.J. et al., 2016: Arctic communities perceive climate impacts on access
as a critical challenge to availability of subsistence resources. Climatic
Change, 139(3-4), 413-427, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1819-6.
Brondizio, E.S. et al., 2016: Re-conceptualizing the Anthropocene: A call for
collaboration. Global Environmental Change, 39, 318-327,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.02.006.
Busby, J., 2016: After Paris: Good enough climate governance. Current History,
15(777), 3-9, www.currenthistory.com/busby_currenthistory.pdf.
Caney, S., 2005: Cosmopolitan Justice, Responsibility, and Global Climate Change.
Leiden Journal of International Law, 18(04), 747-75,
doi:10.1017/s0922156505002992.
Caney, S., 2010: Climate change and the duties of the advantaged. Critical
Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, 13(1), 203-228,
doi:10.1080/13698230903326331.
Cardona, O.D. et al., 2012: Determinants of Risk: Exposure and Vulnerablity. In:
Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros,
T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K.
Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 65-108.
Chen, X. et al., 2017: The increasing rate of global mean sea-level rise during 19932014. Nature Climate Change, 7(7), 492-495, doi:10.1038/nclimate3325.
Cherubini, F. and K. Tanaka, 2016: Amending the Inadequacy of a Single Indicator
for Climate Impact Analyses. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(23),
12530-12531, doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b05343.
Chevuturi, A., N.P. Klingaman, A.G. Turner, and S. Hannah, 2018: Projected Changes
in the Asian-Australian Monsoon Region in 1.5C and 2.0C Global-Warming
Scenarios. Earth's Future, 6(3), 339-358, doi:10.1002/2017ef000734.
Christensen, J.H. et al., 2013: Climate Phenomena and their Relevance for Future
Regional Climate Change Supplementary Material. In: Climate Change
2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A.
Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1217-1308.

83

1

Chapter 1

1

Ciais, P. et al., 2013: Carbon and Other Biogeochemical Cycles. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 465-570.
Clarke, L.E. et al., 2014: Assessing transformation pathways. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 413-510.
Collins, M. et al., 2013: Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments
and Irreversibility. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 1029-1136.
Corner, A. and J. Clarke, 2017: Talking Climate - From Research to Practice in Public
Engagement. Palgrave Macmillan, Oxford, UK, 146 pp.,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-46744-3.
Cowtan, K. and R.G. Way, 2014: Coverage bias in the HadCRUT4 temperature
series and its impact on recent temperature trends. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society, 140(683), 1935-1944, doi:10.1002/qj.2297.
Cowtan, K. et al., 2015: Robust comparison of climate models with observations
using blended land air and ocean sea surface temperatures. Geophysical
Research Letters, 42(15), 6526-6534, doi:10.1002/2015gl064888.
Cramer, W. et al., 2014: Detection and attribution of observed impacts. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 979-1037.
Creutzig, F., 2016: Economic and ecological views on climate change mitigation
with bioenergy and negative emissions. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 4-10,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12235.
Crutzen, P.J., 2002: Geology of mankind. Nature, 415(6867), 23,
doi:10.1038/415023a.
Crutzen, P.J. and E.F. Stoermer, 2000: The Anthropocene. Global Change Newsletter,
41, 17-18, www.igbp.net/download/18.31
6f18321323470177580001401/1376383088452/nl41.pdf.
Czerniewicz, L., S. Goodier, and R. Morrell, 2017: Southern knowledge online?
Climate change research discoverability and communication practices.
Information, Communication & Society, 20(3), 386-405,
doi:10.1080/1369118x.2016.1168473.
Dasgupta, P. et al., 2014: Rural areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 613-657.
Death, C. and C. Gabay, 2015: Doing biopolitics differently? Radical potential in
the post-2015 MDG and SDG debates. Globalizations, 12(4), 597-612,
doi:10.1080/14747731.2015.1033172.
Delanty, G. and A. Mota, 2017: Governing the Anthropocene. European Journal of
Social Theory, 20(1), 9-38, doi:10.1177/1368431016668535.
Denton, F. et al., 2014: Climate-Resilient Pathways: Adaptation, Mitigation, and
Sustainable Development. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 1101-1131.

84

Framing and Context
Deser, C., R. Knutti, S. Solomon, and A.S. Phillips, 2012: Communication of the
Role of Natural Variability in Future North American Climate. Nature Climate
Change, 2(11), 775-779, doi:10.1038/nclimate1562.
Deuber, O., G. Luderer, and O. Edenhofer, 2013: Physico-economic evaluation of
climate metrics: A conceptual framework. Environmental Science & Policy,
29(0), 37-45, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2013.01.018.
Dietz, S., B. Groom, and W.A. Pizer, 2016: Weighing the Costs and Benefits of
Climate Change to Our Children. The Future of Children, 26(1), 133-155,
www.jstor.org/stable/43755234.
Doll, P. et al., 2018: Risks for the global freshwater system at 1.5C and 2C global
warming. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 044038,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab792.
Dooley, K., J. Gupta, and A. Patwardhan, 2018: INEA editorial: Achieving 1.5C and
climate justice. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics, 18(1), 1-9, doi:10.1007/s10784-018-9389-x.
Dryzek, J.S., 2016: Institutions for the Anthropocene: Governance in a Changing
Earth System. British Journal of Political Science, 46(04), 937-956,
doi:10.1017/s0007123414000453.
Duyck, S., S. Jodoin, and A. Johl (eds.), 2018: Routledge Handbook of Human Rights
and Climate Governance. Routledge, Abingdon, UK, 430 pp.
Ebi, K.L., L.H. Ziska, and G.W. Yohe, 2016: The shape of impacts to come: lessons
and opportunities for adaptation from uneven increases in global and
regional temperatures. Climatic Change, 139(3), 341-349,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1816-9.
Ebi, K.L. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research:
Background, process, and future directions. Climatic Change, 122(3), 363-
372, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0912-3.
Eby, M. et al., 2009: Lifetime of anthropogenic climate change: Millennial time
scales of potential CO2 and surface temperature perturbations. Journal of
Climate, 22(10), 2501-2511, doi:10.1175/2008jcli2554.1.
Ehlert, D. and K. Zickfeld, 2017: What determines the warming commitment after
cessation of CO2 emissions? Environmental Research Letters, 12(1), 015002,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa564a.
Ekstrom, M., M.R. Grose, and P.H. Whetton, 2015: An appraisal of downscaling
methods used in climate change research. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 6(3), 301-319, doi:10.1002/wcc.339.
Emori, S. et al., 2018: Risk implications of long-term global climate goals: overall
conclusions of the ICA-RUS project. Sustainability Science, 13(2), 279-289,
doi:10.1007/s11625-018-0530-0.
England, M.H. et al., 2014: Recent intensification of wind-driven circulation in
the Pacific and the ongoing warming hiatus. Nature Climate Change, 4(3),
222-227, doi:10.1038/nclimate2106.
Epstein, A.H. and S.L.H. Theuer, 2017: Sustainable development and climate
action: thoughts on an integrated approach to SDG and climate policy
implementation. In: Papers from Interconnections 2017. Interconnections
2017, pp. 50.
Etminan, M., G. Myhre, E.J. Highwood, and K.P. Shine, 2016: Radiative forcing
of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide: A significant revision of the
methane radiative forcing. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(24), 12,614-
12,623, doi:10.1002/2016gl071930.
Fazey, I. et al., 2016: Past and future adaptation pathways. Climate and
Development, 8(1), 26-44, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.989192.
Fazey, I. et al., 2018: Community resilience for a 1.5C world. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 31, 30-40, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.006.
Fernandez, A.J. et al., 2017: Aerosol optical, microphysical and radiative forcing
properties during variable intensity African dust events in the Iberian Peninsula.
Atmospheric Research, 196, 129-141, doi:10.1016/j.atmosres.2017.06.019.
Field, C.B. et al., 2014: Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 35-94.
Fischer, E.M. and R. Knutti, 2015: Anthropogenic contribution to global occurrence
of heavy-precipitation and high-temperature extremes. Nature Climate
Change, 5(6), 560-564, doi:10.1038/nclimate2617.
Fleurbaey, M. et al., 2014: Sustainable Development and Equity. In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate

Framing and Context
Change [Edenhofer, O., Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, P.E. K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, and T.Z.J.C.M. B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 283-350.
Folland, C.K., O. Boucher, A. Colman, and D.E. Parker, 2018: Causes of irregularities
in trends of global mean surface temperature since the late 19th century.
Science Advances, 4(6), eaao5297, doi:10.1126/sciadv.aao5297.
Forkel, M. et al., 2016: Enhanced seasonal CO2 exchange caused by amplified
plant productivity in northern ecosystems. Science, 351(6274), 696-699,
doi:10.1126/science.aac4971.
Foster, G. and S. Rahmstorf, 2011: Global temperature evolution 1979-2010.
Environmental Research Letters, 6(4), 044022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/6/4/044022.
Foster, G.L., D.L. Royer, and D.J. Lunt, 2017: Future climate forcing potentially
without precedent in the last 420 million years. Nature Communications, 8,
14845, doi: 10.1038/ncomms14845.
Frolicher, T.L. and F. Joos, 2010: Reversible and irreversible impacts of greenhouse
gas emissions in multi-century projections with the NCAR global coupled
carbon cycle-climate model. Climate Dynamics, 35(7), 1439-1459,
doi:10.1007/s00382-009-0727-0.
Frolicher, T.L., M. Winton, and J.L. Sarmiento, 2014: Continued global warming
after CO2 emissions stoppage. Nature Climate Change, 4(1), 40-44,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2060.
Fuglestvedt, J. et al., 2018: Implications of possible interpretations of `greenhouse
gas balance' in the Paris Agreement. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119),
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0445.
Gillett, N.P., V.K. Arora, D. Matthews, and M.R. Allen, 2013: Constraining the ratio
of global warming to cumulative CO2 emissions using CMIP5 simulations.
Journal of Climate, 26(18), 6844-6858, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00476.1.
Gillett, N.P., V.K. Arora, K. Zickfeld, S.J. Marshall, and W.J. Merryfield, 2011: Ongoing
climate change following a complete cessation of carbon dioxide emissions.
Nature Geoscience, 4, 83-87, doi:10.1038/ngeo1047.
Giorgi, F. and W.J. Gutowski, 2015: Regional Dynamical Downscaling and the
CORDEX Initiative. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 40(1),
467-490, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-102014-021217.
Gomez-Echeverri, L., 2018: Climate and development: enhancing impact through
stronger linkages in the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
376(2119), doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0444.
Goodwin, P., R.G. Williams, and A. Ridgwell, 2015: Sensitivity of climate to
cumulative carbon emissions due to compensation of ocean heat and carbon
uptake. Nature Geoscience, 8(1), 29-34, doi:10.1038/ngeo2304.
Goodwin, P. et al., 2018: Pathways to 1.5C and 2C warming based on
observational and geological constraints. Nature Geoscience, 11(2), 102-
107, doi:10.1038/s41561-017-0054-8.
Gouldson, A. et al., 2015: Exploring the economic case for climate action in cities.
Global Environmental Change, 35, 93-105,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.07.009.
Gradstein, F.M., J.G. Ogg, M.D. Schmitz, and G.M. Ogg (eds.), 2012: The Geologic
Time Scale. Elsevier BV, Boston, MA, USA, 1144 pp.,
doi:10.1016/b978-0-444-59425-9.01001-5.
Gregory, J.M. and P.M. Forster, 2008: Transient climate response estimated from
radiative forcing and observed temperature change. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres, 113(D23), D23105, doi:10.1029/2008jd010405.
Hall, J., G. Fu, and J. Lawry, 2007: Imprecise probabilities of climate change:
Aggregation of fuzzy scenarios and model uncertainties. Climatic Change,
81(3-4), 265-281, doi:10.1007/s10584-006-9175-6.
Hammill, A. and H. Price-Kelly, 2017: Using NDCs , NAPs and the SDGs to Advance
Climate-Resilient Development. NDC Expert perspectives for the NDC
Partnership, NDC Partnership, Washington, DC, USA and Bonn, Germany, 10 pp.
Hansen, G. and W. Cramer, 2015: Global distribution of observed climate change
impacts. Nature Climate Change, 5(3), 182-185,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2529.
Hansen, G., D. Stone, M. Auffhammer, C. Huggel, and W. Cramer, 2016: Linking local
impacts to changes in climate: a guide to attribution. Regional Environmental
Change, 16(2), 527-541, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0760-y.
Hansen, J., R. Ruedy, M. Sato, and K. Lo, 2010: Global surface temperature change.
Reviews of Geophysics, 48(4), RG4004,
doi:10.1029/2010rg000345.

Chapter 1
Hansen, J. et al., 2005: Earth's energy imbalance: confirmation and implications.
Science, 308, 1431-1435, doi:10.1126/science.1110252.
Harlan, S.L. et al., 2015: Climate Justice and Inequality: Insights from Sociology.
In: Climate Change and Society: Sociological Perspectives [Dunlap, R.E. and
R.J. Brulle (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 127-163,
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199356102.003.0005.
Harrington, C., 2016: The Ends of the World: International Relations and the
Anthropocene. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 44(3), 478-498,
doi:10.1177/0305829816638745.
Harris, L.M., E.K. Chu, and G. Ziervogel, 2017: Negotiated resilience. Resilience,
3293, 1-19, doi:10.1080/21693293.2017.1353196.
Hartmann, D.J. et al., 2013: Observations: Atmosphere and Surface. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 159-254.
Haustein, K. et al., 2017: A real-time Global Warming Index. Scientific Reports,
7(1), 15417, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-14828-5.
Hawkins, E. et al., 2017: Estimating changes in global temperature since the
pre-industrial period. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,
BAMS-D-16-0007.1, doi:10.1175/bams-d-16-0007.1.
Hegerl, G.C. et al., 2007: Understanding and Attributing Climate Change. In:
Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 663-745.
Henley, B.J. and A.D. King, 2017: Trajectories toward the 1.5C Paris target:
Modulation by the Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation. Geophysical Research
Letters, 44(9), 4256-4262, doi:10.1002/2017gl073480.
Hienola, A. et al., 2018: The impact of aerosol emissions on the 1.5C pathways.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 044011.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al., 2007: Coral Reefs Under Rapid Climate Change and Ocean
Acidification. Science, 318(5857), 1737-1742, doi:10.1126/science.1152509.
Holz, C., S. Kartha, and T. Athanasiou, 2017: Fairly sharing 1.5: national fair shares
of a 1.5C-compliant global mitigation effort. International Environmental
Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 1-18,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9371-z.
Horton, R., 2014: Why the sustainable development goals will fail. The Lancet,
383(9936), 2196, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(14)61046-1.
Humphreys, S., 2017: Climate, Technology, `Justice'. In: Protecting the Environment
for Future Generations - Principles and Actors in International Environmental
Law [Proel, A. (ed.)]. Erich Schmidt Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 171-190.
IBA, 2014: Achieving Justice and Human Rights in an Era of Climate Disruption.
International Bar Association (IBA), London, UK, 240 pp.
Ionesco, D., D. Mokhnacheva, and F. Gemenne, 2016: Atlas de Migrations
Environnmentales (in French). Presses de Sciences Po, Paris, France, 152 pp.
IPCC, 2000: Special Report on Emissions Scenarios: A Special Report of Working
Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Nakienovi, N.
and R. Swart (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, 570 pp.
IPCC, 2012a: Summary for Policymakers. In: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events
and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros,
T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K.
Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 3-21.
IPCC, 2012b: Meeting Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Expert Meeting on Geoengineering. [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y.
Sokona, C. Field, V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, Q. Dahe, J. Minx, K. Mach, G.-K. Plattner,
S. Schlomer, G. Hansen, and M. Mastrandrea (eds.)]. IPCC Working Group III
Technical Support Unit, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research,
Potsdam, Germany, 99 pp.
IPCC, 2013a: Principles Governing IPCC Work. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 2 pp.
IPCC, 2013b: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 3-29.

85

1

Chapter 1

1

IPCC, 2014a: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 1-32.
IPCC, 2014b: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of
Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O.,
R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I.
Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C.
von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1-30.
IPCC, 2014c: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri, and L.A. Meyer
(eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp.
IPCC, 2014d: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report.
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K.
Pachauri, and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 2-34.
IPCC, 2017: Meeting Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Expert Meeting on Mitigation, Sustainability and Climate Stabilization
Scenarios. [Shukla, P.R., J. Skea, R. Diemen, E. Huntley, M. Pathak, J. PortugalPereira, J. Scull, and R. Slade (eds.)]. IPCC Working Group III Technical Support
Unit, Imperial College London, London, UK, 44 pp.
Jacob, D. and S. Solman, 2017: IMPACT2C - An introduction. Climate Services, 7,
1-2, doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2017.07.006.
Jacobson, M.Z. et al., 2015: 100% clean and renewable wind, water, and sunlight
(WWS) all-sector energy roadmaps for the 50 United States. Energy &
Environmental Science, 8(7), 2093-2117, doi:10.1039/c5ee01283j.
James, R., R. Washington, C.-F. Schleussner, J. Rogelj, and D. Conway, 2017:
Characterizing half-a-degree difference: a review of methods for identifying
regional climate responses to global warming targets. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 8(2), e457,
doi:10.1002/wcc.457.
Jarvis, A.J., D.T. Leedal, and C.N. Hewitt, 2012: Climate-society feedbacks and the
avoidance of dangerous climate change. Nature Climate Change, 2(9), 668-
671, doi:10.1038/nclimate1586.
Jenkins, S., R.J. Millar, N. Leach, and M.R. Allen, 2018: Framing Climate Goals in
Terms of Cumulative CO2-Forcing-Equivalent Emissions. Geophysical Research
Letters, 45(6), 2795-2804, doi:10.1002/2017gl076173.
Johansson, D.J.A., 2012: Economics- and physical-based metrics for comparing
greenhouse gases. Climatic Change, 110(1-2), 123-141,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0072-2.
Jones, G.S., P.A. Stott, and N. Christidis, 2013: Attribution of observed historical
near-surface temperature variations to anthropogenic and natural causes
using CMIP5 simulations. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres,
118(10), 4001-4024, doi:10.1002/jgrd.50239.
Jones, G.S., P.A. Stott, and J.F.B. Mitchell, 2016: Uncertainties in the attribution
of greenhouse gas warming and implications for climate prediction.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 121(12), 6969-6992,
doi:10.1002/2015jd024337.
Jones, P., 2016: The reliability of global and hemispheric surface temperature
records. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences, 33(3), 269-282,
doi:10.1007/s00376-015-5194-4.
Kabir, M.I. et al., 2016: Knowledge and perception about climate change and human
health: findings from a baseline survey among vulnerable communities in
Bangladesh. BMC Public Health, 16(1), 266, doi:10.1186/s12889-016-2930-3.
Kainuma, M., R. Pandey, T. Masui, and S. Nishioka, 2017: Methodologies for
leapfrogging to low carbon and sustainable development in Asia. Journal of
Renewable and Sustainable Energy, 9(2), 021406,
doi:10.1063/1.4978469.
Kanie, N. and F. Biermann (eds.), 2017: Governing through Goals: Sustainable
Development Goals as Governance Innovation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 352 pp.
Karl, T.R. et al., 2015: Possible artifacts of data biases in the recent global surface
warming hiatus. Science, 348(6242), 1469-1472,
doi:10.1126/science.aaa5632.

86

Framing and Context
Karmalkar, A. and R.S. Bradley, 2017: Consequences of Global Warming of
1.5C and 2C for Regional Temperature and Precipitation Changes in the
Contiguous United States. PLOS ONE, 12(1), e0168697,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0168697.
Kelman, I., 2017: Linking disaster risk reduction, climate change, and the
sustainable development goals. Disaster Prevention and Management: An
International Journal, 26(3), 254-258,
doi:10.1108/dpm-02-2017-0043.
King, A.D., D.J. Karoly, and B.J. Henley, 2017: Australian climate extremes at
1.5C and 2C of global warming. Nature Climate Change, 7(6), 412-416,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3296.
King, A.D. et al., 2018a: Reduced heat exposure by limiting global warming to 1.5C.
Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 549-551, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0191-0.
King, A.D. et al., 2018b: On the Linearity of Local and Regional Temperature
Changes from 1.5C to 2C of Global Warming. Journal of Climate, 31(18),
7495-7514, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-17-0649.1.
Kirtman, B., et al., 2013: Near-term Climate Change: Projections and
Predictability. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 953-1028.
Klein, R.J.T. et al., 2014: Adaptation opportunities, constraints, and limits. In:
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 899-943.
Klinsky, S. and H. Winkler, 2018: Building equity in: strategies for integrating equity
into modelling for a 1.5C world. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119),
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0461.
Knox, J.H., 2015: Human Rights Principles and Climate Change. In: Oxford
Handbook of International Climate Change Law [Carlarne, C., K.R. Gray,
and R. Tarasofsky (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 213-238,
doi:10.1093/law/9780199684601.003.0011.
Knutti, R. and J. Sedlaek, 2012: Robustness and uncertainties in the new
CMIP5 climate model projections. Nature Climate Change, 3(4), 369-373,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1716.
Knutti, R., J. Rogelj, J. Sedlaek, and E.M. Fischer, 2015: A scientific critique of
the two-degree climate change target. Nature Geoscience, 9(1), 13-18,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2595.
Kolstad, C. et al., 2014: Social, Economic, and Ethical Concepts and Methods. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 207-282.
Kopp, R.E. et al., 2016: Temperature-driven global sea-level variability in the
Common Era. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(11),
1-8, doi:10.1073/pnas.1517056113.
Kosaka, Y. and S.P. Xie, 2013: Recent global-warming hiatus tied to equatorial Pacific
surface cooling. Nature, 501(7467), 403-407, doi:10.1038/nature12534.
Kriegler, E., J.W. Hall, H. Held, R. Dawson, and H.J. Schellnhuber, 2009: Imprecise
probability assessment of tipping points in the climate system. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(13), 5041-5046,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0809117106.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2012: The need for and use of socio-economic scenarios for
climate change analysis: A new approach based on shared socio-economic
pathways. Global Environmental Change, 22(4), 807-822,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.05.005.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research:
The concept of shared climate policy assumptions. Climatic Change, 122(3),
401-414, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0971-5.
Kristjansson, J.E., M. Helene, and S. Hauke, 2016: The hydrological cycle response to
cirrus cloud thinning. Geophysical Research Letters, 42(24), 10,807-810,815,

Framing and Context
doi:10.1002/2015gl066795.
Lauder, A.R. et al., 2013: Offsetting methane emissions - An alternative to emission
equivalence metrics. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 12,
419-429, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2012.11.028.
Leach, N.J. et al., 2018: Current level and rate of warming determine emissions
budgets under ambitious mitigation. Nature Geoscience, 11(8), 574-579,
doi:10.1038/s41561-018-0156-y.
Leal Filho, W. et al., 2018: Implementing climate change research at universities:
Barriers, potential and actions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 170, 269-277,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.105.
Lee, D. et al., 2018: Impacts of half a degree additional warming on the Asian
summer monsoon rainfall characteristics. Environmental Research Letters,
13(4), 044033, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab55d.
Leggett, J. et al., 1992: Emissions scenarios for the IPCC: an update. In: Climate
change 1992: The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment
[Houghton, J.T., B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 69-95.
Leichenko, R. and J.A. Silva, 2014: Climate change and poverty: Vulnerability,
impacts, and alleviation strategies. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate
Change, 5(4), 539-556, doi:10.1002/wcc.287.
Leonard, M. et al., 2014: A compound event framework for understanding extreme
impacts. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(1), 113-128,
doi:10.1002/wcc.252.
Leung, D.Y.C., G. Caramanna, and M.M. Maroto-Valer, 2014: An overview of current
status of carbon dioxide capture and storage technologies. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 39, 426-443, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.093.
Levasseur, A. et al., 2016: Enhancing life cycle impact assessment from climate
science: Review of recent findings and recommendations for application to
LCA. Ecological Indicators, 71, 163-174,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.06.049.
Lewis, S.C., A.D. King, and D.M. Mitchell, 2017: Australia's Unprecedented Future
Temperature Extremes Under Paris Limits to Warming. Geophysical Research
Letters, 44(19), 9947-9956, doi:10.1002/2017gl074612.
Lofts, K., S. Shamin, T.S. Zaman, and R. Kibugi, 2017: Brief on Sustainable
Development Goal 13 on Taking Action on Climate Change and Its Impacts:
Contributions of International Law, Policy and Governance,. McGill Journal of
Sustainable Development Law, 11(1), 183-192,
doi:10.3868/s050-004-015-0003-8.
Loftus, P.J., A.M. Cohen, J.C.S. Long, and J.D. Jenkins, 2015: A critical review of
global decarbonization scenarios: What do they tell us about feasibility?
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 6(1), 93-112,
doi:10.1002/wcc.324.
Lovbrand, E., M. Hjerpe, and B.-O. Linner, 2017: Making climate governance global:
how UN climate summitry comes to matter in a complex climate regime.
Environmental Politics, 26(4), 580-599,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1319019.
Lowe, J.A. and D. Bernie, 2018: The impact of Earth system feedbacks on carbon
budgets and climate response. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119),
doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0263.
Lowe, J.A. et al., 2009: How difficult is it to recover from dangerous levels of global
warming? Environmental Research Letters, 4(1), 014012,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/1/014012.
Luning, S. and F. Vahrenholt, 2017: Paleoclimatological Context and Reference
Level of the 2C and 1.5C Paris Agreement Long-Term Temperature Limits.
Frontiers in Earth Science, 5, 104, doi:10.3389/feart.2017.00104.
Luthi, D. et al., 2008: High-resolution carbon dioxide concentration record
650,000-800,000 years before present. Nature, 453(7193), 379-382,
doi:10.1038/nature06949.
MacMartin, D.G., K.L. Ricke, and D.W. Keith, 2018: Solar geoengineering as part
of an overall strategy for meeting the 1.5C Paris target. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 376(2119), doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0454.
Marba, N. et al., 2015: Impact of seagrass loss and subsequent revegetation
on carbon sequestration and stocks. Journal of Ecology, 103(2), 296-302,
doi:10.1111/1365-2745.12370.
Marcott, S.A., J.D. Shakun, P.U. Clark, and A.C. Mix, 2013: A reconstruction
of regional and global temperature for the past 11,300 years. Science,
339(6124), 1198-201, doi:10.1126/science.1228026.
Marsicek, J., B.N. Shuman, P.J. Bartlein, S.L. Shafer, and S. Brewer, 2018: Reconciling
divergent trends and millennial variations in Holocene temperatures. Nature,

Chapter 1
554(7690), 92-96, doi:10.1038/nature25464.
Martius, O., S. Pfahl, and C. Chevalier, 2016: A global quantification of compound
precipitation and wind extremes. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(14),
7709-7717, doi:10.1002/2016gl070017.
Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., 2013: Information from Paleoclimate Archives. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels,
Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 383-464.
Mastrandrea, M.D. et al., 2011: The IPCC AR5 guidance note on consistent
treatment of uncertainties: a common approach across the working groups.
Climatic Change, 108(4), 675-691, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0178-6.
Mathesius, S., M. Hofmann, K. Caldeira, and H.J. Schellnhuber, 2015: Long-term
response of oceans to CO2 removal from the atmosphere. Nature Climate
Change, 5(12), 1107-1113, doi:10.1038/nclimate2729.
Matthews, H.D. and K. Caldeira, 2008: Stabilizing climate requires near-zero emissions.
Geophysical Research Letters, 35(4), L04705, doi:10.1029/2007gl032388.
Matthews, H.D. and K. Zickfeld, 2012: Climate response to zeroed emissions of
greenhouse gases and aerosols. Nature Climate Change, 2(5), 338-341,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1424.
Matthews, H.D. and S. Solomon, 2013: Irreversible Does Not Mean Unavoidable.
Science, 340(6131), 438-439, doi:10.1126/science.1236372.
Matthews, H.D., N.P. Gillett, P. Stott, and K. Zickfeld, 2009: The proportionality of
global warming to cumulative carbon emissions. Nature, 459(7248), 829-32,
doi:10.1038/nature08047.
Matthews, T.K.R., R.L. Wilby, and C. Murphy, 2017: Communicating the deadly
consequences of global warming for human heat stress. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 114(15), 3861-3866,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1617526114.
Maupin, A., 2017: The SDG13 to combat climate change: an opportunity for Africa
to become a trailblazer? African Geographical Review, 36(2), 131-145,
doi:10.1080/19376812.2016.1171156.
Mauritsen, T. and R. Pincus, 2017: Committed warming inferred from observations.
Nature Climate Change, 2, 1-5, doi:10.1038/nclimate3357.
McKinnon, C., 2015: Climate justice in a carbon budget. Climatic Change, 133(3),
375-384, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1382-6.
Medhaug, I., M.B. Stolpe, E.M. Fischer, and R. Knutti, 2017: Reconciling
controversies about the `global warming hiatus'. Nature, 545(7652), 41-47,
doi:10.1038/nature22315.
Meehl, G.A. et al., 2007: Global Climate Projections. In: Climate Change 2007:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor,
and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 747-845.
Millar, R.J., Z.R. Nicholls, P. Friedlingstein, and M.R. Allen, 2017a: A modified impulseresponse representation of the global near-surface air temperature and
atmospheric concentration response to carbon dioxide emissions. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 17(11), 7213-7228, doi:10.5194/acp-17-7213-2017.
Millar, R.J. et al., 2017b: Emission budgets and pathways consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C. Nature Geoscience, 10(10), 741-747, doi:10.1038/ngeo3031.
Mimura, N. et al., 2014: Adaptation planning and implementation. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 869-898.
Minx, J.C., W.F. Lamb, M.W. Callaghan, L. Bornmann, and S. Fuss, 2017: Fast
growing research on negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters,
12(3), 035007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5ee5.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2016: Realizing the impacts of a 1.5C warmer world. Nature
Climate Change, 6(8), 735-737, doi:10.1038/nclimate3055.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2017: Half a degree additional warming, prognosis and projected
impacts (HAPPI): background and experimental design. Geoscientific Model
Development, 10(2), 571-583, doi:10.5194/gmd-10-571-2017.
Miyan, M.A., 2015: Droughts in Asian Least Developed Countries: Vulnerability
and sustainability. Weather and Climate Extremes, 7, 8-23,
doi:10.1016/j.wace.2014.06.003.

87

1

Chapter 1

1

Morice, C.P., J.J. Kennedy, N.A. Rayner, and P.D. Jones, 2012: Quantifying
uncertainties in global and regional temperature change using an ensemble
of observational estimates: The HadCRUT4 data set. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres, 117(D8), D08101, doi:10.1029/2011jd017187.
Morita, T. et al., 2001: Greenhouse Gas Emission Mitigation Scenarios and Implications.
In: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[B. Metz, O. Davidson, R. Swart, and J. Pan (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 115-164.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2010: The next generation of scenarios for climate change
research and assessment. Nature, 463(7282), 747-756,
doi:10.1038/nature08823.
Mueller, B. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2014: Systematic land climate and
evapotranspiration biases in CMIP5 simulations. Geophysical Research
Letters, 41(1), 128-134,
doi:10.1002/2013gl058055.
Myhre, G. et al., 2013: Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 658-740.
Myhre, G. et al., 2017: Multi-model simulations of aerosol and ozone radiative
forcing due to anthropogenic emission changes during the period 1990-
2015. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 17(4), 2709-2720,
doi:10.5194/acp-17-2709-2017.
Mysiak, J., S. Surminski, A. Thieken, R. Mechler, and J. Aerts, 2016: Brief
communication: Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction - Success or
warning sign for Paris? Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 16(10),
2189-2193, doi:10.5194/nhess-16-2189-2016.
NOAA, 2016: State of the Climate: Global Climate Report for Annual 2015.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Centers
for Environmental Information (NCEI). Retrieved from:
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/201513.
O'Brien, K. and E. Selboe, 2015: Social transformation. In: The Adaptive Challenge
of Climate Change [O'Brien, K. and E. Selboe (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY , USA, pp. 311-324,
doi:10.1017/cbo9781139149389.018.
O'Brien, K. et al., 2012: Toward a sustainable and resilient future. In: Managing the
Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation.
A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken,
K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and
P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 437-486.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research:
The concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 122(3),
387-400, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0905-2.
Ocko, I.B. et al., 2017: Unmask temporal trade-offs in climate policy debates.
Science, 356(6337), 492-493, doi:10.1126/science.aaj2350.
OECD, 2016: The OECD supporting action on climate change. Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris, France, 18 pp.
OHCHR, 2009: Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the relationship between climate change and human rights.
A/HRC/10/61, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR), 32 pp.
OHCHR, 2015: Understanding Human Rights and Climate Change. Submission of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to the 21st Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), 28 pp.
OHCHR, 2017: Analytical study on the relationship between climate change and
the full and effective enjoyment of the rights of the child. A/HRC/35/13, Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), 18 pp.
Okereke, C., 2010: Climate justice and the international regime. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 1(3), 462-474,
doi:10.1002/wcc.52.
Oliver, T.H. and M.D. Morecroft, 2014: Interactions between climate change and
land use change on biodiversity: attribution problems, risks, and opportunities.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 317-335,
doi:10.1002/wcc.271.

88

Framing and Context
Olsson, L. et al., 2014: Livelihoods and poverty. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 798-832.
Otto, F.E.L., D.J. Frame, A. Otto, and M.R. Allen, 2015: Embracing uncertainty in
climate change policy. Nature Climate Change, 5, 1-5,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2716.
Otto, F.E.L., R.B. Skeie, J.S. Fuglestvedt, T. Berntsen, and M.R. Allen, 2017: Assigning
historic responsibility for extreme weather events. Nature Climate Change,
7(11), 757-759, doi:10.1038/nclimate3419.
Pattberg, P. and F. Zelli (eds.), 2016: Environmental politics and governance in
the anthropocene: Institutions and legitimacy in a complex world. Routledge,
London, UK, 268 pp., doi:10.4324/9781315697468.
Patterson, J. et al., 2017: Exploring the governance and politics of transformations
towards sustainability. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions,
24, 1-16, doi:10.1016/j.eist.2016.09.001.
Pelling, M., 2011: Adaptation to Climate Change: From Resilience to Transformation.
Routledge, Abingdon, Oxon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 224 pp.
Pelling, M., K. O'Brien, and D. Matyas, 2015: Adaptation and transformation.
Climatic Change, 133(1), 113-127,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1303-0.
Pendergrass, A.G., F. Lehner, B.M. Sanderson, and Y. Xu, 2015: Does extreme
precipitation intensity depend on the emissions scenario? Geophysical
Research Letters, 42(20), 8767-8774,
doi:10.1002/2015gl065854.
Pfleiderer, P., C.-F. Schleussner, M. Mengel, and J. Rogelj, 2018: Global mean
temperature indicators linked to warming levels avoiding climate risks.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 064015,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac319.
Popp, A. et al., 2017: Land-use futures in the shared socio-economic pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 331-345,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.10.002.
Porter, J.R. et al., 2014: Food security and food production systems. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 485-533.
Portner, H.-O. et al., 2014: Ocean systems. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 411-484.
Rao, S. et al., 2017: Future Air Pollution in the Shared Socio-Economic Pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 346-358,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.012.
Reckien, D. et al., 2017: Climate change, equity and the Sustainable Development
Goals: an urban perspective. Environment & Urbanization, 29(1), 159-182,
doi:10.1177/0956247816677778.
Reisinger, A. et al., 2012: Implications of alternative metrics for global mitigation
costs and greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture. Climatic Change, 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0593-3.
Reisinger, A. et al., 2014: Australasia. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1371-1438.
Resurreccion, B.P., 2013: Persistent women and environment linkages in climate
change and sustainable development agendas. Women's Studies International
Forum, 40, 33-43, doi:10.1016/j.wsif.2013.03.011.

Framing and Context
Revi, A. et al., 2014: Urban areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 535-612.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy,
land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 153-168,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Ribes, A. and L. Terray, 2013: Application of regularised optimal fingerprinting to
attribution. Part II: application to global near-surface temperature. Climate
Dynamics, 41(11), 2837-2853,
doi:10.1007/s00382-013-1736-6.
Ribes, A., F.W. Zwiers, J.-M. Azais, and P. Naveau, 2017: A new statistical approach
to climate change detection and attribution. Climate Dynamics, 48(1), 367-
386, doi:10.1007/s00382-016-3079-6.
Richardson, M., K. Cowtan, and R.J. Millar, 2018: Global temperature definition
affects achievement of long-term climate goals. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(5), 054004, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab305.
Richardson, M., K. Cowtan, E. Hawkins, and M.B. Stolpe, 2016: Reconciled climate
response estimates from climate models and the energy budget of Earth.
Nature Climate Change, 6(10), 931-935,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3066.
Robinson, M. and T. Shine, 2018: Achieving a climate justice pathway to 1.5C.
Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 564-569,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0189-7.
Rogelj, J., C.-F. Schleussner, and W. Hare, 2017: Getting It Right Matters:
Temperature Goal Interpretations in Geoscience Research. Geophysical
Research Letters, 44(20), 10,662-10,665,
doi:10.1002/2017gl075612.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2015: Energy system transformations for limiting end-ofcentury warming to below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 519-527,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2572.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2016a: Paris Agreement climate proposals need boost to keep
warming well below 2C. Nature Climate Change, 534, 631-639,
doi:10.1038/nature18307.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2016b: Differences between carbon budget estimates unravelled.
Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 245-252, doi:10.1038/nclimate2868.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2018: Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature increase
below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 325-332,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0091-3.
Rohde, R. et al., 2013: Berkeley Earth Temperature Averaging Process.
Geoinformatics & Geostatistics: An Overview, 1(2), 1-13,
doi:10.4172/2327-4581.1000103.
Rosenbloom, D., 2017: Pathways: An emerging concept for the theory and
governance of low-carbon transitions. Global Environmental Change, 43,
37-50, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.011.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2008: Attributing physical and biological impacts to
anthropogenic climate change. Nature, 453(7193), 353-357,
doi:10.1038/nature06937.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2017: Assessing inter-sectoral climate change risks: the role
of ISIMIP. Environmental Research Letters, 12(1), 010301.
Rosenzweig, C., W. Solecki, P. Romeo-Lankao, M. Shagun, S. Dhakal, and S. Ali
Ibrahim (eds.), 2018: Climate Change and Cities: Second Assessment Report
of the Urban Climate Change Research Network. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 811 pp.
Saeed, F. et al., 2018: Robust changes in tropical rainy season length at 1.5C and
2C. Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 064024,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab797.
Samset, B.H. et al., 2018: Climate Impacts From a Removal of Anthropogenic
Aerosol Emissions. Geophysical Research Letters, 45(2), 1020-1029,
doi:10.1002/2017gl076079.
Sarofim, M.C., S.T. Waldhoff, and S.C. Anenberg, 2017: Valuing the Ozone-Related
Health Benefits of Methane Emission Controls. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 66(1), 45-63, doi:10.1007/s10640-015-9937-6.
Savaresi, A., 2016: The Paris Agreement: a new beginning? Journal of Energy &
Natural Resources Law, 34(1), 16-26,
doi:10.1080/02646811.2016.1133983.

Chapter 1
Schafer, S., M. Lawrence, H. Stelzer, W. Born, and S. Low (eds.), 2015: The European
Transdisciplinary Assessment of Climate Engineering (EuTRACE): Removing
Greenhouse Gases from the Atmosphere and Reflecting Sunlight away from
Earth. The European Transdisciplinary Assessment of Climate Engineering
(EuTRACE), 170 pp.
Schewe, J. et al., 2014: Multimodel assessment of water scarcity under climate
change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3245-
3250, doi:10.1073/pnas.1222460110.
Schleussner, C.-F., P. Pfleiderer, and E.M. Fischer, 2017: In the observational record
half a degree matters. Nature Climate Change, 7(7), 460-462,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3320.
Schleussner, C.-F. et al., 2016: Differential climate impacts for policy relevant limits
to global warming: the case of 1.5C and 2C. Earth System Dynamics, 7(2),
327-351, doi:10.5194/esd-7-327-2016.
Schroeder, H., M.T. Boykoff, and L. Spiers, 2012: Equity and state representations in
climate negotiations. Nature Climate Change, 2, 834-836,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1742.
Schurer, A.P., M.E. Mann, E. Hawkins, S.F.B. Tett, and G.C. Hegerl, 2017: Importance
of the pre-industrial baseline for likelihood of exceeding Paris goals. Nature
Climate Change, 7(8), 563-567,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3345.
Seneviratne, S.I., M.G. Donat, A.J. Pitman, R. Knutti, and R.L. Wilby, 2016: Allowable
CO2 emissions based on regional and impact-related climate targets. Nature,
529(7587), 477-483, doi:10.1038/nature16542.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2012: Changes in climate extremes and their impacts on
the natural physical environment. In: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events
and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of
Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D.
Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 109-230.
Settele, J. et al., 2014: Terrestrial and inland water systems. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 271-359.
Shelton, D., 2008: Equity. In: The Oxford Handbook of International Environmental
Law [Bodansky, D., J. Brunnee, and E. Hey (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK, pp. 639-662, doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199552153.013.0027.
Shiferaw, B. et al., 2014: Managing vulnerability to drought and enhancing
livelihood resilience in sub-Saharan Africa: Technological, institutional and
policy options. Weather and Climate Extremes, 3, 67-79,
doi:10.1016/j.wace.2014.04.004.
Shindell, D.T., 2015: The social cost of atmospheric release. Climatic Change,
130(2), 313-326, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1343-0.
Shindell, D.T., Y. Lee, and G. Faluvegi, 2016: Climate and health impacts of US
emissions reductions consistent with 2C. Nature Climate Change, 6, 503-
507, doi:10.1038/nclimate2935.
Shindell, D.T., J.S. Fuglestvedt, and W.J. Collins, 2017: The social cost of methane:
theory and applications. Faraday Discussions, 200, 429-451,
doi:10.1039/c7fd00009j.
Shine, K.P., J.S. Fuglestvedt, K. Hailemariam, and N. Stuber, 2005: Alternatives to
the Global Warming Potential for comparing climate impacts of emissions of
greenhouse gases. Climatic Change, 68(3), 281-302,
doi:10.1007/s10584-005-1146-9.
Shine, K.P., R.P. Allan, W.J. Collins, and J.S. Fuglestvedt, 2015: Metrics for linking
emissions of gases and aerosols to global precipitation changes. Earth System
Dynamics, 6(2), 525-540, doi:10.5194/esd-6-525-2015.
Shue, H., 2013: Climate Hope: Implementing the Exit Strategy. Chicago Journal of
International Law, 13(2), 381-402,
https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cjil/vol13/iss2/6/.
Shue, H., 2014: Climate Justice: Vulnerability and Protection. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK, 368 pp.
Shue, H., 2018: Mitigation gambles: uncertainty, urgency and the last gamble
possible. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119),
doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0105.

89

1

Chapter 1

1

Shukla, P.R. and V. Chaturvedi, 2013: Sustainable energy transformations in India
under climate policy. Sustainable Development, 21(1), 48-59,
doi:10.1002/sd.516.
Simmons, A.J. et al., 2017: A reassessment of temperature variations and trends
from global reanalyses and monthly surface climatological datasets.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 143(702), 101-119,
doi:10.1002/qj.2949.
Simpson, M. et al., 2016: Decision Analysis for Management of Natural Hazards.
Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 41(1), 489-516,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-090011.
Sitch, S., P.M. Cox, W.J. Collins, and C. Huntingford, 2007: Indirect radiative forcing
of climate change through ozone effects on the land-carbon sink. Nature,
448(7155), 791-794, doi:10.1038/nature06059.
Skeie, R.B. et al., 2017: Perspective has a strong effect on the calculation of
historical contributions to global warming. Environmental Research Letters,
12(2), 024022, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5b0a.
Smith, C.J. et al., 2018: FAIR v1.3: a simple emissions-based impulse response and
carbon cycle model. Geoscientific Model Development, 11(6), 2273-2297,
doi:10.5194/gmd-11-2273-2018.
Smith, S.J. and P.J. Rasch, 2013: The long-term policy context for solar radiation
management. Climatic Change, 121(3), 487-497,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0577-3.
Smith, S.J., J. Karas, J. Edmonds, J. Eom, and A. Mizrahi, 2013: Sensitivity of multigas climate policy to emission metrics. Climatic Change, 117(4), 663-675,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0565-7.
Smith, S.M. et al., 2012: Equivalence of greenhouse-gas emissions for peak
temperature limits. Nature Climate Change, 2(7), 535-538,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1496.
Solecki, W., M. Pelling, and M. Garschagen, 2017: Transitions between risk
management regimes in cities. Ecology and Society, 22(2), 38,
doi:10.5751/es-09102-220238.
Solomon, S., G.-K.G. Plattner, R. Knutti, and P. Friedlingstein, 2009: Irreversible
climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106(6), 1704-9,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0812721106.
Somanathan, E. et al., 2014: National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1141-1205.
Sovacool, B.K., B.-O. Linner, and M.E. Goodsite, 2015: The political economy of
climate adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 5(7), 616-618,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2665.
Stavins, R. et al., 2014: International Cooperation: Agreements and Instruments. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1001-1082.
Steffen, W. et al., 2016: Stratigraphic and Earth System approaches to defining the
Anthropocene. Earth's Future, 4(8), 324-345,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000379.
Sterner, E., D.J.A. Johansson, and C. Azar, 2014: Emission metrics and sea level rise.
Climatic Change, 127(2), 335-351, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1258-1.
Stocker, T.F. et al., 2013: Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 33-115.
Stone, D. et al., 2013: The challenge to detect and attribute effects of climate
change on human and natural systems. Climatic Change, 121(2), 381-395,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0873-6.
Strefler, J., G. Luderer, T. Aboumahboub, and E. Kriegler, 2014: Economic impacts
of alternative greenhouse gas emission metrics: a model-based assessment.
Climatic Change, 125(3-4), 319-331, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1188-y.

90

Framing and Context
Summerhayes, C.P., 2015: Earth's Climate Evolution. John Wiley & Sons Ltd,
Chichester, UK, 394 pp., doi:10.1002/9781118897362.
Tabara, J.D. et al., 2018: Positive tipping points in a rapidly warming world. Current
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 120-129,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.01.012.
Tanaka, K. and B.C. O'Neill, 2018: The Paris Agreement zero-emissions goal is
not always consistent with the 1.5C and 2C temperature targets. Nature
Climate Change, 8(4), 319-324, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0097-x.
Taylor, K.E., R.J. Stouffer, and G.A. Meehl, 2012: An overview of CMIP5 and the
experiment design. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 93(4),
485-498, doi:10.1175/bams-d-11-00094.1.
Termeer, C.J.A.M., A. Dewulf, and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational change:
governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a continuous
change perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
60(4), 558-576, doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
The Royal Society, 2009: Geoengineering the climate: science, governance and
uncertainty. RS Policy document 10/09, The Royal Society, London, UK, 82 pp.
Tokarska, K.B. and K. Zickfeld, 2015: The effectiveness of net negative carbon
dioxide emissions in reversing anthropogenic climate change. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(9), 094013, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/9/094013.
Tokarska, K.B. and N.P. Gillett, 2018: Cumulative carbon emissions budgets
consistent with 1.5C global warming. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 296-
299, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0118-9.
Tol, R.S.J., T.K. Berntsen, B.C. O'Neill, Fuglestvedt, and P.S. Keith, 2012: A unifying
framework for metrics for aggregating the climate effect of different
emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 7(4), 044006.
Tschakert, P., B. van Oort, A.L. St. Clair, and A. LaMadrid, 2013: Inequality and
transformation analyses: a complementary lens for addressing vulnerability
to climate change. Climate and Development, 5(4), 340-350,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2013.828583.
Tschakert, P. et al., 2017: Climate change and loss, as if people mattered: values,
places, and experiences. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change,
8(5), e476, doi:10.1002/wcc.476.
UN, 2015a: The Millennium Development Goals Report 2015. United Nations
(UN), New York, NY, USA, 75 pp.
UN, 2015b: Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
A/RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), 35 pp.
UNDP, 2016: Human Development Report 2016: Human Development for
Everyone. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), New York, NY,
USA, 286 pp.
UNFCCC, 2016: Aggregate effect of the intended nationally determined
contributions: an update. FCCC/CP/2016/2, United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 75 pp.
van Oldenborgh, G.J. et al., 2017: Attribution of extreme rainfall from Hurricane
Harvey, August 2017. Environmental Research Letters, 12(12), 124009,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9ef2.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2011: The representative concentration pathways: An
overview. Climatic Change, 109(1), 5-31,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0148-z.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for Climate Change
Research: Scenario matrix architecture. Climatic Change, 122(3), 373-386,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0906-1.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2015: Pathways to achieve a set of ambitious global
sustainability objectives by 2050: Explorations using the IMAGE integrated
assessment model. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 98, 303-
323, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2015.03.005.
Vautard, R. et al., 2014:The European climate under a 2C global warming. Environmental
Research Letters, 9(3), 034006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/3/034006.
Vincent, K.E., P. Tschakert, J. Barnett, M.G. Rivera-Ferre, and A. Woodward, 2014:
Cross-chapter box on gender and climate change. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 105-107.
Visser, H., S. Dangendorf, D.P. van Vuuren, B. Bregman, and A.C. Petersen, 2018:
Signal detection in global mean temperatures after "Paris": an uncertainty
and sensitivity analysis. Climate of the Past, 14(2), 139-155,
doi:10.5194/cp-14-139-2018.

Framing and Context

Chapter 1

von Stechow, C. et al., 2015: Integrating Global Climate Change Mitigation
Goals with Other Sustainability Objectives: A Synthesis. Annual Review of
Environment and Resources, 40(1), 363-394,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-021113-095626.
von Stechow, C. et al., 2016: 2C and the SDGs: United they stand, divided they
fall? Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034022.
Vose, R.S. et al., 2012: NOAA's merged land-ocean surface temperature analysis.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 93(11), 1677-1685,
doi:10.1175/bams-d-11-00241.1.
Waters, C.N. et al., 2016: The Anthropocene is functionally and stratigraphically
distinct from the Holocene. Science, 351(6269), aad2622-aad2622,
doi:10.1126/science.aad2622.
WCED, 1987: Our Common Future. World Commission on Environment and
Development (WCED), Geneva, Switzerland, 383 pp., doi:10.2307/2621529.
Weber, H., 2017: Politics of `Leaving No One Behind': Contesting the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals Agenda. Globalizations, 14(3), 399-414,
doi:10.1080/14747731.2016.1275404.
Whitmarsh, L., S. O'Neill, and I. Lorenzoni (eds.), 2011: Engaging the Public with
Climate Change: Behaviour Change and Communication. Earthscan, London,
UK and Washington, DC, USA, 289 pp.
Wigley, T.M.L., 2018: The Paris warming targets: emissions requirements and sea
level consequences. Climatic Change, 147(1-2), 31-45,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2119-5.
Williams, R.G., V. Roussenov, T.L. Frolicher, and P. Goodwin, 2017: Drivers of
Continued Surface Warming After Cessation of Carbon Emissions. Geophysical
Research Letters, 44(20), 10,633-10,642, doi:10.1002/2017gl075080.
Winkler, I.T. and M.L. Satterthwaite, 2017: Leaving no one behind? Persistent
inequalities in the SDGs. The International Journal of Human Rights, 21(8),
1073-1097, doi:10.1080/13642987.2017.1348702.
Wise, R.M. et al., 2014: Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as part
of pathways of change and response. Global Environmental Change, 28,
325-336, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.002.
World Bank, 2013: Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts, and
the Case for Resilience. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 254 pp.
Wright, H., S. Huq, and J. Reeves, 2015: Impact of climate change on least developed
countries: are the SDGs possible? IIED Briefing May 2015, International
Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London, UK, 4 pp.
Xu, Y. and V. Ramanathan, 2017: Well below 2C: Mitigation strategies for avoiding
dangerous to catastrophic climate changes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 1-9, doi:10.1073/pnas.1618481114.
Zalasiewicz, J. et al., 2017: Making the case for a formal Anthropocene Epoch: an
analysis of ongoing critiques. Newsletters on Stratigraphy, 50(2), 205-226,
doi:10.1127/nos/2017/0385.
Zickfeld, K., A.H. MacDougall, and H.D. Matthews, 2016: On the proportionality
between global temperature change and cumulative CO2 emissions during
periods of net negative CO2 emissions. Environmental Research Letters,
11(5), 055006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/055006.
Zickfeld, K., M. Eby, H.D. Matthews, and A.J. Weaver, 2009: Setting cumulative
emissions targets to reduce the risk of dangerous climate change. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(38), 16129-16134,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0805800106.
Zscheischler, J. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2017: Dependence of drivers affects risks
associated with compound events. Science Advances, 3(6), e1700263,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1700263.

1

91

2

Mitigation Pathways
Compatible with 1.5C
in the Context
of Sustainable Development
Coordinating Lead Authors:
Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Drew Shindell (USA), Kejun Jiang (China)

Lead Authors:
Solomone Fifita (Fiji), Piers Forster (UK), Veronika Ginzburg (Russia), Collins Handa (Kenya), Haroon
Kheshgi (USA), Shigeki Kobayashi (Japan), Elmar Kriegler (Germany), Luis Mundaca (Sweden/Chile),
Roland Seferian (France), Maria Virginia Vilarino (Argentina)

Contributing Authors:
Katherine Calvin (USA), Joana Correia de Oliveira de Portugal Pereira (UK/Portugal), Oreane
Edelenbosch (Netherlands/Italy), Johannes Emmerling (Italy/Germany), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Thomas
Gasser (Austria/France), Nathan Gillett (Canada), Chenmin He (China), Edgar Hertwich (USA/Austria),
Lena Hoglund-Isaksson (Austria/Sweden), Daniel Huppmann (Austria), Gunnar Luderer (Germany), Anil
Markandya (Spain/UK), David L. McCollum (USA/Austria), Malte Meinshausen (Australia/Germany),
Richard Millar (UK), Alexander Popp (Germany), Pallav Purohit (Austria/India), Keywan Riahi (Austria),
Aurelien Ribes (France), Harry Saunders (Canada/USA), Christina Schadel (USA/Switzerland), Chris
Smith (UK), Pete Smith (UK), Evelina Trutnevyte (Switzerland/Lithuania), Yang Xiu (China), Wenji Zhou
(Austria/China), Kirsten Zickfeld (Canada/Germany)

Chapter Scientists:
Daniel Huppmann (Austria), Chris Smith (UK)

Review Editors:
Greg Flato (Canada), Jan Fuglestvedt (Norway), Rachid Mrabet (Morocco), Roberto Schaeffer (Brazil)

This chapter should be cited as:
Rogelj, J., D. Shindell, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. Forster, V. Ginzburg, C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayashi, E. Kriegler, L. Mundaca,
R. Seferian, and M.V. Vilarino, 2018: Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable
Development. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte,
V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

93

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Table of Contents
Executive Summary......................................................................95
2.1


2

Introduction to Mitigation Pathways and
the Sustainable Development Context.....................98

2.1.1

Mitigation Pathways Consistent with 1.5C..................98

2.1.2

The Use of Scenarios....................................................98

2.1.3

New Scenario Information since AR5............................99

2.1.4


Utility of Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs)
in the Context of this Report.......................................100

2.2

Geophysical Relationships and Constraints..........101

2.2.1

Geophysical Characteristics of Mitigation Pathways...101

2.2.2

The Remaining 1.5C Carbon Budget..........................104

2.3

Overview of 1.5C Mitigation Pathways................108

2.3.1

Range of Assumptions Underlying 1.5C Pathways.....109

2.3.2

Key Characteristics of 1.5C Pathways........................112

2.3.3

Emissions Evolution in 1.5C Pathways.......................115

2.3.4

CDR in 1.5C Pathways...............................................118

Box 2.1: Bioenergy and BECCS Deployment
in Integrated Assessment Modelling.....................................124
2.3.5

Implications of Near-Term Action in 1.5C Pathways...126

2.4
Disentangling the Whole-System
 Transformation...............................................................129
2.4.1

Energy System Transformation....................................129

2.4.2

Energy Supply..............................................................130

2.4.3

Energy End-Use Sectors...............................................136

2.4.4


Land-Use Transitions and Changes in
the Agricultural Sector.................................................144

2.5


Challenges, Opportunities and Co-Impacts
of Transformative Mitigation Pathways.................148

2.5.1

Policy Frameworks and Enabling Conditions...............148

Cross-Chapter Box 5 | Economics of 1.5C Pathways
and the Social Cost of Carbon................................................150
2.5.2
Economic and Investment Implications of 1.5C
 Pathways.....................................................................152
2.5.3


94

Sustainable Development Features
of 1.5C Pathways.......................................................156

2.6

Knowledge Gaps............................................................157

2.6.1

Geophysical Understanding........................................157

2.6.2

Integrated Assessment Approaches.............................158

2.6.3

Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)...................................158

Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 2.1: What Kind of Pathways Limit Warming
to 1.5C and are we on Track?............................................159
FAQ 2.2: What do Energy Supply and Demand
have to do with Limiting Warming to 1.5C?......................161

References ....................................................................................163

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Executive Summary
This chapter assesses mitigation pathways consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. In doing so, it explores
the following key questions: What role do CO2 and non-CO2 emissions
play? {2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.6} To what extent do 1.5C pathways involve
overshooting and returning below 1.5C during the 21st century? {2.2,
2.3} What are the implications for transitions in energy, land use and
sustainable development? {2.3, 2.4, 2.5} How do policy frameworks
affect the ability to limit warming to 1.5C? {2.3, 2.5} What are the
associated knowledge gaps? {2.6}
The assessed pathways describe integrated, quantitative
evolutions of all emissions over the 21st century associated
with global energy and land use and the world economy. The
assessment is contingent upon available integrated assessment
literature and model assumptions, and is complemented by other
studies with different scope, for example, those focusing on individual
sectors. In recent years, integrated mitigation studies have improved
the characterizations of mitigation pathways. However, limitations
remain, as climate damages, avoided impacts, or societal co-benefits
of the modelled transformations remain largely unaccounted for, while
concurrent rapid technological changes, behavioural aspects, and
uncertainties about input data present continuous challenges. (high
confidence) {2.1.3, 2.3, 2.5.1, 2.6, Technical Annex 2}

The Chances of Limiting Warming to 1.5C
and the Requirements for Urgent Action
Pathways consistent with 1.5C of warming above pre-industrial
levels can be identified under a range of assumptions about
economic growth, technology developments and lifestyles.
However, lack of global cooperation, lack of governance of the required
energy and land transformation, and increases in resource-intensive
consumption are key impediments to achieving 1.5C pathways.
Governance challenges have been related to scenarios with high
inequality and high population growth in the 1.5C pathway literature.
{2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.5}
Under emissions in line with current pledges under the Paris
Agreement (known as Nationally Determined Contributions,
or NDCs), global warming is expected to surpass 1.5C above
pre-industrial levels, even if these pledges are supplemented
with very challenging increases in the scale and ambition of
mitigation after 2030 (high confidence). This increased action
would need to achieve net zero CO2 emissions in less than 15 years.
Even if this is achieved, temperatures would only be expected to remain
below the 1.5C threshold if the actual geophysical response ends up
being towards the low end of the currently estimated uncertainty range.
Transition challenges as well as identified trade-offs can be reduced if
global emissions peak before 2030 and marked emissions reductions
compared to today are already achieved by 2030. {2.2, 2.3.5, CrossChapter Box 11 in Chapter 4}

1

Chapter 2

Limiting warming to 1.5C depends on greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions over the next decades, where lower GHG emissions in
2030 lead to a higher chance of keeping peak warming to 1.5C
(high confidence). Available pathways that aim for no or limited (less
than 0.1C) overshoot of 1.5C keep GHG emissions in 2030 to 25-30
GtCO2e yr-1 in 2030 (interquartile range). This contrasts with median
estimates for current unconditional NDCs of 52-58 GtCO2e yr-1 in
2030. Pathways that aim for limiting warming to 1.5C by 2100 after
a temporary temperature overshoot rely on large-scale deployment
of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) measures, which are uncertain and
entail clear risks. In model pathways with no or limited overshoot of
1.5C, global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions decline by about 45%
from 2010 levels by 2030 (40-60% interquartile range), reaching net
zero around 2050 (2045-2055 interquartile range). For limiting global
warming to below 2C with at least 66% probability CO2 emissions
are projected to decline by about 25% by 2030 in most pathways (10-
30% interquartile range) and reach net zero around 2070 (2065-2080
interquartile range).1 {2.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.5, 2.5.3, Cross-Chapter Boxes 6 in
Chapter 3 and 9 in Chapter 4, 4.3.7}
Limiting warming to 1.5C implies reaching net zero CO2
emissions globally around 2050 and concurrent deep reductions
in emissions of non-CO2 forcers, particularly methane (high
confidence). Such mitigation pathways are characterized by energydemand reductions, decarbonization of electricity and other fuels,
electrification of energy end use, deep reductions in agricultural
emissions, and some form of CDR with carbon storage on land or
sequestration in geological reservoirs. Low energy demand and low
demand for land- and GHG-intensive consumption goods facilitate
limiting warming to as close as possible to 1.5C. {2.2.2, 2.3.1, 2.3.5,
2.5.1, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4}.
In comparison to a 2C limit, the transformations required to limit
warming to 1.5C are qualitatively similar but more pronounced
and rapid over the next decades (high confidence). 1.5C implies
very ambitious, internationally cooperative policy environments that
transform both supply and demand (high confidence). {2.3, 2.4, 2.5}
Policies reflecting a high price on emissions are necessary
in models to achieve cost-effective 1.5C pathways (high
confidence). Other things being equal, modelling studies suggest
the global average discounted marginal abatement costs for limiting
warming to 1.5C being about 3-4 times higher compared to 2C
over the 21st century, with large variations across models and socioeconomic and policy assumptions. Carbon pricing can be imposed
directly or implicitly by regulatory policies. Policy instruments, like
technology policies or performance standards, can complement explicit
carbon pricing in specific areas. {2.5.1, 2.5.2, 4.4.5}
Limiting warming to 1.5C requires a marked shift in investment
patterns (medium confidence). Additional annual average energyrelated investments for the period 2016 to 2050 in pathways limiting
warming to 1.5C compared to pathways without new climate policies
beyond those in place today (i.e., baseline) are estimated to be around

Kyoto-GHG emissions in this statement are aggregated with GWP-100 values of the IPCC Second Assessment Report.

95

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

830 billion USD2010 (range of 150 billion to 1700 billion USD2010
across six models). Total energy-related investments increase by about
12% (range of 3% to 24%) in 1.5C pathways relative to 2C pathways.
Average annual investment in low-carbon energy technologies and
energy efficiency are upscaled by roughly a factor of six (range of factor
of 4 to 10) by 2050 compared to 2015, overtaking fossil investments
globally by around 2025 (medium confidence). Uncertainties and
strategic mitigation portfolio choices affect the magnitude and focus
of required investments. {2.5.2}

Future Emissions in 1.5C Pathways

2

Mitigation requirements can be quantified using carbon budget
approaches that relate cumulative CO2 emissions to global mean
temperature increase. Robust physical understanding underpins
this relationship, but uncertainties become increasingly relevant as a
specific temperature limit is approached. These uncertainties relate to
the transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions (TCRE),
non-CO2 emissions, radiative forcing and response, potential additional
Earth system feedbacks (such as permafrost thawing), and historical
emissions and temperature. {2.2.2, 2.6.1}
Cumulative CO2 emissions are kept within a budget by reducing
global annual CO2 emissions to net zero. This assessment
suggests a remaining budget of about 420 GtCO2 for a twothirds chance of limiting warming to 1.5C, and of about 580
GtCO2 for an even chance (medium confidence). The remaining
carbon budget is defined here as cumulative CO2 emissions from the
start of 2018 until the time of net zero global emissions for global
warming defined as a change in global near-surface air temperatures.
Remaining budgets applicable to 2100 would be approximately
100 GtCO2 lower than this to account for permafrost thawing and
potential methane release from wetlands in the future, and more
thereafter. These estimates come with an additional geophysical
uncertainty of at least 400 GtCO2, related to non-CO2 response
and TCRE distribution. Uncertainties in the level of historic warming
contribute 250 GtCO2. In addition, these estimates can vary by
250 GtCO2 depending on non-CO2 mitigation strategies as found in
available pathways. {2.2.2, 2.6.1}

aerosol) affects carbon budgets and the certainty of pathway
categorizations. Some non-CO2 forcers are emitted alongside CO2,
particularly in the energy and transport sectors, and can be largely
addressed through CO2 mitigation. Others require specific measures,
for example, to target agricultural nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane
(CH4), some sources of black carbon, or hydrofluorocarbons (high
confidence). In many cases, non-CO2 emissions reductions are similar
in 2C pathways, indicating reductions near their assumed maximum
potential by integrated assessment models. Emissions of N2O and
NH3 increase in some pathways with strongly increased bioenergy
demand. {2.2.2, 2.3.1, 2.4.2, 2.5.3}

The Role of Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)
All analysed pathways limiting warming to 1.5C with no
or limited overshoot use CDR to some extent to neutralize
emissions from sources for which no mitigation measures
have been identified and, in most cases, also to achieve
net negative emissions to return global warming to 1.5C
following a peak (high confidence). The longer the delay in
reducing CO2 emissions towards zero, the larger the likelihood
of exceeding 1.5C, and the heavier the implied reliance on
net negative emissions after mid-century to return warming to
1.5C (high confidence). The faster reduction of net CO2 emissions
in 1.5C compared to 2C pathways is predominantly achieved by
measures that result in less CO2 being produced and emitted, and
only to a smaller degree through additional CDR. Limitations on
the speed, scale and societal acceptability of CDR deployment also
limit the conceivable extent of temperature overshoot. Limits to our
understanding of how the carbon cycle responds to net negative
emissions increase the uncertainty about the effectiveness of CDR to
decline temperatures after a peak. {2.2, 2.3, 2.6, 4.3.7}
CDR deployed at scale is unproven, and reliance on such
technology is a major risk in the ability to limit warming to
1.5C. CDR is needed less in pathways with particularly strong
emphasis on energy efficiency and low demand. The scale and
type of CDR deployment varies widely across 1.5C pathways,
with different consequences for achieving sustainable
development objectives (high confidence). Some pathways rely
more on bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), while
others rely more on afforestation, which are the two CDR methods
most often included in integrated pathways. Trade-offs with other
sustainability objectives occur predominantly through increased land,
energy, water and investment demand. Bioenergy use is substantial
in 1.5C pathways with or without BECCS due to its multiple roles in
decarbonizing energy use. {2.3.1, 2.5.3, 2.6.3, 4.3.7}

Staying within a remaining carbon budget of 580 GtCO2 implies
that CO2 emissions reach carbon neutrality in about 30 years,
reduced to 20 years for a 420 GtCO2 remaining carbon budget
(high confidence). The 400 GtCO2 geophysical uncertainty range
surrounding a carbon budget translates into a variation of this timing
of carbon neutrality of roughly 15-20 years. If emissions do not start
declining in the next decade, the point of carbon neutrality would need
to be reached at least two decades earlier to remain within the same
carbon budget. {2.2.2, 2.3.5}

Properties of Energy and Land Transitions in 1.5C Pathways

Non-CO2 emissions contribute to peak warming and thus
affect the remaining carbon budget. The evolution of
methane and sulphur dioxide emissions strongly influences
the chances of limiting warming to 1.5C. In the near-term, a
weakening of aerosol cooling would add to future warming,
but can be tempered by reductions in methane emissions (high
confidence). Uncertainty in radiative forcing estimates (particularly

The share of primary energy from renewables increases while
coal usage decreases across pathways limiting warming to
1.5C with no or limited overshoot (high confidence). By 2050,
renewables (including bioenergy, hydro, wind, and solar, with directequivalence method) supply a share of 52-67% (interquartile range)
of primary energy in 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot;
while the share from coal decreases to 1-7% (interquartile range),

96

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

with a large fraction of this coal use combined with carbon capture
and storage (CCS). From 2020 to 2050 the primary energy supplied
by oil declines in most pathways (-39 to -77% interquartile range).
Natural gas changes by -13% to -62% (interquartile range), but
some pathways show a marked increase albeit with widespread
deployment of CCS. The overall deployment of CCS varies widely
across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot, with cumulative
CO2 stored through 2050 ranging from zero up to 300 GtCO2
(minimum-maximum range), of which zero up to 140 GtCO2 is stored
from biomass. Primary energy supplied by bioenergy ranges from
40-310 EJ yr-1 in 2050 (minimum-maximum range), and nuclear from
3-66 EJ yr-1 (minimum-maximum range). These ranges reflect both
uncertainties in technological development and strategic mitigation
portfolio choices. {2.4.2}

Chapter 2

Links between 1.5C Pathways and Sustainable Development
Choices about mitigation portfolios for limiting warming to
1.5C can positively or negatively impact the achievement of
other societal objectives, such as sustainable development
(high confidence). In particular, demand-side and efficiency
measures, and lifestyle choices that limit energy, resource, and
GHG-intensive food demand support sustainable development
(medium confidence). Limiting warming to 1.5C can be achieved
synergistically with poverty alleviation and improved energy security
and can provide large public health benefits through improved air
quality, preventing millions of premature deaths. However, specific
mitigation measures, such as bioenergy, may result in trade-offs that
require consideration. {2.5.1, 2.5.2, 2.5.3}

2

1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot include a rapid
decline in the carbon intensity of electricity and an increase
in electrification of energy end use (high confidence). By 2050,
the carbon intensity of electricity decreases to -92 to +11 gCO2 MJ-1
(minimum-maximum range) from about 140 gCO2 MJ-1 in 2020,
and electricity covers 34-71% (minimum-maximum range) of final
energy across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot from
about 20% in 2020. By 2050, the share of electricity supplied by
renewables increases to 59-97% (minimum-maximum range) across
1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot. Pathways with higher
chances of holding warming to below 1.5C generally show a faster
decline in the carbon intensity of electricity by 2030 than pathways
that temporarily overshoot 1.5C. {2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.3}
Transitions in global and regional land use are found in all
pathways limiting global warming to 1.5C with no or limited
overshoot, but their scale depends on the pursued mitigation
portfolio (high confidence). Pathways that limit global warming to
1.5C with no or limited overshoot project a 4 million km2 reduction
to a 2.5 million km2 increase of non-pasture agricultural land for food
and feed crops and a 0.5-11 million km2 reduction of pasture land,
to be converted into 0-6 million km2 of agricultural land for energy
crops and a 2 million km2 reduction to 9.5 million km2 increase in
forests by 2050 relative to 2010 (medium confidence). Land-use
transitions of similar magnitude can be observed in modelled 2C
pathways (medium confidence). Such large transitions pose profound
challenges for sustainable management of the various demands on
land for human settlements, food, livestock feed, fibre, bioenergy,
carbon storage, biodiversity and other ecosystem services (high
confidence). {2.3.4, 2.4.4}

Demand-Side Mitigation and Behavioural Changes
Demand-side measures are key elements of 1.5C pathways.
Lifestyle choices lowering energy demand and the land- and
GHG-intensity of food consumption can further support
achievement of 1.5C pathways (high confidence). By 2030 and
2050, all end-use sectors (including building, transport, and industry)
show marked energy demand reductions in modelled 1.5C pathways,
comparable and beyond those projected in 2C pathways. Sectoral
models support the scale of these reductions. {2.3.4, 2.4.3, 2.5.1}

97

Chapter 2

2.1

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Introduction to Mitigation Pathways and
the Sustainable Development Context

This chapter assesses the literature on mitigation pathways to limit or
return global mean warming to 1.5C (relative to the pre-industrial
base period 1850-1900). Key questions addressed are: What types of
mitigation pathways have been developed that could be consistent
with 1.5C? What changes in emissions, energy and land use do they
entail? What do they imply for climate policy and implementation, and
what impacts do they have on sustainable development? In terms of
feasibility (see Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1), this chapter focuses
on geophysical dimensions and technological and economic enabling
factors. Social and institutional dimensions as well as additional
aspects of technical feasibility are covered in Chapter 4.
Mitigation pathways are typically designed to reach a predefined
climate target alone. Minimization of mitigation expenditures, but
not climate-related damages or sustainable development impacts,
is often the basis for these pathways to the desired climate target
(see Cross-Chapter Box 5 in this chapter for additional discussion).
However, there are interactions between mitigation and multiple other
sustainable development goals (see Sections 1.1 and 5.4) that provide
both challenges and opportunities for climate action. Hence there are
substantial efforts to evaluate the effects of the various mitigation
pathways on sustainable development, focusing in particular on
aspects for which integrated assessment models (IAMs) provide
relevant information (e.g., land-use changes and biodiversity, food
security, and air quality). More broadly, there are efforts to incorporate
climate change mitigation as one of multiple objectives that, in general,
reflect societal concerns more completely and could potentially provide
benefits at lower costs than simultaneous single-objective policies
(e.g., Clarke et al., 2014). For example, with carefully selected policies,
universal energy access can be achieved while simultaneously reducing
air pollution and mitigating climate change (McCollum et al., 2011;
Riahi et al., 2012; IEA, 2017d). This chapter thus presents both the
pathways and an initial discussion of their context within sustainable
development objectives (Section 2.5), with the latter, along with equity
and ethical issues, discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
As described in Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1, scenarios are
comprehensive, plausible, integrated descriptions of possible futures
based on specified, internally consistent underlying assumptions,
with pathways often used to describe the clear temporal evolution of
specific scenario aspects or goal-oriented scenarios. We include both
these usages of `pathways' here.

2.1.1

Mitigation Pathways Consistent with 1.5C

Emissions scenarios need to cover all sectors and regions over the
21st century to be associated with a climate change projection out to
2100. Assumptions regarding future trends in population, consumption
of goods and services (including food), economic growth, behaviour,
technology, policies and institutions are all required to generate

2

98

scenarios (Section 2.3.1). These societal choices must then be linked
to the drivers of climate change, including emissions of well-mixed
greenhouse gases and aerosol and ozone precursors as well as landuse and land-cover changes. Deliberate solar radiation modification is
not included in these scenarios (see Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4).
Plausible developments need to be anticipated in many facets of the
key sectors of energy and land use. Within energy, these scenarios
consider energy resources like biofuels, energy supply and conversion
technologies, energy consumption, and supply and end-use efficiency.
Within land use, agricultural productivity, food demand, terrestrial
carbon management, and biofuel production are all considered.
Climate policies are also considered, including carbon pricing and
technology policies such as research and development funding and
subsidies. The scenarios incorporate regional differentiation in sectoral
and policy development. The climate changes resulting from such
scenarios are derived using models that typically incorporate physical
understanding of the carbon cycle and climate response derived from
complex geophysical models evaluated against observations (Sections
2.2 and 2.6).
The temperature response to a given emission pathway (see glossary) is
uncertain and therefore quantified in terms of a probabilistic outcome.
Chapter 1 assesses the climate objectives of the Paris Agreement in
terms of human-induced warming, thus excluding potential impacts
of natural forcing such as volcanic eruptions or solar output changes
or unforced internal variability. Temperature responses in this chapter
are assessed using simple geophysically based models that evaluate
the anthropogenic component of future temperature change and do
not incorporate internal natural variations and are thus fit for purpose
in the context of this assessment (Section 2.2.1). Hence a scenario
that is consistent with 1.5C may in fact lead to either a higher or
lower temperature change, but within quantified and generally wellunderstood bounds (see also Chapter 1, Section 1.2.3). Consistency
with avoiding a human-induced temperature change limit must
therefore also be defined probabilistically, with likelihood values
selected based on risk-avoidance preferences. Responses beyond
global mean temperature are not typically evaluated in such models
and are assessed in Chapter 3.

2.1.2

The Use of Scenarios

Variations in scenario assumptions and design define to a large
degree which questions can be addressed with a specific scenario
set, for example, the exploration of implications of delayed climate
mitigation action. In this assessment, the following classes of 1.5Cand 2C-consistent scenarios are of particular interest to the topics
addressed in this chapter: (i) scenarios with the same climate target
over the 21st century but varying socio-economic assumptions
(Sections 2.3 and 2.4), (ii) pairs of scenarios with similar socioeconomic assumptions but with forcing targets aimed at 1.5C and 2C
(Section 2.3), and (iii) scenarios that follow the Nationally Determined
Contributions or NDCs2 until 2030 with much more stringent mitigation
action thereafter (Section 2.3.5).

Current pledges include those from the United States although they have stated their intention to withdraw in the future.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Characteristics of these pathways, such as emissions reduction rates,
time of peaking, and low-carbon energy deployment rates, can be
assessed as being consistent with 1.5C. However, they cannot be
assessed as `requirements' for 1.5C, unless a targeted analysis
is available that specifically asked whether there could be other
1.5C-consistent pathways without the characteristics in question. AR5
already assessed such targeted analyses, for example, asking which
technologies are important in order to keep open the possibility of
limiting warming to 2C (Clarke et al., 2014). By now, several such
targeted analyses are also available for questions related to 1.5C
(Luderer et al., 2013; Rogelj et al., 2013b; Bauer et al., 2018; Strefler
et al., 2018b; van Vuuren et al., 2018). This assessment distinguishes
between `consistent' and the much stronger concept of required
characteristics of 1.5C pathways wherever possible.
Ultimately, society will adjust the choices it makes as new information
becomes available and technical learning progresses, and these
adjustments can be in either direction. Earlier scenario studies have
shown, however, that deeper emissions reductions in the near term
hedge against the uncertainty of both climate response and future
technology availability (Luderer et al., 2013; Rogelj et al., 2013b; Clarke
et al., 2014). Not knowing what adaptations might be put in place in
the future, and due to limited studies, this chapter examines prospective
rather than iteratively adaptive mitigation pathways (Cross-Chapter
Box 1 in Chapter 1). Societal choices illustrated by scenarios may also
influence what futures are envisioned as possible or desirable and
hence whether those come into being (Beck and Mahony, 2017).

2.1.3

New Scenario Information since AR5

In this chapter, we extend the AR5 mitigation pathway assessment
based on new scenario literature. Updates in understanding of
climate sensitivity, transient climate response, radiative forcing, and
the cumulative carbon budget consistent with 1.5C are discussed in
Sections 2.2.
Mitigation pathways developed with detailed process-based
integrated assessment models (IAMs) covering all sectors and regions
over the 21st century describe an internally consistent and calibrated
(to historical trends) way to get from current developments to
meeting long-term climate targets like 1.5C (Clarke et al., 2014). The
overwhelming majority of available 1.5C pathways were generated
by such IAMs, and these pathways can be directly linked to climate
outcomes and their consistency with the 1.5C goal evaluated. The
AR5 similarly relied upon such studies, which were mainly discussed in
Chapter 6 of Working Group III (WGIII) (Clarke et al., 2014).
Since the AR5, several new, integrated multimodel studies have
appeared in the literature that explore specific characteristics of
scenarios more stringent than the lowest scenario category assessed
in AR5 that was assessed to limit warming below 2C with greater
than 66% likelihood (Rogelj et al., 2015b, 2018; Akimoto et al., 2017;
Marcucci et al., 2017; Su et al., 2017; Bauer et al., 2018; Bertram et
al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018; Holz et al., 2018b; Kriegler et al., 2018a;
Liu et al., 2018; Luderer et al., 2018; Strefler et al., 2018a; van Vuuren
et al., 2018; Vrontisi et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). Those scenarios
explore 1.5C-consistent pathways from multiple perspectives

Chapter 2

(see Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3), examining sensitivity to
assumptions regarding:
* socio-economic drivers and developments including energy and
food demand as, for example, characterized by the Shared SocioEconomic Pathways (SSPs; Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1)
* near-term climate policies describing different levels of strengthening
the NDCs
* the use of bioenergy and the availability and desirability of carbon
dioxide removal (CDR) technologies
A large number of these scenarios were collected in a scenario database
established for the assessment of this Special Report (Supplementary
Material 2.SM.1.3). Mitigation pathways were classified by four
factors: consistency with a temperature increase limit (as defined by
Chapter 1), whether they temporarily overshoot that limit, the extent
of this potential overshoot, and the likelihood of falling within these
bounds.
Specifically, they were put into classes that either kept surface
temperature increases below a given threshold throughout the 21st
century or returned to a value below 1.5C above pre-industrial levels
at some point before 2100 after temporarily exceeding that level earlier
- referred to as an overshoot (OS). Both groups were further separated
based on the probability of being below the threshold and the degree
of overshoot, respectively (Table 2.1). Pathways are uniquely classified,
with 1.5C-related classes given higher priority than 2C classes in
cases where a pathway would be applicable to either class.
The probability assessment used in the scenario classification is based
on simulations using two reduced-complexity carbon cycle, atmospheric
composition, and climate models: the `Model for the Assessment of
Greenhouse Gas-Induced Climate Change' (MAGICC) (Meinshausen
et al., 2011a), and the `Finite Amplitude Impulse Response' (FAIRv1.3)
model (Smith et al., 2018). For the purpose of this report, and to facilitate
comparison with AR5, the range of the key carbon cycle and climate
parameters for MAGICC and its setup are identical to those used in
AR5 WGIII (Clarke et al., 2014). For each mitigation pathway, MAGICC
and FAIR simulations provide probabilistic estimates of atmospheric
concentrations, radiative forcing and global temperature outcomes until
2100. However, the classification uses MAGICC probabilities directly for
traceability with AR5 and because this model is more established in the
literature. Nevertheless, the overall uncertainty assessment is based on
results from both models, which are considered in the context of the
latest radiative forcing estimates and observed temperatures (Etminan
et al., 2016; Smith et al., 2018) (Section 2.2 and Supplementary Material
2.SM.1.1). The comparison of these lines of evidence shows high
agreement in the relative temperature response of pathways, with
medium agreement on the precise absolute magnitude of warming,
introducing a level of imprecision in these attributes. Consideration of
the combined evidence here leads to medium confidence in the overall
geophysical characteristics of the pathways reported here.
In addition to the characteristics of the above-mentioned classes,
four illustrative pathway archetypes have been selected and are used
throughout this chapter to highlight specific features of and variations
across 1.5C pathways. These are chosen in particular to illustrate the
spectrum of CO2 emissions reduction patterns consistent with 1.5C,
99

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Table 2.1 | Classification of pathways that this chapter draws upon, along with the number of available pathways in each class. The definition of each class
is based on probabilities derived from the MAGICC model in a setup identical to AR5 WGIII (Clarke et al., 2014), as detailed in Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.4.
Pathway group

1.5C or
1.5C-consistent**

2

2C or
2C-consistent

Pathway Class

Pathway Selection Criteria and Description

Number of
Scenarios

Below-1.5C

Pathways limiting peak warming to below 1.5C during the entire 21st century
with 50-66% likelihood*

9

1.5C-low-OS

Pathways limiting median warming to below 1.5C in 2100 and with a
50-67% probability of temporarily overshooting that level earlier, generally
implying less than 0.1C higher peak warming than Below-1.5C pathways

44

1.5C-high-OS

Pathways limiting median warming to below 1.5C in 2100 and with a greater
than 67% probability of temporarily overshooting that level earlier, generally
implying 0.1-0.4C higher peak warming than Below-1.5C pathways

37

Lower-2C

Pathways limiting peak warming to below 2C during the entire 21st century
with greater than 66% likelihood

74

Higher-2C

Pathways assessed to keep peak warming to below 2C during the entire
21st century with 50-66% likelihood

58

Number of
Scenarios

90

132

* No pathways were available that achieve a greater than 66% probability of limiting warming below 1.5C during the entire 21st century based on the MAGICC model projections.
** This chapter uses the term 1.5C-consistent pathways to refer to pathways with no overshoot, with limited (low) overshoot, and with high overshoot. However, the Summary for Policymakers
 focusses on pathways with no or limited (low) overshoot.

ranging from very rapid and deep near-term decreases, facilitated
by efficiency and demand-side measures that lead to limited CDR
requirements, to relatively slower but still rapid emissions reductions
that lead to a temperature overshoot and necessitate large CDR
deployment later in the century (Section 2.3).

2.1.4

Utility of Integrated Assessment Models
(IAMs) in the Context of this Report

IAMs lie at the basis of the assessment of mitigation pathways in this
chapter, as much of the quantitative global scenario literature is derived
with such models. IAMs combine insights from various disciplines in a
single framework, resulting in a dynamic description of the coupled
energy-economy-land-climate system that cover the largest sources
of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from different
sectors. Many of the IAMs that contributed mitigation scenarios to this
assessment include a process-based description of the land system in
addition to the energy system (e.g., Popp et al., 2017), and several have
been extended to cover air pollutants (Rao et al., 2017) and water use
(Hejazi et al., 2014; Fricko et al., 2016; Mouratiadou et al., 2016). Such
integrated pathways hence allow the exploration of the whole-system
transformation, as well as the interactions, synergies, and tradeoffs between sectors, and, increasingly, questions beyond climate
mitigation (von Stechow et al., 2015). The models do not, however, fully
account for all constraints that could affect realization of pathways
(see Chapter 4).
Section 2.3 assesses the overall characteristics of 1.5C pathways
based on fully integrated pathways, while Sections 2.4 and 2.5 describe
underlying sectoral transformations, including insights from sectorspecific assessment models and pathways that are not derived from
IAMs. Such models provide detail in their domain of application and
make exogenous assumptions about cross-sectoral or global factors.
They often focus on a specific sector, such as the energy (Bruckner et
al., 2014; IEA, 2017a; Jacobson, 2017; OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017),
buildings (Lucon et al., 2014) or transport (Sims et al., 2014) sector, or
100

a specific country or region (Giannakidis et al., 2018). Sector-specific
pathways are assessed in relation to integrated pathways because they
cannot be directly linked to 1.5C by themselves if they do not extend
to 2100 or do not include all GHGs or aerosols from all sectors.
AR5 found sectoral 2C decarbonization strategies from IAMs to be
consistent with sector-specific studies (Clarke et al., 2014). A growing
body of literature on 100%-renewable energy scenarios has emerged
(e.g., see Creutzig et al., 2017; Jacobson et al., 2017), which goes
beyond the wide range of IAM projections of renewable energy shares
in 1.5C and 2C pathways. While the representation of renewable
energy resource potentials, technology costs and system integration in
IAMs has been updated since AR5, leading to higher renewable energy
deployments in many cases (Luderer et al., 2017; Pietzcker et al., 2017),
none of the IAM projections identify 100% renewable energy solutions
for the global energy system as part of cost-effective mitigation
pathways (Section 2.4.2). Bottom-up studies find higher mitigation
potentials in the industry, buildings, and transport sectors in 2030 than
realized in selected 2C pathways from IAMs (UNEP 2017), indicating
the possibility to strengthen sectoral decarbonization strategies until
2030 beyond the integrated 1.5C pathways assessed in this chapter
(Luderer et al., 2018).
Detailed, process-based IAMs are a diverse set of models ranging
from partial equilibrium energy-land models to computable general
equilibrium models of the global economy, from myopic to perfect
foresight models, and from models with to models without endogenous
technological change (Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2). The IAMs
used in this chapter have limited to no coverage of climate impacts.
They typically use GHG pricing mechanisms to induce emissions
reductions and associated changes in energy and land uses consistent
with the imposed climate goal. The scenarios generated by these
models are defined by the choice of climate goals and assumptions
about near-term climate policy developments. They are also shaped
by assumptions about mitigation potentials and technologies as well
as baseline developments such as, for example, those represented by

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

different Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs), especially those
pertaining to energy and food demand (Riahi et al., 2017). See Section
2.3.1 for discussion of these assumptions. Since the AR5, the scenario
literature has greatly expanded the exploration of these dimensions.
This includes low-demand scenarios (Grubler et al., 2018; van Vuuren
et al., 2018), scenarios taking into account a larger set of sustainable
development goals (Bertram et al., 2018), scenarios with restricted
availability of CDR technologies (Bauer et al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018;
Holz et al., 2018b; Kriegler et al., 2018a; Strefler et al., 2018b; van Vuuren
et al., 2018), scenarios with near-term action dominated by regulatory
policies (Kriegler et al., 2018a) and scenario variations across the
SSPs (Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018). IAM results depend upon
multiple underlying assumptions, for example, the extent to which
global markets and economies are assumed to operate frictionless
and policies are cost-optimized, assumptions about technological
progress and availability and costs of mitigation and CDR measures,
assumptions about underlying socio-economic developments and
future energy, food and materials demand, and assumptions about
the geographic and temporal pattern of future regulatory and carbon
pricing policies (see Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2 for additional
discussion on IAMs and their limitations).

2.2

Geophysical Relationships and Constraints

Emissions pathways can be characterized by various geophysical
characteristics, such as radiative forcing (Masui et al., 2011; Riahi et
al., 2011; Thomson et al., 2011; van Vuuren et al., 2011b), atmospheric
concentrations (van Vuuren et al., 2007, 2011a; Clarke et al., 2014) or
associated temperature outcomes (Meinshausen et al., 2009; Rogelj
et al., 2011; Luderer et al., 2013). These attributes can be used to
derive geophysical relationships for specific pathway classes, such as
cumulative CO2 emissions compatible with a specific level of warming,
also known as `carbon budgets' (Meinshausen et al., 2009; Rogelj et al.,
2011; Stocker et al., 2013; Friedlingstein et al., 2014a), the consistent
contributions of non-CO2 GHGs and aerosols to the remaining carbon
budget (Bowerman et al., 2011; Rogelj et al., 2015a, 2016b), or to
temperature outcomes (Lamarque et al., 2011; Bowerman et al., 2013;
Rogelj et al., 2014b). This section assesses geophysical relationships for
both CO2 and non-CO2 emissions (see glossary).

2.2.1

Geophysical Characteristics of Mitigation Pathways

This section employs the pathway classification introduced in Section
2.1, with geophysical characteristics derived from simulations with
the MAGICC reduced-complexity carbon cycle and climate model and
supported by simulations with the FAIR reduced-complexity model
(Section 2.1). Within a specific category and between models, there
remains a large degree of variance. Most pathways exhibit a temperature
overshoot which has been highlighted in several studies focusing on
stringent mitigation pathways (Huntingford and Lowe, 2007; Wigley
et al., 2007; Nohara et al., 2015; Rogelj et al., 2015d; Zickfeld and
Herrington, 2015; Schleussner et al., 2016; Xu and Ramanathan,
2017). Only very few of the scenarios collected in the database for
this report hold the average future warming projected by MAGICC
below 1.5C during the entire 21st century (Table 2.1, Figure 2.1). Most

Chapter 2

1.5C-consistent pathways available in the database overshoot 1.5C
around mid-century before peaking and then reducing temperatures
so as to return below that level in 2100. However, because of
numerous geophysical uncertainties and model dependencies (Section
2.2.1.1, Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1), absolute temperature
characteristics of the various pathway categories are more difficult to
distinguish than relative features (Figure 2.1, Supplementary Material
2.SM.1.1), and actual probabilities of overshoot are imprecise. However,
all lines of evidence available for temperature projections indicate a
probability greater than 50% of overshooting 1.5C by mid-century in
all but the most stringent pathways currently available (Supplementary
Material 2.SM.1.1, 2.SM.1.4).
Most 1.5C-consistent pathways exhibit a peak in temperature by midcentury whereas 2C-consistent pathways generally peak after 2050
(Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.4). The peak in median temperature
in the various pathway categories occurs about ten years before
reaching net zero CO2 emissions due to strongly reduced annual
CO2 emissions and deep reductions in CH4 emissions (Section 2.3.3).
The two reduced-complexity climate models used in this assessment
suggest that virtually all available 1.5C-consistent pathways peak
and then decline global mean temperature, but with varying rates
of temperature decline after the peak (Figure 2.1). The estimated
decadal rates of temperature change by the end of the century are
smaller than the amplitude of the climate variability as assessed in AR5
(1 standard deviation of about 0.1C), which hence complicates the
detection of a global peak and decline of warming in observations on
time scales of one to two decades (Bindoff et al., 2013). In comparison,
many pathways limiting warming to 2C or higher by 2100 still have
noticeable increasing trends at the end of the century, and thus imply
continued warming.
By 2100, the difference between 1.5C- and 2C-consistent pathways
becomes clearer compared to mid-century, not only for the temperature
response (Figure 2.1) but also for atmospheric CO2 concentrations. In
2100, the median CO2 concentration in 1.5C-consistent pathways is
below 2016 levels (Le Quere et al., 2018), whereas it remains higher
by about 5-10% compared to 2016 in the 2C-consistent pathways.

2.2.1.1 Geophysical uncertainties: non-CO2 forcing agents
Impacts of non-CO2 climate forcers on temperature outcomes are
particularly important when evaluating stringent mitigation pathways
(Weyant et al., 2006; Shindell et al., 2012; Rogelj et al., 2014b, 2015a;
Samset et al., 2018). However, many uncertainties affect the role of
non-CO2 climate forcers in stringent mitigation pathways.
A first uncertainty arises from the magnitude of the radiative forcing
attributed to non-CO2 climate forcers. Figure 2.2 illustrates how, for
one representative 1.5C-consistent pathway (SSP2-1.9) (Fricko et al.,
2017; Rogelj et al., 2018), the effective radiative forcings as estimated
by MAGICC and FAIR can differ (see Supplementary Material 2.SM1.1
for further details). This large spread in non-CO2 effective radiative
forcings leads to considerable uncertainty in the predicted temperature
response. This uncertainty ultimately affects the assessed temperature
outcomes for pathway classes used in this chapter (Section 2.1) and
also affects the carbon budget (Section 2.2.2). Figure 2.2 highlights
101

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2

Figure 2.1 | Pathways classification overview. (a) Average global mean temperature increase relative to 2010 as projected by FAIR and MAGICC in 2030, 2050 and
2100; (b) response of peak warming to cumulative CO2 emissions until net zero by MAGICC (red) and FAIR (blue); (c) decadal rate of average global mean temperature change
from 2081 to 2100 as a function of the annual CO2 emissions averaged over the same period as given by FAIR (transparent squares) and MAGICC (filled circles). In panel (a),
horizontal lines at 0.63C and 1.13C are indicative of the 1.5C and 2C warming thresholds with the respect to 1850-1900, taking into account the assessed historical
warming of 0.87C 0.12C between the 1850-1900 and 2006-2015 periods (Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1). In panel (a), vertical lines illustrate both the physical and the scenario
uncertainty as captured by MAGICC and FAIR and show the minimal warming of the 5th percentile of projected warming and the maximal warming of the 95th percentile of
projected warming per scenario class. Boxes show the interquartile range of mean warming across scenarios, and thus represent scenario uncertainty only.

the important role of methane emissions reduction in this scenario, in
agreement with the recent literature focussing on stringent mitigation
pathways (Shindell et al., 2012; Rogelj et al., 2014b, 2015a; Stohl et al.,
2015; Collins et al., 2018).
For mitigation pathways that aim at halting and reversing radiative
forcing increase during this century, the aerosol radiative forcing is a
considerable source of uncertainty (Figure 2.2) (Samset et al., 2018;
Smith et al., 2018). Indeed, reductions in SO2 (and NOx) emissions
largely associated with fossil-fuel burning are expected to reduce the
cooling effects of both aerosol radiative interactions and aerosol cloud
102

interactions, leading to warming (Myhre et al., 2013; Samset et al.,
2018). A multimodel analysis (Myhre et al., 2017) and a study based
on observational constraints (Malavelle et al., 2017) largely support
the AR5 best estimate and uncertainty range of aerosol forcing.
The partitioning of total aerosol radiative forcing between aerosol
precursor emissions is important (Ghan et al., 2013; Jones et al.,
2018; Smith et al., 2018) as this affects the estimate of the mitigation
potential from different sectors that have aerosol precursor emission
sources. The total aerosol effective radiative forcing change in stringent
mitigation pathways is expected to be dominated by the effects from
the phase-out of SO2, although the magnitude of this aerosol-warming

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

effect depends on how much of the present-day aerosol cooling is
attributable to SO2, particularly the cooling associated with aerosol-
cloud interaction (Figure 2.2). Regional differences in the linearity of
aerosol-cloud interactions (Carslaw et al., 2013; Kretzschmar et al.,
2017) make it difficult to separate the role of individual precursors.
Precursors that are not fully mitigated will continue to affect the
Earth system. If, for example, the role of nitrate aerosol cooling is at
the strongest end of the assessed IPCC AR5 uncertainty range, future
temperature increases may be more modest if ammonia emissions
continue to rise (Hauglustaine et al., 2014).
Figure 2.2 shows that there are substantial differences in the evolution
of estimated effective radiative forcing of non-CO2 forcers between
MAGICC and FAIR. These forcing differences result in MAGICC
simulating a larger warming trend in the near term compared to both
the FAIR model and the recent observed trends of 0.2C per decade
reported in Chapter 1 (Figure 2.1, Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1,
Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1.3). The aerosol effective forcing is stronger in
MAGICC compared to either FAIR or the AR5 best estimate, though it
is still well within the AR5 uncertainty range (Supplementary Material
2.SM.1.1.1). A recent revision (Etminan et al., 2016) increases the
methane forcing by 25%. This revision is used in the FAIR but not in the
AR5 setup of MAGICC that is applied here. Other structural differences
exist in how the two models relate emissions to concentrations that
contribute to differences in forcing (see Supplementary Material
2.SM.1.1.1).
Non-CO2 climate forcers exhibit a greater geographical variation in
radiative forcings than CO2, which leads to important uncertainties in the
temperature response (Myhre et al., 2013). This uncertainty increases
the relative uncertainty of the temperature pathways associated with
low emission scenarios compared to high emission scenarios (Clarke
et al., 2014). It is also important to note that geographical patterns
of temperature change and other climate responses, especially those
related to precipitation, depend significantly on the forcing mechanism
(Myhre et al., 2013; Shindell et al., 2015; Marvel et al., 2016; Samset et
al., 2016) (see also Chapter 3, Section 3.6.2.2).

2.2.1.2 Geophysical uncertainties: climate and Earth system
feedbacks
Climate sensitivity uncertainty impacts future projections as well as
carbon-budget estimates (Schneider et al., 2017). AR5 assessed the
equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) to be likely in the 1.5-4.5C
range, extremely unlikely less than 1C and very unlikely greater
than 6C. The lower bound of this estimate is lower than the range
of CMIP5 models (Collins et al., 2013). The evidence for the 1.5C
lower bound on ECS in AR5 was based on analysis of energy-budget
changes over the historical period. Work since AR5 has suggested
that the climate sensitivity inferred from such changes has been
lower than the 2 x CO2 climate sensitivity for known reasons (Forster,
2016; Gregory and Andrews, 2016; Rugenstein et al., 2016; Armour,
2017; Ceppi and Gregory, 2017; Knutti et al., 2017; Proistosescu and
Huybers, 2017). Both a revised interpretation of historical estimates
and other lines of evidence based on analysis of climate models with
the best representation of today's climate (Sherwood et al., 2014;
Zhai et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2016; Brown and Caldeira, 2017; Knutti

2

Figure 2.2 | Changes and uncertainties in effective radiative forcings (ERF)
for one 1.5C-consistent pathway (SSP2-19) as estimated by MAGICC
and FAIR. The lines are indicative of the total effective radiative forcing from all
anthropogenic sources (solid lines) and for non-CO2 agents only (dashed lines), as
represented by MAGICC (red) and FAIR (blue) relative to 2010, respectively. Vertical
bars show the mean radiative forcing as predicted by MAGICC and FAIR of relevant
non-CO2 agents for year 2030, 2050 and 2100. The vertical lines give the uncertainty
(1 standard deviation) of the ERFs for the represented species.

et al., 2017) suggest that the lower bound of ECS could be revised
upwards, which would decrease the chances of limiting warming
below 1.5C in assessed pathways. However, such a reassessment has
been challenged (Lewis and Curry, 2018), albeit from a single line of
evidence. Nevertheless, it is premature to make a major revision to the
lower bound. The evidence for a possible revision of the upper bound
on ECS is less clear, with cases argued from different lines of evidence
for both decreasing (Lewis and Curry, 2015, 2018; Cox et al., 2018)
and increasing (Brown and Caldeira, 2017) the bound presented in the
literature. The tools used in this chapter employ ECS ranges consistent
with the AR5 assessment. The MAGICC ECS distribution has not been
selected to explicitly reflect this but is nevertheless consistent (Rogelj
et al., 2014a). The FAIR model used here to estimate carbon budgets
explicitly constructs log-normal distributions of ECS and transient
climate response based on a multi-parameter fit to the AR5 assessed
ranges of climate sensitivity and individual historic effective radiative
forcings (Smith et al., 2018) (Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1.1).
Several feedbacks of the Earth system, involving the carbon cycle, nonCO2 GHGs and/or aerosols, may also impact the future dynamics of the
coupled carbon-climate system's response to anthropogenic emissions.
These feedbacks are caused by the effects of nutrient limitation (Duce et
al., 2008; Mahowald et al., 2017), ozone exposure (de Vries et al., 2017),
fire emissions (Narayan et al., 2007) and changes associated with
natural aerosols (Cadule et al., 2009; Scott et al., 2018). Among these
Earth system feedbacks, the importance of the permafrost feedback's
influence has been highlighted in recent studies. Combined evidence
103

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

from both models (MacDougall et al., 2015; Burke et al., 2017; Lowe
and Bernie, 2018) and field studies (like Schadel et al., 2014; Schuur et
al., 2015) shows high agreement that permafrost thawing will release
both CO2 and CH4 as the Earth warms, amplifying global warming. This
thawing could also release N2O (Voigt et al., 2017a, b). Field, laboratory
and modelling studies estimate that the vulnerable fraction in
permafrost is about 5-15% of the permafrost soil carbon (~5300-5600
GtCO2 in Schuur et al., 2015) and that carbon emissions are expected to
occur beyond 2100 because of system inertia and the large proportion
of slowly decomposing carbon in permafrost (Schadel et al., 2014).
Published model studies suggest that a large part of the carbon release
to the atmosphere is in the form of CO2 (Schadel et al., 2016), while the
amount of CH4 released by permafrost thawing is estimated to be much
smaller than that CO2. Cumulative CH4 release by 2100 under RCP2.6
ranges from 0.13 to 0.45 Gt of methane (Burke et al., 2012; Schneider
von Deimling et al., 2012, 2015), with fluxes being the highest in the
middle of the century because of maximum thermokarst lake extent by
mid-century (Schneider von Deimling et al., 2015).
The reduced complexity climate models employed in this assessment
do not take into account permafrost or non-CO2 Earth system
feedbacks, although the MAGICC model has a permafrost module that
can be enabled. Taking the current climate and Earth system feedbacks
understanding together, there is a possibility that these models
would underestimate the longer-term future temperature response to
stringent emission pathways (Section 2.2.2).

2.2.2

The Remaining 1.5C Carbon Budget

Matthews et al., 2009; Zickfeld et al., 2009; IPCC, 2013a). However,
because the projected changes in non-CO2 climate forcers tend to
amplify future warming, CO2-only carbon budgets overestimate the
total net cumulative carbon emissions compatible with 1.5C or 2C
(Friedlingstein et al., 2014a; Rogelj et al., 2016b; Matthews et al., 2017;
Mengis et al., 2018; Tokarska et al., 2018).
Since the AR5, many estimates of the remaining carbon budget for
1.5C have been published (Friedlingstein et al., 2014a; MacDougall
et al., 2015; Peters, 2016; Rogelj et al., 2016b, 2018; Matthews et al.,
2017; Millar et al., 2017; Goodwin et al., 2018b; Kriegler et al., 2018b;
Lowe and Bernie, 2018; Mengis et al., 2018; Millar and Friedlingstein,
2018; Schurer et al., 2018; Seferian et al., 2018; Tokarska and Gillett,
2018; Tokarska et al., 2018). These estimates cover a wide range as a
result of differences in the models used, and of methodological choices,
as well as physical uncertainties. Some estimates are exclusively modelbased while others are based on observations or on a combination of
both. Remaining carbon budgets limiting warming below 1.5C or 2C
that are derived from Earth system models of intermediate complexity
(MacDougall et al., 2015; Goodwin et al., 2018a), IAMs (Luderer et al.,
2018; Rogelj et al., 2018), or are based on Earth-system model results
(Lowe and Bernie, 2018; Seferian et al., 2018; Tokarska and Gillett,
2018) give remaining carbon budgets of the same order of magnitude
as the IPCC AR5 Synthesis Report (SYR) estimates (IPCC, 2014a).
This is unsurprising as similar sets of models were used for the AR5
(IPCC, 2013b). The range of variation across models stems mainly from
either the inclusion or exclusion of specific Earth system feedbacks
(MacDougall et al., 2015; Burke et al., 2017; Lowe and Bernie, 2018) or
different budget definitions (Rogelj et al., 2018).

2.2.2.1 Carbon budget estimates
Since the AR5, several approaches have been proposed to estimate
carbon budgets compatible with 1.5C or 2C. Most of these
approaches indirectly rely on the approximate linear relationship
between peak global mean temperature and cumulative emissions
of carbon (the transient climate response to cumulative emissions of
carbon, TCRE) (Collins et al., 2013; Friedlingstein et al., 2014a; Rogelj et
al., 2016b), whereas others base their estimates on equilibrium climate
sensitivity (Schneider et al., 2017). The AR5 employed two approaches
to determine carbon budgets. Working Group I (WGI) computed
carbon budgets from 2011 onwards for various levels of warming
relative to the 1861-1880 period using RCP8.5 (Meinshausen et al.,
2011b; Stocker et al., 2013), whereas WGIII estimated their budgets
from a set of available pathways that were assessed to have a >50%
probability to exceed 1.5C by mid-century, and return to 1.5C or
below in 2100 with greater than 66% probability (Clarke et al., 2014).
These differences made AR5 WGI and WGIII carbon budgets difficult to
compare as they are calculated over different time periods, are derived
from a different sets of multi-gas and aerosol emission scenarios,
and use different concepts of carbon budgets (exceedance for WGI,
avoidance for WGIII) (Rogelj et al., 2016b; Matthews et al., 2017).
Carbon budgets can be derived from CO2-only experiments as well
as from multi-gas and aerosol scenarios. Some published estimates
of carbon budgets compatible with 1.5C or 2C refer to budgets
for CO2-induced warming only, and hence do not take into account
the contribution of non-CO2 climate forcers (Allen et al., 2009;
104

In contrast to the model-only estimates discussed above and employed
in the AR5, this report additionally uses observations to inform its
evaluation of the remaining carbon budget. Table 2.2 shows that the
assessed range of remaining carbon budgets consistent with 1.5C
or 2C is larger than the AR5 SYR estimate and is part way towards
estimates constrained by recent observations (Millar et al., 2017;
Goodwin et al., 2018a; Tokarska and Gillett, 2018). Figure 2.3 illustrates
that the change since AR5 is, in very large part, due to the application
of a more recent observed baseline to the historic temperature change
and cumulative emissions; here adopting the baseline period of 2006-
2015 (see Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1). AR5 SYR Figures SPM.10 and 2.3
already illustrated the discrepancy between models and observations,
but did not apply this as a correction to the carbon budget because they
were being used to illustrate the overall linear relationship between
warming and cumulative carbon emissions in the CMIP5 models since
1870, and were not specifically designed to quantify residual carbon
budgets relative to the present for ambitious temperature goals. The
AR5 SYR estimate was also dependent on a subset of Earth system
models illustrated in Figure 2.3 of this report. Although, as outlined
below and in Table 2.2, considerably uncertainties remain, there is high
agreement across various lines of evidence assessed in this report that
the remaining carbon budget for 1.5C or 2C would be larger than
the estimates at the time of the AR5. However, the overall remaining
budget for 2100 is assessed to be smaller than that derived from the
recent observational-informed estimates, as Earth system feedbacks
such as permafrost thawing reduce the budget applicable to centennial
scales (see Section 2.2.2.2).

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.3 | Temperature changes from 1850-1900 versus cumulative CO2 emissions since 1st January 1876. Solid lines with dots reproduce the globally
averaged near-surface air temperature response to cumulative CO2 emissions plus non-CO2 forcers as assessed in Figure SPM10 of WGI AR5, except that points marked with
years relate to a particular year, unlike in WGI AR5 Figure SPM.10, where each point relates to the mean over the previous decade. The AR5 data was derived from 15 Earth
system models and 5 Earth system models of Intermediate Complexity for the historic observations (black) and RCP8.5 scenario (red), and the red shaded plume shows the
range across the models as presented in the AR5. The purple shaded plume and the line are indicative of the temperature response to cumulative CO2 emissions and non-CO2
warming adopted in this report. The non-CO2 warming contribution is averaged from the MAGICC and FAIR models, and the purple shaded range assumes the AR5 WGI TCRE
distribution (Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1.2). The 2010 observation of surface temperature change (0.97C based on 2006-2015 mean compared to 1850-1900, Chapter
1, Section 1.2.1) and cumulative carbon dioxide emissions from 1876 to the end of 2010 of 1,930 GtCO2 (Le Quere et al., 2018) is shown as a filled purple diamond. The value
for 2017 based on the latest cumulative carbon emissions up to the end of 2017 of 2,220 GtCO2 (Version 1.3 accessed 22 May 2018) and a surface temperature anomaly of
1.1C based on an assumed temperature increase of 0.2C per decade is shown as a hollow purple diamond. The thin blue line shows annual observations, with CO2 emissions
from Le Quere et al. (2018) and estimated globally averaged near-surface temperature from scaling the incomplete coverage and blended HadCRUT4 dataset in Chapter 1. The
thin black line shows the CMIP5 multimodel mean estimate with CO2 emissions also from (Le Quere et al., 2018). The thin black line shows the GMST historic temperature trends
from Chapter 1, which give lower temperature changes up to 2006-2015 of 0.87C and would lead to a larger remaining carbon budget. The dotted black lines illustrate the
remaining carbon budget estimates for 1.5C given in Table 2.2. Note these remaining budgets exclude possible Earth system feedbacks that could reduce the budget, such as
CO2 and CH4 release from permafrost thawing and tropical wetlands (see Section 2.2.2.2).

2.2.2.2

CO2 and non-CO2 contributions to the remaining
carbon budget

A remaining carbon budget can be estimated from calculating the
amount of CO2 emissions consistent (given a certain value of TCRE)
with an allowable additional amount of warming. Here, the allowable
warming is the 1.5C warming threshold minus the current warming
taken as the 2006-2015 average, with a further amount removed to
account for the estimated non-CO2 temperature contribution to the
remaining warming (Peters, 2016; Rogelj et al., 2016b). This assessment
uses the TCRE range from AR5 WGI (Collins et al., 2013) supported
by estimates of non-CO2 contributions that are based on published
methods and integrated pathways (Friedlingstein et al., 2014a; Allen et
al., 2016, 2018; Peters, 2016; Smith et al., 2018). Table 2.2 and Figure
2.3 show the assessed remaining carbon budgets and key uncertainties
for a set of additional warming levels relative to the 2006-2015 period
(see Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1.2 for details). With an assessed
historical warming of 0.87C  0.12C from 1850-1900 to 2006-2015
(Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1), 0.63C of additional warming would be

approximately consistent with a global mean temperature increase
of 1.5C relative to pre-industrial levels. For this level of additional
warming, remaining carbon budgets have been estimated (Table 2.2,
Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1.2).
The remaining carbon budget calculation presented in the Table
2.2 and illustrated in Figure 2.3 does not consider additional Earth
system feedbacks such as permafrost thawing. These are uncertain
but estimated to reduce the remaining carbon budget by an order of
magnitude of about 100 GtCO2 and more thereafter. Accounting for
such feedbacks would make the carbon budget more applicable for
2100 temperature targets, but would also increase uncertainty (Table
2.2 and see below). Excluding such feedbacks, the assessed range for
the remaining carbon budget is estimated to be 840, 580, and 420
GtCO2 for the 33rd, 50th and, 67th percentile of TCRE, respectively,
with a median non-CO2 warming contribution and starting from 1
January 2018 onward. Consistent with the approach used in the
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (IPCC, 2013b), the latter estimates
use global near-surface air temperatures both over the ocean and
105

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

over land to estimate global surface temperature change since preindustrial. The global warming from the pre-industrial period until the
2006-2015 reference period is estimated to amount to 0.97C with
an uncertainty range of about 0.1C (see Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1).
Three methodological improvements lead to these estimates of the
remaining carbon budget being about 300 GtCO2 larger than those
reported in Table 2.2 of the IPCC AR5 SYR (IPCC, 2014a) (medium
confidence). The AR5 used 15 Earth System Models (ESM) and 5
Earth-system Models of Intermediate Complexity (EMIC) to derive an
estimate of the remaining carbon budget. Their approach hence made
implicit assumptions about the level of warming to date, the future
contribution of non-CO2 emissions, and the temperature response
to CO2 (TCRE). In this report, each of these aspects are considered
explicitly. When estimating global warming until the 2006-2015
reference period as a blend of near-surface air temperature over land
and sea-ice regions, and sea-surface temperature over open ocean,
by averaging the four global mean surface temperature time series
listed in Chapter 1 Section 1.2.1, the global warming would amount
to 0.87C 0.1C. Using the latter estimate of historical warming and
projecting global warming using global near-surface air temperatures
from model projections leads to remaining carbon budgets for limiting
global warming to 1.5C of 1080, 770, and 570 GtCO2 for the 33rd,
50th, and 67th percentile of TCRE, respectively. Note that future
research and ongoing observations over the next years will provide a
better indication as to how the 2006-2015 base period compares with
the long-term trends and might affect the budget estimates. Similarly,
improved understanding in Earth system feedbacks would result in a
better quantification of their impacts on remaining carbon budgets for
1.5C and 2C.
After TCRE uncertainty, a major additional source of uncertainty is the
magnitude of non-CO2 forcing and its contribution to the temperature
change between the present day and the time of peak warming.
Integrated emissions pathways can be used to ensure consistency
between CO2 and non-CO2 emissions (Bowerman et al., 2013; Collins
et al., 2013; Clarke et al., 2014; Rogelj et al., 2014b, 2015a; Tokarska et
al., 2018). Friedlingstein et al. (2014a) used pathways with limited to
no climate mitigation to find a variation due to non-CO2 contributions
of about 33% for a 2C carbon budget. Rogelj et al. (2016b) showed
no particular bias in non-CO2 radiative forcing or warming at the time
of exceedance of 2C or at peak warming between scenarios with
increasing emissions and strongly mitigated scenarios (consistent
with Stocker et al., 2013). However, clear differences of the nonCO2 warming contribution at the time of deriving a 2C-consistent
carbon budget were reported for the four RCPs. Although the spread
in non-CO2 forcing across scenarios can be smaller in absolute terms
at lower levels of cumulative emissions, it can be larger in relative
terms compared to the remaining carbon budget (Stocker et al., 2013;
Friedlingstein et al., 2014a; Rogelj et al., 2016b). Tokarska and Gillett
(2018) find no statistically significant differences in 1.5C-consistent
cumulative emissions budgets when calculated for different RCPs from
consistent sets of CMIP5 simulations.
The mitigation pathways assessed in this report indicate that emissions
of non-CO2 forcers contribute an average additional warming of around
0.15C relative to 2006-2015 at the time of net zero CO2 emissions,
reducing the remaining carbon budget by roughly 320 GtCO2. This
106

arises from a weakening of aerosol cooling and continued emissions
of non-CO2 GHGs (Sections 2.2.1, 2.3.3). This non-CO2 contribution
at the time of net zero CO2 emissions varies by about 0.1C across
scenarios, resulting in a carbon budget uncertainty of about 250
GtCO2, and takes into account marked reductions in methane emissions
(Section 2.3.3). If these reductions are not achieved, remaining carbon
budgets are further reduced. Uncertainties in the non-CO2 forcing and
temperature response are asymmetric and can influence the remaining
carbon budget by -400 to +200 GtCO2, with the uncertainty in aerosol
radiative forcing being the largest contributing factor (Table 2.2). The
MAGICC and FAIR models in their respective parameter setups and
model versions used to assess the non-CO2 warming contribution give
noticeable different non-CO2 effective radiative forcing and warming
for the same scenarios while both being within plausible ranges of
future response (Figure 2.2 and Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1,
2.SM.1.2). For this assessment, it is premature to assess the accuracy
of their results, so it is assumed that both are equally representative
of possible futures. Their non-CO2 warming estimates are therefore
averaged for the carbon budget assessment and their differences used
to guide the uncertainty assessment of the role of non-CO2 forcers.
Nevertheless, the findings are robust enough to give high confidence
that the changing emissions of non-CO2 forcers (particularly the
reduction in cooling aerosol precursors) cause additional near-term
warming and reduce the remaining carbon budget compared to the
CO2-only budget.
TCRE uncertainty directly impacts carbon budget estimates (Peters,
2016; Matthews et al., 2017; Millar and Friedlingstein, 2018). Based
on multiple lines of evidence, AR5 WGI assessed a likely range for
TCRE of 0.2-0.7C per 1000 GtCO2 (Collins et al., 2013). The TCRE
of the CMIP5 Earth system models ranges from 0.23C to 0.66C
per 1000 GtCO2 (Gillett et al., 2013). At the same time, studies using
observational constraints find best estimates of TCRE of 0.35-0.41C
per 1000 GtCO2 (Matthews et al., 2009; Gillett et al., 2013; Tachiiri et
al., 2015; Millar and Friedlingstein, 2018). This assessment continues
to use the assessed AR5 TCRE range under the working assumption
that TCRE is normally distributed (Stocker et al., 2013). Observationbased estimates have reported log-normal distributions of TCRE (Millar
and Friedlingstein, 2018). Assuming a log-normal instead of normal
distribution of the assessed AR5 TCRE range would result in about a
200 GtCO2 increase for the median budget estimates but only about
half at the 67th percentile, while historical temperature uncertainty
and uncertainty in recent emissions contribute 150 and 50 GtCO2
to the uncertainty, respectively (Table 2.2).
Calculating carbon budgets from the TCRE requires the assumption
that the instantaneous warming in response to cumulative CO2
emissions equals the long-term warming or, equivalently, that
the residual warming after CO2 emissions cease is negligible. The
magnitude of this residual warming, referred to as the zero-emission
commitment, ranges from slightly negative (i.e., a slight cooling)
to slightly positive for CO2 emissions up to present-day (Chapter 1,
Section 1.2.4) (Lowe et al., 2009; Frolicher and Joos, 2010; Gillett et
al., 2011; Matthews and Zickfeld, 2012). The delayed temperature
change from a pulse CO2 emission introduces uncertainties in emission
budgets, which have not been quantified in the literature for budgets
consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C. As a consequence, this

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

uncertainty does not affect our carbon budget estimates directly but
it is included as an additional factor in the assessed Earth system
feedback uncertainty (as detailed below) of roughly 100 GtCO2 on
decadal time scales presented in Table 2.2.
Remaining carbon budgets are further influenced by Earth system
feedbacks not accounted for in CMIP5 models, such as the permafrost
carbon feedback (Friedlingstein et al., 2014b; MacDougall et al., 2015;
Burke et al., 2017; Lowe and Bernie, 2018), and their influence on
the TCRE. Lowe and Bernie (2018) used a simple climate sensitivity
scaling approach to estimate that Earth system feedbacks (such as
CO2 released by permafrost thawing or methane released by wetlands)
could reduce carbon budgets for 1.5C and 2C by roughly 100
GtCO2 on centennial time scales. Their findings are based on an older
understanding of Earth system feedbacks (Arneth et al., 2010). This
estimate is broadly supported by more recent analysis of individual
feedbacks. Schadel et al. (2014) suggest an upper bound of 24.4 PgC
(90 GtCO2) emitted from carbon release from permafrost over the next
forty years for a RCP4.5 scenario. Burke et al. (2017) use a single model
to estimate permafrost emissions between 0.3 and 0.6 GtCO2 y-1 from
the point of 1.5C stabilization, which would reduce the budget by
around 20 GtCO2 by 2100. Comyn-Platt et al. (2018) include carbon
and methane emissions from permafrost and wetlands and suggest the
1.5C remaining carbon budget is reduced by 116 GtCO2. Additionally,
Mahowald et al. (2017) find there is possibility of 0.5-1.5 GtCO2 y-1
being released from aerosol-biogeochemistry changes if aerosol
emissions cease. In summary, these additional Earth system feedbacks
taken together are assessed to reduce the remaining carbon budget
applicable to 2100 by an order of magnitude of 100 GtCO2, compared
to the budgets based on the assumption of a constant TCRE presented
in Table 2.2 (limited evidence, medium agreement), leading to overall
medium confidence in their assessed impact. After 2100, the impact
of additional Earth system feedbacks is expected to further reduce the
remaining carbon budget (medium confidence).
The uncertainties presented in Table 2.2 cannot be formally combined,
but current understanding of the assessed geophysical uncertainties
suggests at least a 50% possible variation for remaining carbon
budgets for 1.5C-consistent pathways. By the end of 2017,
anthropogenic CO2 emissions since the pre-industrial period are
estimated to have amounted to approximately 2200 320 GtCO2
(medium confidence) (Le Quere et al., 2018). When put in the context
of year-2017 CO2 emissions (about 42 GtCO2 yr-1, 3 GtCO2 yr-1, high
confidence) (Le Quere et al., 2018), a remaining carbon budget of
580 GtCO2 (420 GtCO2) suggests meeting net zero global CO2 emissions
in about 30 years (20 years) following a linear decline starting from
2018 (rounded to the nearest five years), with a variation of 15-20
years due to the geophysical uncertainties mentioned above (high
confidence).

Chapter 2

ocean thermal and carbon cycle inertia (Herrington and Zickfeld, 2014;
Krasting et al., 2014; Zickfeld et al., 2016). This asymmetrical behaviour
makes carbon budgets path-dependent in the case of a budget and/or
temperature overshoot (MacDougall et al., 2015). Although potentially
large for scenarios with large overshoot (MacDougall et al., 2015), this
path-dependence of carbon budgets has not been well quantified for
1.5C- and 2C-consistent scenarios and as such remains an important
knowledge gap. This assessment does not explicitly account for path
dependence but takes it into consideration for its overall confidence
assessment.
This assessment finds a larger remaining budget from the 2006-2015
base period than the 1.5C and 2C remaining budgets inferred from
AR5 from the start of 2011, which were approximately 1000 GtCO2
for the 2C (66% of model simulations) and approximately 400 GtCO2
for the 1.5C budget (66% of model simulations). In contrast, this
assessment finds approximately 1600 GtCO2 for the 2C (66th TCRE
percentile) and approximately 860 GtCO2 for the 1.5C budget (66th
TCRE percentile) from 2011. However, these budgets are not directly
equivalent as AR5 reported budgets for fractions of CMIP5 simulations
and other lines of evidence, while this report uses the assessed range
of TCRE and an assessment of the non-CO2 contribution at net zero CO2
emissions to provide remaining carbon budget estimates at various
percentiles of TCRE. Furthermore, AR5 did not specify remaining
budgets to carbon neutrality as we do here, but budgets until the time
the temperature limit of interest was reached, assuming negligible zero
emission commitment and taking into account the non-CO2 forcing at
that point in time.
In summary, although robust physical understanding underpins the
carbon budget concept, relative uncertainties become larger as a
specific temperature limit is approached. For the budget, applicable
to the mid-century, the main uncertainties relate to the TCRE, non-CO2
emissions, radiative forcing and response. For 2100, uncertain Earth
system feedbacks such as permafrost thawing would further reduce
the available budget. The remaining budget is also conditional upon
the choice of baseline, which is affected by uncertainties in both
historical emissions, and in deriving the estimate of globally averaged
human-induced warming. As a result, only medium confidence can be
assigned to the assessed remaining budget values for 1.5C and 2.0C
and their uncertainty.

The remaining carbon budgets assessed in this section are consistent
with limiting peak warming to the indicated levels of additional
warming. However, if these budgets are exceeded and the use of
CDR (see Sections 2.3 and 2.4) is envisaged to return cumulative
CO2 emissions to within the carbon budget at a later point in time,
additional uncertainties apply because the TCRE is different under
increasing and decreasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations due to
107

2

Chapter 2
Table 2.2 |

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
The assessed remaining carbon budget and its uncertainties. Shaded blue horizontal bands illustrate the uncertainty in historical temperature increase
from the 1850-1900 base period until the 2006-2015 period as estimated from global near-surface air temperatures, which impacts the additional warming 
until a specific temperature limit like 1.5C or 2C relative to the 1850-1900 period. Shaded grey cells indicate values for when historical temperature increase
is estimated from a blend of near-surface air temperatures over land and sea ice regions and sea-surface temperatures over oceans.

Additional
Warming
since
2006-2015
[C]*(1)

Approximate
Warming
since
1850-1900
[C]*(1)

Remaining Carbon Budget
(Excluding Additional
Earth System Feedbacks*(5))
[GtCO2 from 1.1.2018]*(2)

Percentiles of TCRE
*(3)

2

33rd

50th

67th

0.3

290

160

80

0.4

530

350

230

0.5
0.53

~1.5C

770

530

380

840

580

420

0.6

1010

710

530

0.63

1080

770

570

0.7

1240

900

680

0.78

1440

1040

800

0.8

1480

1080

830

0.9

1720

1260

980

1

1960

1450

1130

1.03

~2C

2030

1500

1170

1.1

2200

1630

1280

1.13

2270

1690

1320

1.2

2440

1820

1430

Key Uncertainties and Variations*(4)

Earth System
Feedbacks
*(5)

Non-CO2
scenario
variation
*(6)

Non-CO2
forcing and
response
uncertainty

TCRE
distribution
uncertainty
*(7)

Historical
temperature
uncertainty
*(1)

Recent
emissions
uncertainty
*(8)

[GtCO2]

[GtCO2]

[GtCO2]

[GtCO2]

[GtCO2]

[GtCO2]

250

-400 to +200

+100 to +200

250

20

Budgets on
the left are
reduced by
about -100
on centennial
time scales

Notes:
*(1) Chapter 1 has assessed historical warming between the 1850-1900 and 2006-2015 periods to be 0.87C with a 0.12C likely (1-standard deviation) range, and global near-surface air
temperature to be 0.97C. The temperature changes from the 2006-2015 period are expressed in changes of global near-surface air temperature.
*(2) Historical CO2 emissions since the middle of the 1850-1900 historical base period (mid-1875) are estimated at 1940 GtCO2 (1640-2240 GtCO2, one standard deviation range) until end
2010. Since 1 January 2011, an additional 290 GtCO2 (270-310 GtCO2, one sigma range) has been emitted until the end of 2017 (Le Quere et al., 2018).
*(3) TCRE: transient climate response to cumulative emissions of carbon, assessed by AR5 to fall likely between 0.8-2.5C/1000 PgC (Collins et al., 2013), considering a normal distribution
consistent with AR5 (Stocker et al., 2013). Values are rounded to the nearest 10 GtCO2.
*(4) Focussing on the impact of various key uncertainties on median budgets for 0.53C of additional warming.
*(5) Earth system feedbacks include CO2 released by permafrost thawing or methane released by wetlands, see main text.
*(6) Variations due to different scenario assumptions related to the future evolution of non-CO2 emissions.
*(7) The distribution of TCRE is not precisely defined. Here the influence of assuming a lognormal instead of a normal distribution shown.
*(8) Historical emissions uncertainty reflects the uncertainty in historical emissions since 1 January 2011.

2.3

Overview of 1.5C Mitigation Pathways

Limiting global mean temperature increase at any level requires global
CO2 emissions to become net zero at some point in the future (Zickfeld
et al., 2009; Collins et al., 2013). At the same time, limiting the residual
warming of short-lived non-CO2 emissions can be achieved by reducing
their annual emissions as much as possible (Section 2.2, Cross-Chapter
Box 2 in Chapter 1). This would require large-scale transformations of
the global energy-agriculture-land-economy system, affecting the
way in which energy is produced, agricultural systems are organized,
and food, energy and materials are consumed (Clarke et al., 2014). This
section assesses key properties of pathways consistent with limiting
global mean temperature to 1.5C relative to pre-industrial levels,
including their underlying assumptions and variations.
108

Since the AR5, an extensive body of literature has appeared on integrated
pathways consistent with 1.5C (Section 2.1) (Rogelj et al., 2015b, 2018;
Akimoto et al., 2017; Loffler et al., 2017; Marcucci et al., 2017; Su et al.,
2017; Bauer et al., 2018; Bertram et al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018; Holz
et al., 2018b; Kriegler et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2018; Luderer et al., 2018;
Strefler et al., 2018a; van Vuuren et al., 2018; Vrontisi et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2018). These pathways have global coverage and represent all
GHG-emitting sectors and their interactions. Such integrated pathways
allow the exploration of the whole-system transformation, and hence
provide the context in which the detailed sectoral transformations
assessed in Section 2.4 of this chapter are taking place.
The overwhelming majority of published integrated pathways have
been developed by global IAMs that represent key societal systems

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

and their interactions, like the energy system, agriculture and land use,
and the economy (see Section 6.2 in Clarke et al., 2014). Very often
these models also include interactions with a representation of the
geophysical system, for example, by including spatially explicit land
models or carbon cycle and climate models. The complex features of
these subsystems are approximated and simplified in these models.
IAMs are briefly introduced in Section 2.1 and important knowledge
gaps identified in Section 2.6. An overview to the use, scope and
limitations of IAMs is provided in Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2.
The pathway literature is assessed in two ways in this section. First,
various insights on specific questions reported by studies can be assessed
to identify robust or divergent findings. Second, the combined body of
scenarios can be assessed to identify salient features of pathways in line
with a specific climate goal across a wide range of models. The latter
can be achieved by assessing pathways available in the database to
this assessment (Section 2.1, Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2-4). The
ensemble of scenarios available to this assessment is an ensemble of
opportunity: it is a collection of scenarios from a diverse set of studies
that was not developed with a common set of questions and a statistical
analysis of outcomes in mind. This means that ranges can be useful to
identify robust and sensitive features across available scenarios and
contributing modelling frameworks, but do not lend themselves to a
statistical interpretation.To understand the reasons underlying the ranges,
an assessment of the underlying scenarios and studies is required. To this
end, this section highlights illustrative pathway archetypes that help to
clarify the variation in assessed ranges for 1.5C-consistent pathways.

2.3.1

Range of Assumptions Underlying 1.5C Pathways

Earlier assessments have highlighted that there is no single pathway to
achieve a specific climate objective (e.g., Clarke et al., 2014). Pathways
depend on the underlying development processes, and societal
choices, which affect the drivers of projected future baseline emissions.
Furthermore, societal choices also affect climate change solutions in
pathways, like the technologies that are deployed, the scale at which
they are deployed, or whether solutions are globally coordinated.
A key finding is that 1.5C-consistent pathways could be identified
under a considerable range of assumptions in model studies despite
the tightness of the 1.5C emissions budget (Figures 2.4, 2.5) (Rogelj
et al., 2018).
The AR5 provided an overview of how differences in model structure
and assumptions can influence the outcome of transformation
pathways (Section 6.2 in Clarke et al., 2014, as well as Table A.II.14
in Krey et al., 2014b) and this was further explored by the modelling
community in recent years with regard to, e.g., socio-economic drivers
(Kriegler et al., 2016; Marangoni et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017),
technology assumptions (Bosetti et al., 2015; Creutzig et al., 2017;
Pietzcker et al., 2017), and behavioural factors (van Sluisveld et al.,
2016; McCollum et al., 2017).

2.3.1.1

Socio-economic drivers and the demand for
energy and land in 1.5C pathways

There is deep uncertainty about the ways humankind will use energy
and land in the 21st century. These ways are intricately linked to

Chapter 2

future population levels, secular trends in economic growth and
income convergence, behavioural change and technological progress.
These dimensions have been recently explored in the context of
the SSPs (Kriegler et al., 2012; O'Neill et al., 2014), which provide
narratives (O'Neill et al., 2017) and quantifications (Crespo Cuaresma,
2017; Dellink et al., 2017; KC and Lutz, 2017; Leimbach et al., 2017;
Riahi et al., 2017) of different world futures across which scenario
dimensions are varied to explore differential challenges to adaptation
and mitigation (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1). This framework
is increasingly adopted by IAMs to systematically explore the impact
of socio-economic assumptions on mitigation pathways (Riahi et al.,
2017), including 1.5C-consistent pathways (Rogelj et al., 2018). The
narratives describe five worlds (SSP1-5) with different socio-economic
predispositions to mitigate and adapt to climate change (Table 2.3). As
a result, population and economic growth projections can vary strongly
across integrated scenarios, including available 1.5C-consistent
pathways (Figure 2.4). For example, based on alternative future
fertility, mortality, migration and educational assumptions, population
projections vary between 8.5 and 10.0 billion people by 2050 and
between 6.9 and 12.6 billion people by 2100 across the SSPs. An
important factor for these differences is future female educational
attainment, with higher attainment leading to lower fertility rates and
therefore decreased population growth up to a level of 1 billion people
by 2050 (Lutz and KC, 2011; Snopkowski et al., 2016; KC and Lutz,
2017). Consistent with population development, GDP per capita also
varies strongly in SSP baselines, ranging from about 20 to more than
50 thousand USD2010 per capita in 2050 (in purchasing power parity
values, PPP), in part driven by assumptions on human development,
technological progress and development convergence between and
within regions (Crespo Cuaresma, 2017; Dellink et al., 2017; Leimbach
et al., 2017). Importantly, none of the GDP projections in the mitigation
pathway literature assessed in this chapter included the feedback of
climate damages on economic growth (Hsiang et al., 2017).
Baseline projections for energy-related GHG emissions are sensitive to
economic growth assumptions, while baseline projections for land-use
emissions are more directly affected by population growth (assuming
unchanged land productivity and per capita demand for agricultural
products) (Kriegler et al., 2016). SSP-based modelling studies of
mitigation pathways have identified high challenges to mitigation
for worlds with a focus on domestic issues and regional security
combined with high population growth (SSP3), and for worlds with
rapidly growing resource and fossil-fuel intensive consumption (SSP5)
(Riahi et al., 2017). No model could identify a 2C-consistent pathway
for SSP3, and high mitigation costs were found for SSP5. This picture
translates to 1.5C-consistent pathways that have to remain within
even tighter emissions constraints (Rogelj et al., 2018). No model
found a 1.5C-consistent pathway for SSP3 and some models could not
identify 1.5C-consistent pathways for SSP5 (2 of 4 models, compared
to 1 of 4 models for 2C-consistent pathways). The modelling analysis
also found that the effective control of land-use emissions becomes
even more critical in 1.5C-consistent pathways. Due to high inequality
levels in SSP4, land use can be less well managed. This caused 2 of
3 models to no longer find an SSP4-based 1.5C-consistent pathway
even though they identified SSP4-based 2C-consistent pathways at
relatively moderate mitigation costs (Riahi et al., 2017). Rogelj et al.
(2018) further reported that all six participating models identified
109

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Table 2.3 | Key Characteristics of the Five Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs) (O'Neill et al., 2017).
Socio-Economic
Challenges to
Mitigation

High

Socio-Economic Challenges to Adaptation
Low

Medium

High

SSP5: Fossil-fuelled development

SSP3: Regional rivalry

* low population
* very high economic growth per capita
* high human development
* high technological progress
* ample fossil fuel resources
* very resource intensive lifestyles
* high energy and food demand per capita
* economic convergence and global cooperation

* high population
* low economic growth per capita
* low human development
* low technological progress
* resource-intensive lifestyles
* resource-constrained energy and food demand
per capita
* focus on regional food and energy security
* regionalization and lack of global cooperation

SSP2: Middle of the road

2

* medium population
* medium and uneven economic growth
* medium and uneven human development
* medium and uneven technological progress
* resource-intensive lifestyles
* medium and uneven energy and food demand
per capita
* limited global cooperation and economic convergence

Medium

Low

SSP1: Sustainable development

SSP4: Inequality

* low population
* high economic growth per capita
* high human development
* high technological progress
* environmentally oriented technological and
behavioural change
* resource-efficient lifestyles
* low energy and food demand per capita
* economic convergence and global cooperation

* Medium to high population
* Unequal low to medium economic
growth per capita
* Unequal low to medium human development
* unequal technological progress: high in globalized
high-tech sectors, slow in domestic sectors
* unequal lifestyles and energy /food consumption:
resource intensity depending on income
* Globally connected elite, disconnected domestic
work forces

1.5C-consistent pathways in a sustainability oriented world (SSP1) and
four of six models found 1.5C-consistent pathways for middle-of-theroad developments (SSP2). These results show that 1.5C-consistent
pathways can be identified under a broad range of assumptions, but
that lack of global cooperation (SSP3), high inequality (SSP4) and/or
high population growth (SSP3) that limit the ability to control land use
emissions, and rapidly growing resource-intensive consumption (SSP5)
are key impediments.
Figure 2.4 compares the range of underlying socio-economic
developments as well as energy and food demand in available
1.5C-consistent pathways with the full set of published scenarios
that were submitted to this assessment. While 1.5C-consistent
pathways broadly cover the full range of population and economic
growth developments (except for the high population development
in SSP3-based scenarios), they tend to cluster on the lower end for
energy and food demand. They still encompass, however, a wide range
of developments from decreasing to increasing demand levels relative
to today. For the purpose of this assessment, a set of four illustrative
1.5C-consistent pathway archetypes were selected to show the
variety of underlying assumptions and characteristics (Figure 2.4). They
comprise three 1.5C-consistent pathways based on the SSPs (Rogelj
et al., 2018): a sustainability oriented scenario (S1 based on SSP1)
developed with the AIM model (Fujimori, 2017), a fossil-fuel intensive
110

and high energy demand scenario (S5, based on SSP5) developed with
the REMIND-MAgPIE model (Kriegler et al., 2017), and a middle-ofthe-road scenario (S2, based on SSP2) developed with the MESSAGEGLOBIOM model (Fricko et al., 2017). In addition, we include a scenario
with low energy demand (LED) (Grubler et al., 2018), which reflects
recent literature with a stronger focus on demand-side measures
(Bertram et al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018; van Vuuren
et al., 2018). Pathways LED, S1, S2, and S5 are referred to as P1, P2, P3,
and P4 in the Summary for Policymakers.

2.3.1.2

Mitigation options in 1.5C pathways

In the context of 1.5C pathways, the portfolio of mitigation options
available to the model becomes an increasingly important factor. IAMs
include a wide variety of mitigation options, as well as measures that
achieve CDR from the atmosphere (Krey et al., 2014a, b) (see Chapter 4,
Section 4.3 for a broad assessment of available mitigation measures).
For the purpose of this assessment, we elicited technology availability
in models that submitted scenarios to the database as summarized
in Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2, where a detailed picture of the
technology variety underlying available 1.5C-consistent pathways
is provided. Modelling choices on whether a particular mitigation
measure is included are influenced by an assessment of its global
mitigation potential, the availability of data and literature describing

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

(a)

Chapter 2

(b)
S1
S2
S5
LED
All scenarios
1.5C pathways

(c)

(d)

2

Figure 2.4 | Range of assumptions about socio-economic drivers and projections for energy and food demand in the pathways available to this
assessment. 1.5C-consistent pathways are blue, other pathways grey. Trajectories for the illustrative 1.5C-consistent archetypes used in this Chapter (LED, S1, S2, S5;
referred to as P1, P2, P3, and P4 in the Summary for Policymakers.) are highlighted. S1 is a sustainability oriented scenario, S2 is a middle-of-the-road scenario, and S5 is a
fossil-fuel intensive and high energy demand scenario. LED is a scenario with particularly low energy demand. Population assumptions in S2 and LED are identical. Panels show
(a) world population, (b) gross world product in purchasing power parity values, (c) final energy demand, and (d) food demand.

its techno-economic characteristics and future prospects, and the
computational challenge of representing the measure, e.g., in terms of
required spatio-temporal and process detail.
This elicitation (Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2) confirms that
IAMs cover most supply-side mitigation options on the process level,
while many demand-side options are treated as part of underlying
assumptions, which can be varied (Clarke et al., 2014). In recent years,
there has been increasing attention on improving the modelling
of integrating variable renewable energy into the power system
(Creutzig et al., 2017; Luderer et al., 2017; Pietzcker et al., 2017) and
of behavioural change and other factors influencing future demand
for energy and food (van Sluisveld et al., 2016; McCollum et al., 2017;
Weindl et al., 2017), including in the context of 1.5C-consistent
pathways (Grubler et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018). The literature
on the many diverse CDR options only recently started to develop
strongly (Minx et al., 2017) (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7 for a detailed
assessment), and hence these options are only partially included in
IAM analyses. IAMs mostly incorporate afforestation and bioenergy
with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) and only in few cases also
include direct air capture with CCS (DACCS) (Chen and Tavoni, 2013;
Marcucci et al., 2017; Strefler et al., 2018b).
Several studies have either directly or indirectly explored the
dependence of 1.5C-consistent pathways on specific (sets of)
mitigation and CDR technologies (Bauer et al., 2018; Grubler et al.,

2018; Holz et al., 2018b; Kriegler et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2018; Rogelj et
al., 2018; Strefler et al., 2018b; van Vuuren et al., 2018). However, there
are a few potentially disruptive technologies that are typically not yet
well covered in IAMs and that have the potential to alter the shape of
mitigation pathways beyond the ranges in the IAM-based literature.
Those are also included in Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2. The
configuration of carbon-neutral energy systems projected in mitigation
pathways can vary widely, but they all share a substantial reliance
on bioenergy under the assumption of effective land-use emissions
control. There are other configurations with less reliance on bioenergy
that are not yet comprehensively covered by global mitigation pathway
modelling. One approach is to dramatically reduce and electrify energy
demand for transportation and manufacturing to levels that make
residual non-electric fuel use negligible or replaceable by limited
amounts of electrolytic hydrogen. Such an approach is presented in
a first-of-its kind low-energy-demand scenario (Grubler et al., 2018)
which is part of this assessment. Other approaches rely less on energy
demand reductions, but employ cheap renewable electricity to push
the boundaries of electrification in the industry and transport sectors
(Breyer et al., 2017; Jacobson, 2017). In addition, these approaches
deploy renewable-based Power-2-X (read: Power to "x") technologies
to substitute residual fossil-fuel use (Brynolf et al., 2018). An important
element of carbon-neutral Power-2-X applications is the combination
of hydrogen generated from renewable electricity and CO2 captured
from the atmosphere (Zeman and Keith, 2008). Alternatively, algae
are considered as a bioenergy source with more limited implications
111

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

for land use and agricultural systems than energy crops (Williams and
Laurens, 2010; Walsh et al., 2016; Greene et al., 2017).

2

Furthermore, a range of measures could radically reduce agricultural
and land-use emissions and are not yet well-covered in IAM modelling.
This includes plant-based proteins (Joshi and Kumar, 2015) and cultured
meat (Post, 2012) with the potential to substitute for livestock products
at much lower GHG footprints (Tuomisto and Teixeira de Mattos, 2011).
Large-scale use of synthetic or algae-based proteins for animal feed
could free pasture land for other uses (Madeira et al., 2017; Pikaar et al.,
2018). Novel technologies such as methanogen inhibitors and vaccines
(Wedlock et al., 2013; Hristov et al., 2015; Herrero et al., 2016; Subharat
et al., 2016) as well as synthetic and biological nitrification inhibitors
(Subbarao et al., 2013; Di and Cameron, 2016) could substantially
reduce future non-CO2 emissions from agriculture if commercialized
successfully. Enhancing carbon sequestration in soils (Paustian et al.,
2016; Frank et al., 2017; Zomer et al., 2017) can provide the dual benefit
of CDR and improved soil quality. A range of conservation, restoration
and land management options can also increase terrestrial carbon
uptake (Griscom et al., 2017). In addition, the literature discusses
CDR measures to permanently sequester atmospheric carbon in rocks
(mineralization and enhanced weathering, see Chapter 4, Section
4.3.7) as well as carbon capture and usage in long-lived products like
plastics and carbon fibres (Mazzotti et al., 2005; Hartmann et al., 2013).
Progress in the understanding of the technical viability, economics and
sustainability of these ways to achieve and maintain carbon neutral
energy and land use can affect the characteristics, costs and feasibility
of 1.5C-consistent pathways significantly.

2.3.1.3

Policy assumptions in 1.5C pathways

Besides assumptions related to socio-economic drivers and mitigation
technology, scenarios are also subject to assumptions about the
mitigation policies that can be put in place. Mitigation policies can
either be applied immediately in scenarios or follow staged or delayed
approaches. Policies can span many sectors (e.g., economy-wide carbon
pricing), or policies can be applicable to specific sectors only (like the
energy sector) with other sectors (e.g., the agricultural or the land-use
sector) treated differently. These variations can have an important
impact on the ability of models to generate scenarios compatible with
stringent climate targets like 1.5C (Luderer et al., 2013; Rogelj et al.,
2013b; Bertram et al., 2015b; Kriegler et al., 2018a; Michaelowa et al.,
2018). In the scenario ensemble available to this assessment, several
variations of near-term mitigation policy implementation can be found:
immediate and cross-sectoral global cooperation from 2020 onward
towards a global climate objective, a phase-in of globally coordinated
mitigation policy from 2020 to 2040, and a more short-term oriented
and regionally diverse global mitigation policy, following NDCs until
2030 (Kriegler et al., 2018a; Luderer et al., 2018; McCollum et al., 2018;
Rogelj et al., 2018; Strefler et al., 2018b). For example, the abovementioned SSP quantifications assume regionally scattered mitigation
policies until 2020, and vary in global convergence thereafter (Kriegler
et al., 2014a; Riahi et al., 2017). The impact of near-term policy choices
on 1.5C-consistent pathways is discussed in Section 2.3.5. The
literature has also explored 1.5C-consistent pathways that build on
a portfolio of policy approaches until 2030, including the combination
of regulatory policies and carbon pricing (Kriegler et al., 2018a),
112

and a variety of ancillary policies to safeguard other sustainable
development goals (Bertram et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018).
A further discussion of policy implications of 1.5C-consistent pathways
is provided in Section 2.5.1, while a general discussion of policies and
options to strengthen action are subject of Chapter 4, Section 4.4.

2.3.2

Key Characteristics of 1.5C Pathways

1.5C-consistent pathways are characterized by a rapid phase out
of CO2 emissions and deep emissions reductions in other GHGs and
climate forcers (Section 2.2.2 and 2.3.3). This is achieved by broad
transformations in the energy; industry; transport; buildings; and
agriculture, forestry and other land-use (AFOLU) sectors (Section 2.4)
(Bauer et al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018; Holz et al., 2018b; Kriegler
et al., 2018b; Liu et al., 2018; Luderer et al., 2018; Rogelj et al.,
2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). Here we assess
1.5C-consistent pathways with and without overshoot during
the 21st century. One study also explores pathways overshooting
1.5C for longer than the 21st century (Akimoto et al., 2017), but
these are not considered 1.5C-consistent pathways in this report
(Chapter 1, Section 1.1.3). This subsection summarizes robust and
varying properties of 1.5C-consistent pathways regarding system
transformations, emission reductions and overshoot. It aims to provide
an introduction to the detailed assessment of the emissions evolution
(Section 2.3.3), CDR deployment (Section 2.3.4), energy (Section 2.4.1,
2.4.2), industry (2.4.3.1), buildings (2.4.3.2), transport (2.4.3.3) and
land-use transformations (Section 2.4.4) in 1.5C-consistent pathways.
Throughout Sections 2.3 and 2.4, pathway properties are highlighted
with four 1.5C-consistent pathway archetypes (LED, S1, S2, S5; referred
to as P1, P2, P3, and P4 in the Summary for Policymakers) covering a
wide range of different socio-economic and technology assumptions
(Figure 2.5, Section 2.3.1).

2.3.2.1

Variation in system transformations underlying 1.5C
pathways

Be it for the energy, transport, buildings, industry, or AFOLU sector,
the literature shows that multiple options and choices are available in
each of these sectors to pursue stringent emissions reductions (Section
2.3.1.2, Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2, Chapter 4, Section 4.3).
Because the overall emissions total under a pathway is limited by a
geophysical carbon budget (Section 2.2.2), choices in one sector affect
the efforts that are required from others (Clarke et al., 2014). A robust
feature of 1.5C-consistent pathways, as highlighted by the set of
pathway archetypes in Figure 2.5, is a virtually full decarbonization of the
power sector around mid-century, a feature shared with 2C-consistent
pathways. The additional emissions reductions in 1.5C-consistent
compared to 2C-consistent pathways come predominantly from the
transport and industry sectors (Luderer et al., 2018). Emissions can be
apportioned differently across sectors, for example, by focussing on
reducing the overall amount of CO2 produced in the energy end-use
sectors, and using limited contributions of CDR by the AFOLU sector
(afforestation and reforestation, S1 and LED pathways in Figure 2.5)
(Grubler et al., 2018; Holz et al., 2018b; van Vuuren et al., 2018), or
by being more lenient about the amount of CO2 that continues to
be produced in the above-mentioned end-use sectors (both by 2030
and mid-century) and strongly relying on technological CDR options

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.5 | Evolution and break down of global anthropogenic CO2 emissions until 2100. The top-left panel shows global net CO2 emissions in Below-1.5C,
1.5C-low-overshoot (OS), and 1.5C-high-OS pathways, with the four illustrative 1.5C-consistent pathway archetypes of this chapter highlighted. Ranges at the bottom of the
top-left panel show the 10th-90th percentile range (thin line) and interquartile range (thick line) of the time that global CO2 emissions reach net zero per pathway class, and for
all pathways classes combined. The top-right panel provides a schematic legend explaining all CO2 emissions contributions to global CO2 emissions. The bottom row shows how
various CO2 contributions are deployed and used in the four illustrative pathway archetypes (LED, S1, S2, S5, referred to as P1, P2, P3, and P4 in the Summary for Policymakers)
used in this chapter (see Section 2.3.1.1). Note that the S5 scenario reports the building and industry sector emissions jointly. Green-blue areas hence show emissions from the
transport sector and the joint building and industry demand sector, respectively.

like BECCS (S2 and S5 pathways in Figure 2.5) (Luderer et al., 2018;
Rogelj et al., 2018). Major drivers of these differences are assumptions
about energy and food demand and the stringency of near-term climate
policy (see the difference between early action in the scenarios S1,
LED and more moderate action until 2030 in the scenarios S2, S5).
Furthermore, the carbon budget in each of these pathways depends
also on the non-CO2 mitigation measures implemented in each of them,
particularly for agricultural emissions (Sections 2.2.2, 2.3.3) (Gernaat et
al., 2015). Those pathways differ not only in terms of their deployment
of mitigation and CDR measures (Sections 2.3.4 and 2.4), but also in
terms of the resulting temperature overshoot (Figure 2.1). Furthermore,
they have very different implications for the achievement of sustainable
development objectives, as further discussed in Section 2.5.3.

2.3.2.2

Pathways keeping warming below 1.5C or temporarily
overshooting it

This subsection explores the conditions that would need to be fulfilled
to stay below 1.5C warming without overshoot. As discussed in Section
2.2.2, to keep warming below 1.5C with a two-in-three (one-in-two)
chance, the cumulative amount of CO2 emissions from 2018 onwards
need to remain below a carbon budget of 420 (580) GtCO2; accounting
for the effects of additional Earth system feedbacks until 2100 reduces
this estimate by 100 GtCO2. Based on the current state of knowledge,

exceeding this remaining carbon budget at some point in time would
give a one-in-three (one-in-two) chance that the 1.5C limit is overshot
(Table 2.2). For comparison, around 290  20 (1 standard deviation
range) GtCO2 have been emitted in the years 2011-2017, with annual
CO2 emissions in 2017 around 42  3 GtCO2 yr-1 (Jackson et al., 2017;
Le Quere et al., 2018). Committed fossil-fuel emissions from existing
fossil-fuel infrastructure as of 2010 have been estimated at around
500  200 GtCO2 (with about 200 GtCO2 already emitted through
2017) (Davis and Caldeira, 2010). Coal-fired power plants contribute
the largest part. Committed emissions from existing coal-fired power
plants built through the end of 2016 are estimated to add up to roughly
200 GtCO2, and a further 100-150 GtCO2 from coal-fired power plants
under construction or planned (Gonzalez-Eguino et al., 2017; Edenhofer
et al., 2018). However, there has been a marked slowdown of planned
coal-power projects in recent years, and some estimates indicate that
the committed emissions from coal plants that are under construction
or planned have halved since 2015 (Shearer et al., 2018). Despite these
uncertainties, the committed fossil-fuel emissions are assessed to
already amount to more than two thirds (half) of the remaining carbon
budget.
An important question is to what extent the nationally determined
contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement are aligned with the
remaining carbon budget. It was estimated that the NDCs, if successfully
113

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

implemented, imply a total of 400-560 GtCO2 emissions over the
2018-2030 period (considering both conditional and unconditional
NDCs) (Rogelj et al., 2016a). Thus, following an NDC trajectory would
already exhaust 95-130% (70-95%) of the remaining two-in-three
(one-in-two) 1.5C carbon budget (unadjusted for additional Earth
system feedbacks) by 2030. This would leave no time (0-9 years) to
bring down global emissions from NDC levels of around 40 GtCO2 yr-1
in 2030 (Fawcett et al., 2015; Rogelj et al., 2016a) to net zero (further
discussion in Section 2.3.5).

2

Most 1.5C-consistent pathways show more stringent emissions
reductions by 2030 than implied by the NDCs (Section 2.3.5) The lower
end of those pathways reach down to below 20 GtCO2 yr-1 in 2030
(Section 2.3.3, Table 2.4), less than half of what is implied by the NDCs.
Whether such pathways will be able to limit warming to 1.5C without
overshoot will depend on whether cumulative net CO2 emissions over
the 21st century can be kept below the remaining carbon budget at
any time. Net global CO2 emissions are derived from the gross amount
of CO2 that humans annually emit into the atmosphere reduced by the
amount of anthropogenic CDR in each year. New research has looked
more closely at the amount and the drivers of gross CO2 emissions
from fossil-fuel combustion and industrial processes (FFI) in deep
mitigation pathways (Luderer et al., 2018), and found that the larger
part of remaining CO2 emissions come from direct fossil-fuel use in
the transport and industry sectors, while residual energy supply sector
emissions (mostly from the power sector) are limited by a rapid approach
to net zero CO2 emissions until mid-century. The 1.5C pathways with
no or limited (<0.1C) overshoot that were reported in the scenario
database project remaining FFI CO2 emissions of 610-1260 GtCO2 over
the period 2018-2100 (5th-95th percentile range; median: 880 GtCO2).
Kriegler et al. (2018b) conducted a sensitivity analysis that explores the
four central options for reducing fossil-fuel emissions: lowering energy
demand, electrifying energy services, decarbonizing the power sector
and decarbonizing non-electric fuel use in energy end-use sectors. By
exploring these options to their extremes, they found a lowest value
of 500 GtCO2 (2018-2100) gross fossil-fuel CO2 emissions for the
hypothetical case of aligning the strongest assumptions for all four
mitigation options. The two lines of evidence and the fact that available
1.5C pathways cover a wide range of assumptions (Section 2.3.1)
give a robust indication of a lower limit of about 500 GtCO2 remaining
fossil-fuel and industry CO2 emissions in the 21st century.
To compare these numbers with the remaining carbon budget, CO2
emissions from agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) need
to be taken into account. In many of the 1.5C-consistent pathways,
AFOLU CO2 emissions reach zero at or before mid-century and then
turn to negative values (Table 2.4). This means human changes to the
land lead to atmospheric carbon being stored in plants and soils. This
needs to be distinguished from the natural CO2 uptake by land, which is
not accounted for in the anthropogenic AFOLU CO2 emissions reported
in the pathways. Given the difference in estimating the `anthropogenic'
sink between countries and the global integrated assessment and
carbon modelling community (Grassi et al., 2017), the AFOLU CO2
estimates included here are not necessarily directly comparable with
countries' estimates at global level. The cumulated amount of AFOLU
CO2 emissions until the time they reach zero combine with the fossil-fuel
and industry CO2 emissions to give a total amount of gross emissions
114

of 650-1270 GtCO2 for the period 2018-2100 (5th-95th percentile;
median 950 GtCO2) in 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot.
The lower end of the range is close to what emerges from a scenario
of transformative change that halves CO2 emissions every decade
from 2020 to 2050 (Rockstrom et al., 2017). All these estimates are
above the remaining carbon budget for a one-in-two chance of limiting
warming below 1.5C without overshoot, including the low end of the
hypothetical sensitivity analysis of Kriegler et al. (2018b), who assumes
75 Gt AFOLU CO2 emissions adding to a total of 575 GtCO2 gross CO2
emissions. As almost no cases have been identified that keep gross CO2
emissions within the remaining carbon budget for a one-in-two chance
of limiting warming to 1.5C, and based on current understanding of
the geophysical response and its uncertainties, the available evidence
indicates that avoiding overshoot of 1.5C will require some type of
CDR in a broad sense, e.g., via net negative AFOLU CO2 emissions
(medium confidence). (Table 2.2).
Net CO2 emissions can fall below gross CO2 emissions, if CDR is
brought into the mix. Studies have looked at mitigation and CDR
in combination to identify strategies for limiting warming to 1.5C
(Sanderson et al., 2016; Ricke et al., 2017). CDR, which may include
net negative AFOLU CO2 emissions, is deployed by all 1.5C-consistent
pathways available to this assessment, but the scale of deployment
and choice of CDR measures varies widely (Section 2.3.4). Furthermore,
no CDR technology has been deployed at scale yet, and all come with
concerns about their potential (Fuss et al., 2018), feasibility (Nemet et
al., 2018) and/or sustainability (Smith et al., 2015; Fuss et al., 2018) (see
Sections 2.3.4, 4.3.2 and 4.3.7 and Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3
for further discussion). CDR can have two very different functions in
1.5C-consistent pathways. If deployed in the first half of the century,
before net zero CO2 emissions are reached, it neutralizes some of the
remaining CO2 emissions year by year and thus slows the accumulation
of CO2 in the atmosphere. In this first function it can be used to remain
within the carbon budget and avoid overshoot. If CDR is deployed in the
second half of the century after carbon neutrality has been established,
it can still be used to neutralize some residual emissions from other
sectors, but also to create net negative emissions that actively draw
down the cumulative amount of CO2 emissions to return below a
1.5C warming level. In the second function, CDR enables temporary
overshoot. The literature points to strong limitations to upscaling
CDR (limiting its first abovementioned function) and to sustainability
constraints (limiting both abovementioned functions) (Fuss et al.,
2018; Minx et al., 2018; Nemet et al., 2018). Large uncertainty hence
exists about what amount of CDR could actually be available before
mid-century. Kriegler et al. (2018b) explore a case limiting CDR to
100 GtCO2 until 2050, and the 1.5C pathways with no or limited
overshoot available in the report's database project 40-260 GtCO2
CDR until the point of carbon neutrality (5th to 95th percentile; median
110 GtCO2). Because gross CO2 emissions in most cases exceed the
remaining carbon budget by several hundred GtCO2 and given the limits
to CDR deployment until 2050, most of the 1.5C-consistent pathways
available to this assessment are overshoot pathways. However, the
scenario database also contains nine non-overshoot pathways that
remain below 1.5C throughout the 21st century (Table 2.1).

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2.3.3

Emissions Evolution in 1.5C Pathways

This section assesses the salient temporal evolutions of climate forcers
over the 21st century. It uses the classification of 1.5C pathways
presented in Section 2.1, which includes a Below-1.5C class, as well
as other classes with varying levels of projected overshoot (1.5C-lowOS and 1.5C-high-OS). First, aggregate-GHG benchmarks for 2030
are assessed. Subsequent sections assess long-lived climate forcers
(LLCF) and short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) separately because they
contribute in different ways to near-term, peak and long-term warming
(Section 2.2, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1).
Estimates of aggregated GHG emissions in line with specific policy
choices are often compared to near-term benchmark values from
mitigation pathways to explore their consistency with long-term
climate goals (Clarke et al., 2014; UNEP, 2016, 2017; UNFCCC, 2016).
Benchmark emissions or estimates of peak years derived from IAMs
provide guidelines or milestones that are consistent with achieving a
given temperature level. While they do not set mitigation requirements
in a strict sense, exceeding these levels in a given year almost invariably
increases the mitigation challenges afterwards by increasing the rates
of change and increasing the reliance on speculative technologies,
including the possibility that its implementation becomes unachievable
(see Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1 for a discussion of feasibility
concepts) (Luderer et al., 2013; Rogelj et al., 2013b; Clarke et al., 2014;
Fawcett et al., 2015; Riahi et al., 2015; Kriegler et al., 2018a). These
trade-offs are particularly pronounced in 1.5C pathways and are
discussed in Section 2.3.5. This section assesses Kyoto-GHG emissions
in 2030 expressed in CO2 equivalent (CO2e) emissions using 100-year
global warming potentials.3
Appropriate benchmark values of aggregated GHG emissions depend
on a variety of factors. First and foremost, they are determined by the
desired likelihood to keep warming below 1.5C and the extent to which
projected temporary overshoot is to be avoided (Sections 2.2, 2.3.2,
and 2.3.5). For instance, median aggregated 2030 GHG emissions are
about 10 GtCO2e yr-1 lower in 1.5C-low-OS compared to 1.5C-highOS pathways, with respective interquartile ranges of 26-31 and 36-49
GtCO2e yr-1 (Table 2.4). These ranges correspond to about 25-30 and
35-48 GtCO2e yr-1 in 2030, respectively, when aggregated with 100year Global Warming Potentials from the IPCC Second Assessment
Report. The limited evidence available for pathways aiming to limit
warming below 1.5C without overshoot or with limited amounts of
CDR (Grubler et al., 2018; Holz et al., 2018b; van Vuuren et al., 2018)
indicates that under these conditions consistent emissions in 2030
would fall at the lower end and below the above mentioned ranges.
Due to the small number of 1.5C pathways with no overshoot in the
report's database (Table 2.4) and the potential for a downward bias in
the selection of underlying scenario assumptions, the headline range
for 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot is also assessed to
be of the order of 25-30 GtCO2e yr-1. Ranges for the 1.5C-low-OS
and Lower-2C classes only overlap outside their interquartile ranges,

3

Chapter 2

highlighting the more accelerated reductions in 1.5C-consistent
compared to 2C-consistent pathways.
Appropriate emissions benchmark values also depend on the
acceptable or desired portfolio of mitigation measures, representing
clearly identified trade-offs and choices (Sections 2.3.4, 2.4, and 2.5.3)
(Luderer et al., 2013; Rogelj et al., 2013a; Clarke et al., 2014; Krey et al.,
2014a; Strefler et al., 2018b). For example, lower 2030 GHG emissions
correlate with a lower dependence on the future availability and
desirability of CDR (Strefler et al., 2018b). On the other hand, pathways
that assume or anticipate only limited deployment of CDR during
the 21st century imply lower emissions benchmarks over the coming
decades, which are achieved in models through further reducing
CO2 emissions in the coming decades. The pathway archetypes
used in the chapter illustrate this further (Figure 2.6). Under middleof-the-road assumptions of technological and socioeconomic
development, pathway S2 suggests emission benchmarks of 34, 12
and -8 GtCO2e yr-1 in the years 2030, 2050, and 2100, respectively.
In contrast, a pathway that further limits overshoot and aims at
eliminating the reliance on negative emissions technologies like
BECCS as well as CCS (here labelled as the LED pathway) shows
deeper emissions reductions in 2030 to limit the cumulative amount
of CO2 until net zero global CO2 emissions (carbon neutrality). The LED
pathway here suggests emission benchmarks of 25, 9 and 2 GtCO2e yr-1
in the years 2030, 2050, and 2100, respectively. However, a pathway
that allows and plans for the successful large-scale deployment of
BECCS by and beyond 2050 (S5) shows a shift in the opposite direction.
The variation within and between the abovementioned ranges of
2030 GHG benchmarks hence depends strongly on societal choices
and preferences related to the acceptability and availability of certain
technologies.
Overall these variations do not strongly affect estimates of the
1.5C-consistent timing of global peaking of GHG emissions. Both
Below-1.5C and 1.5C-low-OS pathways show minimum-maximum
ranges in 2030 that do not overlap with 2020 ranges, indicating the
global GHG emissions peaked before 2030 in these pathways. Also,
2020 and 2030 GHG emissions in 1.5C-high-OS pathways only
overlap outside their interquartile ranges.
Kyoto-GHG emission reductions are achieved by reductions in CO2
and non-CO2 GHGs. The AR5 identified two primary factors that
influence the depth and timing of reductions in non-CO2 Kyoto-GHG
emissions: (i) the abatement potential and costs of reducing the
emissions of these gases and (ii) the strategies that allow making
trade-offs between them (Clarke et al., 2014). Many studies indicate
low-cost, near-term mitigation options in some sectors for non-CO2
gases compared to supply-side measures for CO2 mitigation (Clarke et
al., 2014). A large share of this potential is hence already exploited in
mitigation pathways in line with 2C. At the same time, by mid-century
and beyond, estimates of further reductions of non-CO2 Kyoto-GHGs -
in particular CH4 and N2O - are hampered by the absence of mitigation

In this chapter GWP-100 values from the IPCC Fourth Assessement Report are used because emissions of fluorinated gases in the integrated pathways have been reported
in this metric to the database. At a global scale, switching between GWP-100 values of the Second, Fourth or Fifth IPCC Assessment Reports could result in variations in
aggregated Kyoto-GHG emissions of about 5% in 2030 (UNFCCC, 2016).

115

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

options in the current generation of IAMs, which are hence not able
to reduce residual emissions of sources linked to livestock production
and fertilizer use (Clarke et al., 2014; Gernaat et al., 2015) (Sections
2.3.1.2, 2.4.4, Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2). Therefore, while net
CO2 emissions are projected to be markedly lower in 1.5C-consistent
compared to 2C-consistent pathways, this is much less the case for
methane (CH4) and nitrous-oxide (N2O) (Figures 2.6-2.7). This results
in reductions of CO2 being projected to take up the largest share of
emissions reductions when moving between 1.5C-consistent and
2C-consistent pathways (Rogelj et al., 2015b, 2018; Luderer et al.,
2018). If additional non-CO2 mitigation measures are identified and
adequately included in IAMs, they are expected to further contribute to
mitigation efforts by lowering the floor of residual non-CO2 emissions.
However, the magnitude of these potential contributions has not been
assessed as part of this report.
As a result of the interplay between residual CO2 and non-CO2 emissions
and CDR, global GHG emissions reach net zero levels at different times
in different 1.5C-consistent pathways. Interquartile ranges of the
years in which 1.5C-low-OS and 1.5C-high-OS reach net zero GHG
emissions range from 2060 to 2080 (Table 2.4). A seesaw characteristic
can be found between near-term emissions reductions and the timing
of net zero GHG emissions. This is because pathways with limited
emissions reductions in the next one to two decades require net
negative CO2 emissions later on (see earlier). Most 1.5C-high-OS
pathways lead to net zero GHG emissions in approximately the third
quarter of this century, because all of them rely on significant amounts
of annual net negative CO2 emissions in the second half of the
century to decline temperatures after overshoot (Table 2.4). However,
in pathways that aim at limiting overshoot as much as possible or
more slowly decline temperatures after their peak, emissions reach
the point of net zero GHG emissions slightly later or at times never.
Early emissions reductions in this case reduce the requirement for net
negative CO2 emissions. Estimates of 2030 GHG emissions in line with
the current NDCs overlap with the highest quartile of 1.5C-high-OS
pathways (Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4).

2.3.3.1

Emissions of long-lived climate forcers

Climate effects of long-lived climate forcers (LLCFs) are dominated by
CO2, with smaller contributions of N2O and some fluorinated gases
(Myhre et al., 2013; Blanco et al., 2014). Overall net CO2 emissions
in pathways are the result of a combination of various anthropogenic
contributions (Figure 2.5) (Clarke et al., 2014): (i) CO2 produced by fossilfuel combustion and industrial processes, (ii) CO2 emissions or removals
from the agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sector, (iii)
CO2 capture and sequestration (CCS) from fossil fuels or industrial
activities before it is released to the atmosphere, (iv) CO2 removal by
technological means, which in current pathways is mainly achieved
by BECCS and AFOLU-related CDR, although other options could
be conceivable (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7). Pathways apply these
four contributions in different configurations (Figure 2.5) depending
on societal choices and preferences related to the acceptability and
availability of certain technologies, the timing and stringency of nearterm climate policy, and the ability to limit the demand that drives
baseline emissions (Marangoni et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017; Grubler
et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018), and come with
116

very different implication for sustainable development (Section 2.5.3).
All 1.5C pathways see global CO2 emissions embark on a steady
decline to reach (near) net zero levels around 2050, with 1.5C-lowOS pathways reaching net zero CO2 emissions around 2045-2055
(Table 2.4; Figure 2.5). Near-term differences between the various
pathway classes are apparent, however. For instance, Below-1.5C and
1.5C-low-OS pathways show a clear shift towards lower CO2 emissions
in 2030 relative to other 1.5C and 2C pathway classes, although in all
1.5C classes reductions are clear (Figure 2.6). These lower near-term
emissions levels are a direct consequence of the former two pathway
classes limiting cumulative CO2 emissions until carbon neutrality in
order to aim for a higher probability of limiting peak warming to 1.5C
(Section 2.2.2 and 2.3.2.2). In some cases, 1.5C-low-OS pathways
achieve net zero CO2 emissions one or two decades later, contingent on
2030 CO2 emissions in the lower quartile of the literature range, that
is, below about 18 GtCO2 yr-1. Median year-2030 global CO2 emissions
are of the order of 5-10 GtCO2 yr-1 lower in Below-1.5C compared
to 1.5C-low-OS pathways, which are in turn lower than 1.5C-highOS pathways (Table 2.4). Below-1.5C and 1.5C-low-OS pathways
combined show a decline in global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions
of about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030 (40-60% interquartile range).
Lower-2C pathways show CO2 emissions declining by about 25% by
2030 in most pathways (10-30% interquartile range). The 1.5C-highOS pathways show emissions levels that are broadly similar to the
2C-consistent pathways in 2030.
The development of CO2 emissions in the second half of the century in
1.5C pathways is characterized by the need to stay or return within
a carbon budget. Figure 2.6 shows net CO2 and N2O emissions from
various sources in 2050 and 2100 in 1.5C pathways in the literature.
Virtually all 1.5C pathways obtain net negative CO2 emissions at some
point during the 21st century, but the extent to which net negative
emissions are relied upon varies substantially (Figure 2.6, Table 2.4).
This net withdrawal of CO2 from the atmosphere compensates for
residual long-lived non-CO2 GHG emissions that also accumulate in
the atmosphere (like N2O) or cancels some of the build-up of CO2 due
to earlier emissions to achieve increasingly higher likelihoods that
warming stays or returns below 1.5C (see Section 2.3.4 for a discussion
of various uses of CDR). Even non-overshoot pathways that aim at
achieving temperature stabilization would hence deploy a certain
amount of net negative CO2 emissions to offset any accumulating
long-lived non-CO2 GHGs. The 1.5C overshoot pathways display
significantly larger amounts of annual net negative CO2 emissions in
the second half of the century. The larger the overshoot the more net
negative CO2 emissions are required to return temperatures to 1.5C
by the end of the century (Table 2.4, Figure 2.1).
N2O emissions decline to a much lesser extent than CO2 in currently
available 1.5C pathways (Figure 2.6). Current IAMs have limited
emissions-reduction potentials (Gernaat et al., 2015) (Sections 2.3.1.2,
2.4.4, Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2), reflecting the difficulty of
eliminating N2O emission from agriculture (Bodirsky et al., 2014).
Moreover, the reliance of some pathways on significant amounts of
bioenergy after mid-century (Section 2.4.2) coupled to a substantial
use of nitrogen fertilizer (Popp et al., 2017) also makes reducing N2O
emissions harder (for example, see pathway S5 in Figure 2.6). As

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.6 | Annual global emissions characteristics for 2020, 2030, 2050, 2100. Data are shown for (a) Kyoto-GHG emissions, and (b) global total CO2 emissions,
(c) CO2 emissions from the agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sector, (d) global N2O emissions, and (e) CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use and industrial processes.
The latter is also split into (f) emissions from the energy supply sector (electricity sector and refineries) and (g) direct emissions from fossil-fuel use in energy demand sectors
(industry, buildings, transport) (bottom row). Horizontal black lines show the median, boxes show the interquartile range, and whiskers the minimum-maximum range. Icons
indicate the four pathway archetypes used in this chapter. In case less than seven data points are available in a class, the minimum-maximum range and single data points
are shown. Kyoto-GHG, emissions in the top panel are aggregated with AR4 GWP-100 and contain CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, and SF6. NF3 is typically not reported by IAMs.
Scenarios with year-2010 Kyoto-GHG emissions outside the range assessed by IPCC AR5 WGIII assessed are excluded (IPCC, 2014b).

117

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

a result, sizeable residual N2O emissions are currently projected to
continue throughout the century, and measures to effectively mitigate
them will be of continued relevance for 1.5C societies. Finally, the
reduction of nitrogen use and N2O emissions from agriculture is already
a present-day concern due to unsustainable levels of nitrogen pollution
(Bodirsky et al., 2012). Section 2.4.4 provides a further assessment of
the agricultural non-CO2 emissions reduction potential.

2.3.3.2

2

Emissions of short-lived climate forcers and
fluorinated gases

SLCFs include shorter-lived GHGs like CH4 and some fluorinated gases
as well as particles (aerosols), their precursors and ozone precursors.
SLCFs are strongly mitigated in 1.5C pathways, as is the case for
2C pathways (Figure 2.7). SLCF emissions ranges of 1.5C and 2C
pathway classes strongly overlap, indicating that the main incremental
mitigation contribution between 1.5C and 2C pathways comes from
CO2 (Luderer et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018). CO2 and SLCF emissions
reductions are connected in situations where SLCF and CO2 are
co-emitted by the same process, for example, with coal-fired power
plants (Shindell and Faluvegi, 2010) or within the transport sector
(Fuglestvedt et al., 2010). Many CO2-targeted mitigation measures
in industry, transport and agriculture (Sections 2.4.3-4) hence also
reduce non-CO2 forcing (Rogelj et al., 2014b; Shindell et al., 2016).
Despite the fact that methane has a strong warming effect (Myhre
et al., 2013; Etminan et al., 2016), current 1.5C-consistent pathways
still project significant emissions of CH4 by 2050, indicating only a
limited CH4 mitigation potential in IAM analyses (Gernaat et al., 2015)
(Sections 2.3.1.2, 2.4.4, Table 2.SM.2). The AFOLU sector contributes an
important share of the residual CH4 emissions until mid-century, with
its relative share increasing from slightly below 50% in 2010 to around
55-70% in 2030, and 60-80% in 2050 in 1.5C-consistent pathways
(interquartile range across 1.5C-consistent pathways for projections).
Many of the proposed measures to target CH4 (Shindell et al., 2012;
Stohl et al., 2015) are included in 1.5C-consistent pathways (Figure
2.7), though not all (Sections 2.3.1.2, 2.4.4, Table 2.SM.2). A detailed
assessment of measures to further reduce AFOLU CH4 emissions has
not been conducted.
Overall reductions of SLCFs can have effects of either sign on
temperature depending on the balance between cooling and warming
agents. The reduction in SO2 emissions is the dominant single effect as
it weakens the negative total aerosol forcing. This means that reducing
all SLCF emissions to zero would result in a short-term warming,
although this warming is unlikely to be more than 0.5C (Section 2.2
and Figure 1.5 (Samset et al., 2018)). Because of this effect, suggestions
have been proposed that target the warming agents only (referred to
as short-lived climate pollutants or SLCPs instead of the more general
short-lived climate forcers; e.g., Shindell et al., 2012), though aerosols
are often emitted in varying mixtures of warming and cooling species
(Bond et al., 2013). Black carbon (BC) emissions reach similar levels
across 1.5C-consistent and 2C-consistent pathways available in the
literature, with interquartile ranges of emissions reductions across
pathways of 16-34% and 48-58% in 2030 and 2050, respectively,
relative to 2010 (Figure 2.7). Recent studies have identified further
reduction potentials for the near term, with global reductions of about
118

80% being suggested (Stohl et al., 2015; Klimont et al., 2017). Because
the dominant sources of certain aerosol mixtures are emitted during
the combustion of fossil fuels, the rapid phase-out of unabated fossil
fuels to avoid CO2 emissions would also result in removal of these
either warming or cooling SLCF air-pollutant species. Furthermore,
SLCFs are also reduced by efforts to reduce particulate air pollution.
For example, year-2050 SO2 emissions (precursors of sulphate aerosol)
in 1.5C-consistent pathways are about 75-85% lower than their 2010
levels. Some caveats apply, for example, if residential biomass use
would be encouraged in industrialised countries in stringent mitigation
pathways without appropriate pollution control measures, aerosol
concentrations could also increase (Sand et al., 2015; Stohl et al., 2015).
Emissions of fluorinated gases (IPCC/TEAP, 2005; US EPA, 2013; Velders
et al., 2015; Purohit and Hoglund-Isaksson, 2017) in 1.5C-consistent
pathways are reduced by roughly 75-80% relative to 2010 levels
(interquartile range across 1.5C-consistent pathways) in 2050,
with no clear differences between the classes. Although unabated
hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions have been projected to increase
(Velders et al., 2015), the Kigali Amendment recently added HFCs to
the basket of gases controlled under the Montreal Protocol (HoglundIsaksson et al., 2017). As part of the larger group of fluorinated
gases, HFCs are also assumed to decline in 1.5C-consistent
pathways. Projected reductions by 2050 of fluorinated gases under
1.5C-consistent pathways are deeper than published estimates of
what a full implementation of the Montreal Protocol including its
Kigali Amendment would achieve (Hoglund-Isaksson et al., 2017),
which project roughly a halving of fluorinated gas emissions in 2050
compared to 2010. Assuming the application of technologies that
are currently commercially available and at least to a limited extent
already tested and implemented, potential fluorinated gas emissions
reductions of more than 90% have been estimated (Hoglund-Isaksson
et al., 2017).
There is a general agreement across 1.5C-consistent pathways that
until 2030 forcing from the warming SLCFs is reduced less strongly
than the net cooling forcing from aerosol effects, compared to 2010.
As a result, the net forcing contributions from all SLCFs combined are
projected to increase slightly by about 0.2-0.3 W m-2, compared to
2010. Also, by the end of the century, about 0.1-0.3 W m-2 of SLCF
forcing is generally currently projected to remain in 1.5C-consistent
scenarios (Figure 2.8). This is similar to developments in 2C-consistent
pathways (Rose et al., 2014b; Riahi et al., 2017), which show median
forcing contributions from these forcing agents that are generally no
more than 0.1 W m-2 higher. Nevertheless, there can be additional gains
from targeted deeper reductions of CH4 emissions and tropospheric
ozone precursors, with some scenarios projecting less than 0.1 W m-2
forcing from SLCFs by 2100.

2.3.4

CDR in 1.5C Pathways

Deep mitigation pathways assessed in AR5 showed significant
deployment of CDR, in particular through BECCS (Clarke et al., 2014).
This has led to increased debate about the necessity, feasibility and
desirability of large-scale CDR deployment, sometimes also called
`negative emissions technologies' in the literature (Fuss et al., 2014;
Anderson and Peters, 2016; Williamson, 2016; van Vuuren et al.,

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Table 2.4 | Emissions in 2030, 2050 and 2100 in 1.5C and 2C scenario classes and absolute annual rates of change between 2010-2030, 2020-2030 and
2030-2050, respectively.
Values show median and interquartile range across available scenarios (25th and 75th percentile given in brackets). If fewer than seven scenarios are available
(*), the minimum-maximum range is given instead. Kyoto-GHG emissions are aggregated with GWP-100 values from IPCC AR4. Emissions in 2010 for total
net CO2, CO2 from fossil-fuel use and industry, and AFOLU CO2 are estimated at 38.5, 33.4, and 5 GtCO2 yr-1, respectively (Le Quere et al., 2018). Percentage
reduction numbers included in headline statement C.1 in the Summary for Policymakers are computed relative to 2010 emissions in each individual pathway, and
hence differ slightly from a case where reductions are computed relative to the historical 2010 emissions reported above. A difference is reported in estimating the
`anthropogenic' sink by countries or the global carbon modelling community (Grassi et al., 2017), and AFOLU CO2 estimates reported here are thus not necessarily
comparable with countries' estimates. Scenarios with year-2010 Kyoto-GHG emissions outside the range assessed by IPCC AR5 WGIII are excluded (IPCC, 2014b),
as are scenario duplicates that would bias ranges towards a single study.

Annual emissions/sequestration
(GtCO2 yr-1)
Name
Total CO2
(net)

CO2 from
fossil fuels
and industry
(gross)

CO2 from
fossil fuels
and industry
(net)

CO2 from
AFOLU

Bioenergy
combined
with carbon
capture
and storage
(BECCS)

Category

Timing of
Global Zero

#

2030

2050

2100

2010-2030

2020-2030

2030-2050

Year

Below-1.5C

5*

13.4 (15.4, 11.4)

-3.0 (1.7, -10.6)

-8.0 (-2.6, -14.2)

-1.2 (-1.0, -1.3)

-2.5 (-1.8, -2.8)

-0.8 (-0.7, -1.2)

2044 (2037, 2054)

1.5C-low-OS

37

20.8 (22.2, 18.0)

-0.4 (2.7, -2.0)

-10.8 (-8.1, -14.3)

-0.8 (-0.7, -1.0)

-1.7 (-1.4, -2.3)

-1.0 (-0.8, -1.2)

2050 (2047, 2055)

1.5C with no
or limited OS

42

20.3
(22.0, 15.9)

-0.5 (2.2, -2.8)

-10.2
(-7.6, -14.2)

-0.9 (-0.7, -1.1)

-1.8 (-1.5, -2.3)

-1.0 (-0.8, -1.2)

2050
(2046, 2055)

1.5C-high-OS

36

29.1 (36.4, 26.0)

1.0 (6.3, -1.2)

-13.8 (-11.1, -16.4)

-0.4 (0.0, -0.6)

-1.1 (-0.5, -1.5)

-1.3 (-1.1, -1.8)

2052 (2049, 2059)

Lower-2C

54

28.9 (33.7, 24.5)

9.9 (13.1, 6.5)

-5.1 (-2.6, -10.3)

-0.4 (-0.2, -0.6)

-1.1 (-0.8, -1.6)

-0.9 (-0.8, -1.2)

2070 (2063, 2079)

Higher-2C

54

33.5 (35.0, 31.0)

17.9 (19.1, 12.2)

-3.3 (0.6, -11.5)

-0.2 (-0.0, -0.4)

-0.7 (-0.5, -0.9)

-0.8 (-0.6, -1.0)

2085
(2070, post-2100)

Below-1.5C

5*

18.0 (21.4, 13.8)

10.5 (20.9, 0.3)

8.3 (11.6, 0.1)

-0.7 (-0.6, -1)

-1.5 (-0.9, -2.2)

-0.4 (0, -0.7)

-

1.5C-low-OS

37

22.1 (24.4, 18.7)

10.3 (14.1, 7.8)

5.6 (8.1, 2.6)

-0.5 (-0.4, -0.6)

-1.3 (-0.9, -1.7)

-0.6 (-0.5, -0.7)

-

1.5C with no
or limited OS

42

21.6
(24.2, 18.0)

10.3 (13.8, 7.7)

6.1 (8.4, 2.6)

-0.5 (-0.4, -0.7)

-1.3 (-0.9, -1.8)

-0.6 (-0.4, -0.7)

-

1.5C-high-OS

36

27.8 (37.1, 25.6)

13.1 (17.0, 11.6)

6.6 (8.8, 2.8)

-0.2 (0.2, -0.3)

-0.8 (-0.2, -1.1)

-0.7 (-0.6, -1.0)

-

Lower-2C

54

27.7 (31.5, 23.5)

15.4 (19.0, 11.1)

7.2 (10.4, 3.7)

-0.2 (-0.0, -0.4)

-0.8 (-0.5, -1.2)

-0.6 (-0.5, -0.8)

-

Higher-2C

54

31.3 (33.4, 28.7)

19.2 (22.6, 17.1)

8.1 (10.9, 5.0)

-0.1 (0.1, -0.2)

-0.5 (-0.2, -0.7)

-0.6 (-0.5, -0.7)

-

Below-1.5C

5*

16.4 (18.2, 13.5)

1.0 (7.0, 0)

-2.7 (0, -9.8)

-0.8 (-0.7, -1)

-1.8 (-1.2, -2.2)

-0.6 (-0.5, -0.9)

-

1.5C-low-OS

37

20.6 (22.2, 17.5)

3.2 (5.6, -0.6)

-8.5 (-4.1, -11.6)

-0.6 (-0.5, -0.7)

-1.4 (-1.1, -1.8)

-0.8 (-0.7, -1.1)

-

1.5C with no
or limited OS

42

20.1
(22.1, 16.8)

3.0 (5.6, 0.0)

-8.3
(-3.5, -10.8)

-0.6 (-0.5, -0.8)

-1.4 (-1.1, -1.9)

-0.8 (-0.7, -1.1)

-

1.5C-high-OS

36

26.9 (34.7, 25.3)

4.2 (10.0, 1.2)

-10.7 (-6.9, -13.2)

-0.3 (0.1, -0.3)

-0.9 (-0.3, -1.2)

-1.2 (-0.9, -1.5)

-

Lower-2C

54

28.2 (31.0, 23.1)

11.8 (14.1, 6.2)

-3.1 (-0.7, -6.4)

-0.2 (-0.1, -0.4)

-0.8 (-0.5, -1.2)

-0.8 (-0.7, -1.0)

-

Higher-2C

54

31.0 (33.0, 28.7)

17.0 (19.3, 13.1)

-2.9 (3.3, -8.0)

-0.1 (0.1, -0.2)

-0.5 (-0.2, -0.7)

-0.7 (-0.5, -1.0)

Below-1.5C

5*

-2.2 (-0.3, -4.8)

-4.4 (-1.2, -11.1)

-4.4 (-2.6, -5.3)

-0.3 (-0.2, -0.4)

-0.5 (-0.4, -0.8)

-0.1 (0, -0.4)

-

1.5C-low-OS

37

-0.1 (0.8, -1.0)

-2.3 (-0.6, -4.1)

-2.4 (-1.2, -4.2)

-0.2 (-0.2, -0.3)

-0.4 (-0.3, -0.5)

-0.1 (-0.1, -0.2)

-

1.5C with no
or limited OS

42

-0.1 (0.7, -1.3)

-2.6 (-0.6, -4.5)

-2.6 (-1.3, -4.2)

-0.2 (-0.2, -0.3)

-0.4 (-0.3, -0.5)

-0.1 (-0.1, -0.2)

-

1.5C-high-OS

36

1.2 (2.7, 0.1)

-2.1 (-0.3, -5.4)

-2.4 (-1.5, -5.0)

-0.1 (-0.1, -0.3)

-0.2 (-0.1, -0.5)

-0.2 (-0.0, -0.3)

-

Lower-2C

54

1.4 (2.8, 0.3)

-1.4 (-0.5, -2.7)

-2.4 (-1.3, -4.2)

-0.2 (-0.1, -0.2)

-0.3 (-0.2, -0.4)

-0.1 (-0.1, -0.2)

-

Higher-2C

54

1.5 (2.7, 0.8)

-0.0 (1.9, -1.6)

-1.3 (0.1, -3.9)

-0.2 (-0.1, -0.2)

-0.2 (-0.1, -0.4)

-0.1 (-0.0, -0.1)

-

Below-1.5C

5*

0.4 (1.1, 0)

3.4 (8.3, 0)

5.7 (13.4, 0)

0 (0.1, 0)

0 (0.1, 0)

0.2 (0.4, 0)

-

1.5C-low-OS

36

0.3 (1.1, 0.0)

4.6 (6.4, 3.8)

12.4 (15.6, 7.6)

0.0 (0.1, 0.0)

0.0 (0.1, 0.0)

0.2 (0.3, 0.2)

-

1.5C with no
or limited OS

41

0.4 (1.0, 0.0)

4.5 (6.3, 3.4)

12.4 (15.0, 6.4)

0.0 (0.1, 0.0)

0.0 (0.1, 0.0)

0.2 (0.3, 0.2)

-

1.5C-high-OS

36

0.1 (0.4, 0.0)

6.8 (9.5, 3.7)

14.9 (16.3, 12.1)

0.0 (0.0, 0.0)

0.0 (0.0, 0.0)

0.3 (0.4, 0.2)

-

Lower-2C

54

0.1 (0.3, 0.0)

3.6 (4.6, 1.8)

9.5 (12.1, 6.9)

0.0 (0.0, 0.0)

0.0 (0.0, 0.0)

0.2 (0.2, 0.1)

-

47

0.1 (0.2, 0.0)

3.0 (4.9, 1.6)

10.8
(15.3, 8.2) [46]

0.0 (0.0, 0.0)

0.0 (0.0, 0.0)

0.1 (0.2, 0.1)

5*

22.1 (22.8, 20.7)

2.7 (8.1, -3.5)

-2.6 (2.7, -10.7)

-1.4 (-1.3, -1.5)

-2.9 (-2.1, -3.3)

-0.9 (-0.7, -1.3)

2066
(2044, post-2100)

1.5C-low-OS

31

27.9 (31.1, 26.0)

7.0 (9.9, 4.5)

-3.8 (-2.1, -7.9)

-1.1 (-0.9, -1.2)

-2.3 (-1.8, -2.8)

-1.1 (-0.9, -1.2)

2068 (2061, 2080)

1.5C with no
or limited OS

36

27.4 (30.9, 24.7)

6.5 (9.6, 4.2)

-3.7 (-1.8, -7.8)

-1.1 (-1.0, -1.3)

-2.4 (-1.9, -2.9)

-1.1 (-0.9, -1.2)

2067 (2061, 2084)

1.5C-high-OS

32

40.4 (48.9, 36.3)

8.4 (12.3, 6.2)

-8.5 (-5.7,
-11.2)

-0.5 (-0.0, -0.7)

-1.3 (-0.6, -1.8)

-1.5 (-1.3, -2.1)

2063 (2058, 2067)

46

39.6 (45.1, 35.7)

18.3 (20.4, 15.2)

2.1 (4.2, -2.4)

-0.5 (-0.1, -0.7)

-1.5 (-0.9, -2.2)

-1.1 (-0.9, -1.2)

post-2100
(2090 post-2100)

42

45.3 (48.5, 39.3)

25.9 (27.9, 23.3)

5.2 (11.5, -4.8)

-0.2 (-0.0, -0.6)

-1.0 (-0.6, -1.2)

-1.0 (-0.7, -1.2)

post-2100
(2085 post-2100)

Higher-2C
Kyoto
GHG (AR4)
[GtCO2e]

Absolute Annual Change
(GtCO2/yr-1)

Below-1.5C

Lower-2C
Higher-2C

-

119

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2

Figure 2.7 | Global characteristics of a selection of short-lived non-CO2 emissions until mid-century for five pathway classes used in this chapter. Data
are shown for (a) methane (CH4), (b) fluorinated gases (F-gas), (c) black carbon (BC), and (d) sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions. Boxes with different colours refer to different
scenario classes. Icons on top the ranges show four illustrative pathway archetypes that apply different mitigation strategies for limiting warming to 1.5C. Boxes show the
interquartile range, horizontal black lines the median, and whiskers the minimum-maximum range. F-gases are expressed in units of CO2-equivalence computed with 100-year
Global Warming Potentials reported in IPCC AR4.

Figure 2.8 | Estimated aggregated effective radiative forcing of SLCFs for 1.5C and 2C pathway classes in 2010, 2020, 2030, 2050, and 2100,
as estimated by the FAIR model (Smith et al., 2018). Aggregated short-lived climate forcer (SLCF) radiative forcing is estimated as the difference between total
anthropogenic radiative forcing and the sum of CO2 and N2O radiative forcing over time, and is expressed relative to 1750. Symbols indicate the four pathways archetypes
used in this chapter. Horizontal black lines indicate the median, boxes the interquartile range, and whiskers the minimum-maximum range per pathway class. Because very few
pathways fall into the Below-1.5C class, only the minimum-maximum is provided here.

120

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2017a; Obersteiner et al., 2018). Most CDR technologies remain largely
unproven to date and raise substantial concerns about adverse sideeffects on environmental and social sustainability (Smith et al., 2015;
Dooley and Kartha, 2018). A set of key questions emerge: how strongly
do 1.5C-consistent pathways rely on CDR deployment and what types
of CDR measures are deployed at which scale? How does this vary
across available 1.5C-consistent pathways and on which factors does
it depend? How does CDR deployment compare between 1.5C- and
2C-consistent pathways and how does it compare with the findings
at the time of the AR5? How does CDR deployment in 1.5C-consistent
pathways relate to questions about availability, policy implementation
and sustainable development implications that have been raised
about CDR technologies? The first three questions are assessed in this
section with the goal to provide an overview and assessment of CDR
deployment in the 1.5C pathway literature. The fourth question is only
touched upon here and is addressed in greater depth in Chapter 4,
Section 4.3.7, which assesses the rapidly growing literature on costs,
potentials, availability and sustainability implications of individual
CDR measures (Minx et al., 2017, 2018; Fuss et al., 2018; Nemet
et al., 2018). In addition, Section 2.3.5 assesses the relationship
between delayed mitigation action and increased CDR reliance. CDR
deployment is intricately linked to the land-use transformation in
1.5C-consistent pathways. This transformation is assessed in Section
2.4.4. Bioenergy and BECCS impacts on sustainable land management
are further assessed in Chapter 3, Section 3.6.2 and Cross-Chapter Box
7 in Chapter 3. Ultimately, a comprehensive assessment of the land
implication of land-based CDR measures will be provided in the IPCC
AR6 Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL).

2.3.4.1

CDR technologies and deployment levels in 1.5C
pathways

A number of approaches to actively remove carbon-dioxide from
the atmosphere are increasingly discussed in the literature (Minx
et al., 2018) (see also Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7). Approaches under
consideration include the enhancement of terrestrial and coastal
carbon storage in plants and soils such as afforestation and
reforestation (Canadell and Raupach, 2008), soil carbon enhancement
(Paustian et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017; Zomer et al., 2017), and other
conservation, restoration, and management options for natural and
managed land (Griscom et al., 2017) and coastal ecosystems (McLeod
et al., 2011). Biochar sequestration (Woolf et al., 2010; Smith, 2016;
Werner et al., 2018) provides an additional route for terrestrial carbon
storage. Other approaches are concerned with storing atmospheric
carbon dioxide in geological formations. They include the combination
of biomass use for energy production with carbon capture and storage
(BECCS) (Obersteiner et al., 2001; Keith and Rhodes, 2002; Gough
and Upham, 2011) and direct air capture with storage (DACCS) using
chemical solvents and sorbents (Zeman and Lackner, 2004; Keith et
al., 2006; Socolow et al., 2011). Further approaches investigate the
mineralization of atmospheric carbon dioxide (Mazzotti et al., 2005;
Matter et al., 2016), including enhanced weathering of rocks (Schuiling
and Krijgsman, 2006; Hartmann et al., 2013; Strefler et al., 2018a).
A fourth group of approaches is concerned with the sequestration
of carbon dioxide in the oceans, for example by means of ocean
alkalinization (Kheshgi, 1995; Rau, 2011; Ilyina et al., 2013; Lenton et
al., 2018). The costs, CDR potential and environmental side effects of

Chapter 2

several of these measures are increasingly investigated and compared
in the literature, but large uncertainties remain, in particular concerning
the feasibility and impact of large-scale deployment of CDR measures
(The Royal Society, 2009; Smith et al., 2015; Psarras et al., 2017; Fuss
et al., 2018) (see Chapter 4.3.7). There are also proposals to remove
methane, nitrous oxide and halocarbons via photocatalysis from the
atmosphere (Boucher and Folberth, 2010; de Richter et al., 2017), but
a broader assessment of their effectiveness, cost and sustainability
impacts is lacking to date.
Only some of these approaches have so far been considered in IAMs
(see Section 2.3.1.2). The mitigation scenario literature up to AR5
mostly included BECCS and, to a more limited extent, afforestation
and reforestation (Clarke et al., 2014). Since then, some 2C- and
1.5C-consistent pathways including additional CDR measures such
as DACCS (Chen and Tavoni, 2013; Marcucci et al., 2017; Lehtila and
Koljonen, 2018; Strefler et al., 2018b) and soil carbon sequestration
(Frank et al., 2017) have become available. Other, more speculative
approaches, in particular ocean-based CDR and removal of non-CO2
gases, have not yet been taken up by the literature on mitigation
pathways. See Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2 for an overview on
the coverage of CDR measures in models which contributed pathways
to this assessment. Chapter 4.3.7 assesses the potential, costs, and
sustainability implications of the full range of CDR measures.
Integrated assessment modelling has not yet explored land conservation,
restoration and management options to remove carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere in sufficient depth, despite land management having a
potentially considerable impact on the terrestrial carbon stock (Erb et
al., 2018). Moreover, associated CDR measures have low technological
requirements, and come with potential environmental and social
co-benefits (Griscom et al., 2017). Despite the evolving capabilities of
IAMs in accounting for a wider range of CDR measures, 1.5C-consistent
pathways assessed here continue to predominantly rely on BECCS and
afforestation/reforestation (see Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2).
However, IAMs with spatially explicit land-use modelling include a full
accounting of land-use change emissions comprising carbon stored
in the terrestrial biosphere and soils. Net CDR in the AFOLU sector,
including but not restricted to afforestation and reforestation, can thus
in principle be inferred by comparing AFOLU CO2 emissions between
a baseline scenario and a 1.5C-consistent pathway from the same
model and study. However, baseline AFOLU CO2 emissions can not only
be reduced by CDR in the AFOLU sector but also by measures to reduce
deforestation and preserve land carbon stocks. The pathway literature
and pathway data available to this assessment do not yet allow
separating the two contributions. As a conservative approximation, the
additional net negative AFOLU CO2 emissions below the baseline are
taken as a proxy for AFOLU CDR in this assessment. Because this does
not include CDR that was deployed before reaching net zero AFOLU
CO2 emissions, this approximation is a lower-bound for terrestrial CDR
in the AFOLU sector (including all mitigation-policy-related factors that
lead to net negative AFOLU CO2 emissions).
The scale and type of CDR deployment in 1.5C-consistent pathways
varies widely (Figure 2.9 and 2.10). Overall CDR deployment over the
21st century is substantial in most of the pathways, and deployment
levels cover a wide range, on the order of 100-1000 Gt CO2 in 1.5C
121

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

pathways with no or limited overshoot (730 [260-1030] GtCO2, for
median and 5th-95th percentile range). Both BECCS (480 [0-1000]
GtCO2 in 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot) and AFOLU
CDR measures including afforestation and reforestation (210 [10540] GtCO2 in 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot) can play
a major role,4 but for both cases pathways exist where they play no
role at all. This shows the flexibility in substituting between individual
CDR measures, once a portfolio of options becomes available. The high
end of the CDR deployment range is populated by high overshoot
pathways, as illustrated by pathway archetype S5 based on SSP5
(fossil-fuelled development, see Section 2.3.1.1) and characterized
by very large BECCS deployment to return warming to 1.5C by 2100
(Kriegler et al., 2017). In contrast, the low end is populated by a few
pathways with no or limited overshoot that limit CDR to on the order of
100-200 GtCO2 over the 21st century, coming entirely from terrestrial
CDR measures with no or small use of BECCS. These are pathways
with very low energy demand facilitating the rapid phase-out of
fossil fuels and process emissions that exclude BECCS and CCS use
(Grubler et al., 2018) and/or pathways with rapid shifts to sustainable

food consumption freeing up sufficient land areas for afforestation
and reforestation (Haberl et al., 2011; van Vuuren et al., 2018). Some
pathways use neither BECCS nor afforestation but still rely on CDR
through considerable net negative CO2 emissions in the AFOLU sector
around mid-century (Holz et al., 2018b). We conclude that the role of
BECCS as a dominant CDR measure in deep mitigation pathways has
been reduced since the time of the AR5. This is related to three factors:
a larger variation of underlying assumptions about socio-economic
drivers (Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018) and associated energy
(Grubler et al., 2018) and food demand (van Vuuren et al., 2018);
the incorporation of a larger portfolio of mitigation and CDR options
(Marcucci et al., 2017; Grubler et al., 2018; Lehtila and Koljonen,
2018; Liu et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018); and targeted analysis
of deployment limits for (specific) CDR measures (Holz et al., 2018b;
Kriegler et al., 2018a; Strefler et al., 2018b), including the availability
of bioenergy (Bauer et al., 2018), CCS (Krey et al., 2014a; Grubler et
al., 2018) and afforestation (Popp et al., 2014b, 2017). As additional
CDR measures are being built into IAMs, the prevalence of BECCS is
expected to be further reduced.

Figure 2.9 | Cumulative CDR deployment in 1.5C-consistent pathways in the literature as reported in the database collected for this assessment until
2050 (panel a) and until 2100 (panel b). Total CDR comprises all forms of CDR, including AFOLU CDR and BECCS, and, in a few pathways, other CDR measures like DACCS.
It does not include CCS combined with fossil fuels (which is not a CDR technology as it does not result in active removal of CO2 from the atmosphere). AFOLU CDR has not been
reported directly and is hence represented by means of a proxy: the additional amount of net negative CO2 emissions in the AFOLU sector compared to a baseline scenario (see
text for a discussion). `Compensatory CO2' depicts the cumulative amount of CDR that is used to neutralize concurrent residual CO2 emissions. `Net negative CO2' describes the
additional amount of CDR that is used to produce net negative CO2 emissions, once residual CO2 emissions are neutralized. The two quantities add up to total CDR for individual
pathways (not for percentiles and medians, see Footnote 4).

As discussed in Section 2.3.2, CDR can be used in two ways in
mitigation pathways: (i) to move more rapidly towards the point of
carbon neutrality and maintain it afterwards in order to stabilize global
mean temperature rise, and (ii) to produce net negative CO2 emissions,
drawing down anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere in order to decline
global mean temperature after an overshoot peak (Kriegler et al., 2018b;
Obersteiner et al., 2018). Both uses are important in 1.5C-consistent
pathways (Figure 2.9 and 2.10). Because of the tighter remaining 1.5C
4

carbon budget, and because many pathways in the literature do not
restrict exceeding this budget prior to 2100, the relative weight of
the net negative emissions component of CDR increases compared to
2C-consistent pathways. The amount of compensatory CDR remains
roughly the same over the century. This is the net effect of stronger
deployment of compensatory CDR until mid-century to accelerate
the approach to carbon neutrality and less compensatory CDR in the
second half of the century due to deeper mitigation of end-use sectors

The median and percentiles of the sum of two quantities is in general not equal to the sum of the medians and percentiles, respectively, of the two quantitites.

122

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
Legend
All amounts over 2018-2100 period

Total amount of CO2 produced
by the economy
Amount not emitted
due to Fossil CCS

Gross CO2 emissions:
total amount of CO2 emissions
being vented into the atmosphere

Chapter 2

CDR compensating
residual CO2
emissions

Maximum (peak) CO2 emissions
peak amount emitted into the atmosphere
during the 21st century after subtracting
CDR (relates to peak warming)

BECCS

AFOLU CDR

Net CO2 emissions:
amount that remains emitted
over the 2018-2100 period
after subtracting CDR
(relates to year-2100 warming)

net negative CO2

Remaining 1.5C carbon budget
from 2018 onwards
range: TCRE 50% and TCRE67%

2

1000

500

0

Pathway class:
S1
Median warming:
1.5C-low-OS
peak : 1.5C
estimated by MAGICC
(AR5 setup)
year-2100 : 1.3C

S2
1.5C-low-OS
peak : 1.6C
year-2100 : 1.3C

S5
1.5C-high-OS
peak : 1.8C
year-2100 : 1.3C

LED
1.5C-low-OS
peak : 1.5C
year-2100 : 1.4C

Remaining
1.5C carbon budget
accounting for addtional
Earth-system feedbacks

Cumulated CO2 2018-2100 (GtCO2)

1500

Figure 2.10 | Accounting of cumulative CO2 emissions for the four 1.5C-consistent pathway archetypes. See top panel for explanation of the bar plots. Total
CDR is the difference between gross (red horizontal bar) and net (purple horizontal bar) cumulative CO2 emissions over the period 2018-2100, and it is equal to the sum of the
BECCS (grey) and AFOLU CDR (green) contributions. Cumulative net negative emissions are the difference between peak (orange horizontal bar) and net (purple) cumulative CO2
emissions. The blue shaded area depicts the estimated range of the remaining carbon budget for a two-in-three to one-in-two chance of staying below1.5C. The grey shaded
area depicts the range when accounting for additional Earth system feedbacks.

in 1.5C-consistent pathways (Luderer et al., 2018). Comparing median
levels, end-of-century net cumulative CO2 emissions are roughly
600 GtCO2 smaller in 1.5C compared to 2C-consistent pathways,
with approximately two thirds coming from further reductions of gross
CO2 emissions and the remaining third from increased CDR deployment.
As a result, median levels of total CDR deployment in 1.5C-consistent
pathways are larger than in 2C-consistent pathways (Figure 2.9), but
with marked variations in each pathway class.
Ramp-up rates of individual CDR measures in 1.5C-consistent
pathways are provided in Table 2.4. BECCS deployment is still
limited in 2030, but ramps up to median levels of 3 (Below-1.5C),
5 (1.5C-low-OS) and 7 GtCO2 yr-1 (1.5C-high-OS) in 2050, and to 6
(Below-1.5C), 12 (1.5C-low-OS) and 15 GtCO2 yr-1 (1.5C-high-OS)
in 2100, respectively. In 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot,
this amounts to 0-1, 0-8, and 0-16 GtCO2 yr-1 in 2030, 2050, and
2100, respectively (ranges refer to the union of the min-max range
of the Below-1.5C and the interquartile range of the 1.5C-low-OS
class; see Table 2.4). Net CDR in the AFOLU sector reaches slightly
lower levels in 2050, and stays more constant until 2100. In 1.5C
pathways with no or limited overshoot, AFOLU CDR amounts to 0-5,

1-11, and 1-5 GtCO2 yr-1 (see above for the definition of the ranges)
in 2030, 2050, and 2100, respectively. In contrast to BECCS, AFOLU
CDR is more strongly deployed in non-overshoot than overshoot
pathways. This indicates differences in the timing of the two CDR
approaches. Afforestation is scaled up until around mid-century, when
the time of carbon neutrality is reached in 1.5C-consistent pathways,
while BECCS is projected to be used predominantly in the 2nd half
of the century (Figure 2.5). This reflects the fact that afforestation is
a readily available CDR technology, while BECCS is more costly and
much less mature a technology. As a result, the two options contribute
differently to compensating concurrent CO2 emissions (until 2050)
and to producing net negative CO2 emissions (post-2050). BECCS
deployment is particularly strong in pathways with high overshoots
but can also feature in pathways with low overshoot (see Figure 2.5
and 2.10). Annual deployment levels until mid-century are not found
to be significantly different between 2C-consistent pathways and
1.5C-consistent pathways with no or low overshoot. This suggests
similar implementation challenges for ramping up BECCS deployment
at the rates projected in the pathways (Honegger and Reiner, 2018;
Nemet et al., 2018). The feasibility and sustainability of upscaling CDR
at these rates is assessed in Chapter 4.3.7.
123

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Concerns have been raised that building expectations about largescale CDR deployment in the future can lead to an actual reduction
of near-term mitigation efforts (Geden, 2015; Anderson and Peters,
2016; Dooley and Kartha, 2018). The pathway literature confirms that
CDR availability influences the shape of mitigation pathways critically
(Krey et al., 2014a; Holz et al., 2018b; Kriegler et al., 2018a; Strefler
et al., 2018b). Deeper near-term emissions reductions are required to
reach the 1.5C-2C target range if CDR availability is constrained. As
a result, the least-cost benchmark pathways to derive GHG emissions
gap estimates (UNEP, 2017) are dependent on assumptions about CDR

availability. Using GHG benchmarks in climate policy makes implicit
assumptions about CDR availability (Fuss et al., 2014; van Vuuren
et al., 2017a). At the same time, the literature also shows that rapid
and stringent mitigation as well as large-scale CDR deployment occur
simultaneously in 1.5C pathways due to the tight remaining carbon
budget (Luderer et al., 2018). Thus, an emissions gap is identified even
for high CDR availability (Strefler et al., 2018b), contradicting a waitand-see approach. There are significant trade-offs between near-term
action, overshoot and reliance on CDR deployment in the long-term
which are assessed in Section 2.3.5.

Box 2.1 | Bioenergy and BECCS Deployment in Integrated Assessment Modelling

2

Bioenergy can be used in various parts of the energy sector of IAMs, including for electricity, liquid fuel, biogas, and hydrogen production.
It is this flexibility that makes bioenergy and bioenergy technologies valuable for the decarbonization of energy use (Klein et al., 2014;
Krey et al., 2014a; Rose et al., 2014a; Bauer et al., 2017, 2018). Most bioenergy technologies in IAMs are also available in combination
with CCS (BECCS). Assumed capture rates differ between technologies, for example, about 90% for electricity and hydrogen production
and about 40-50% for liquid fuel production. Decisions about bioenergy deployment in IAMs are based on economic considerations to
stay within a carbon budget that is consistent with a long-term climate goal. IAMs consider both the value of bioenergy in the energy
system and the value of BECCS in removing CO2 from the atmosphere. Typically, if bioenergy is strongly limited, BECCS technologies
with high capture rates are favoured. If bioenergy is plentiful IAMs tend to choose biofuel technologies with lower capture rates but
high value for replacing fossil fuels in transport (Kriegler et al., 2013a; Bauer et al., 2018). Most bioenergy use in IAMs is combined with
CCS if available (Rose et al., 2014a). If CCS is unavailable, bioenergy use remains largely unchanged or even increases due to the high
value of bioenergy for the energy transformation (Bauer et al., 2018). As land impacts are tied to bioenergy use, the exclusion of BECCS
from the mitigation portfolio will not automatically remove the trade-offs with food, water and other sustainability objectives due to
the continued and potentially increased use of bioenergy.
IAMs assume bioenergy to be supplied mostly from second generation biomass feedstocks such as dedicated cellulosic crops (for
example Miscanthus or poplar) as well as agricultural and forest residues. Detailed process IAMs include land-use models that capture
competition for land for different uses (food, feed, fiber, bioenergy, carbon storage, biodiversity protection) under a range of dynamic
factors including socio-economic drivers, productivity increases in crop and livestock systems, food demand, and land, environmental,
biodiversity, and carbon policies. Assumptions about these factors can vary widely between different scenarios (Calvin et al., 2014;
Popp et al., 2017; van Vuuren et al., 2018). IAMs capture a number of potential environmental impacts from bioenergy production, in
particular indirect land-use change emissions from land conversion and nitrogen and water use for bioenergy production (Kraxner et al.,
2013; Bodirsky et al., 2014; Bonsch et al., 2014; Obersteiner et al., 2016; Humpenoder et al., 2018). The impact of bioenergy production
on soil degradation is an area of active IAM development and was not comprehensively accounted for in the mitigation pathways
assessed in this report (but is, for example, in Frank et al., 2017). Whether bioenergy has large adverse impacts on environmental and
societal goals depends in large parts on the governance of land use (Haberl et al., 2013; Erb et al., 2016b; Obersteiner et al., 2016;
Humpenoder et al., 2018). Here IAMs often make idealized assumptions about effective land management, such as full protection of
the land carbon stock by conservation measures and a global carbon price, respectively, but variations on these assumptions have also
been explored (Calvin et al., 2014; Popp et al., 2014a).

2.3.4.2

Sustainability implications of CDR deployment in 1.5C
pathways

Strong concerns about the sustainability implications of large-scale
CDR deployment in deep mitigation pathways have been raised in the
literature (Williamson and Bodle, 2016; Boysen et al., 2017b; Dooley and
Kartha, 2018; Heck et al., 2018), and a number of important knowledge
gaps have been identified (Fuss et al., 2016). An assessment of the
literature on implementation constraints and sustainable development
implications of CDR measures is provided in Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7 and
the Cross-chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3. An initial discussion of potential
124

environmental side effects of CDR deployment in 1.5C-consistent
pathways is provided in this section. Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7 then
contrasts CDR deployment in 1.5C-consistent pathways with other
branches of literature on limitations of CDR. Integrated modelling aims
to explore a range of developments compatible with specific climate
goals and often does not include the full set of broader environmental
and societal concerns beyond climate change. This has given rise to
the concept of sustainable development pathways (Cross-Chapter Box
1 in Chapter 1) (van Vuuren et al., 2015), and there is an increasing
body of work to extend integrated modelling to cover a broader range
of sustainable development goals (Section 2.6). However, only some

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

of the available 1.5C-consistent pathways were developed within a
larger sustainable development context (Bertram et al., 2018; Grubler
et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018). As discussed
in Section 2.3.4.1, those pathways are characterized by low energy
and/or food demand effectively limiting fossil-fuel substitution and
alleviating land competition, respectively. They also include regulatory
policies for deepening early action and ensuring environmental
protection (Bertram et al., 2018). Overall sustainability implications of
1.5C-consistent pathways are assessed in Section 2.5.3 and Chapter
5, Section 5.4.
Individual CDR measures have different characteristics and therefore
would carry different risks for their sustainable deployment at scale
(Smith et al., 2015). Terrestrial CDR measures, BECCS and enhanced
weathering of rock powder distributed on agricultural lands require
land. Those land-based measures could have substantial impacts
on environmental services and ecosystems (Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
Chapter 3) (Smith and Torn, 2013; Boysen et al., 2016; Heck et al., 2016;
Krause et al., 2017). Measures like afforestation and bioenergy with
and without CCS that directly compete with other land uses could have
significant impacts on agricultural and food systems (Creutzig et al.,
2012, 2015; Calvin et al., 2014; Popp et al., 2014b, 2017; Kreidenweis
et al., 2016; Boysen et al., 2017a; Frank et al., 2017; Stevanovi et al.,
2017; Strapasson et al., 2017; Humpenoder et al., 2018). BECCS using
dedicated bioenergy crops could substantially increase agricultural
water demand (Bonsch et al., 2014; Seferian et al., 2018) and nitrogen
fertilizer use (Bodirsky et al., 2014). DACCS and BECCS rely on CCS and
would require safe storage space in geological formations, including
management of leakage risks (Pawar et al., 2015) and induced
seismicity (Nicol et al., 2013). Some approaches like DACCS have high
energy demand (Socolow et al., 2011). Most of the CDR measures
currently discussed could have significant impacts on either land,
energy, water, or nutrients if deployed at scale (Smith et al., 2015).
However, actual trade-offs depend on a multitude factors (Haberl et
al., 2011; Erb et al., 2012; Humpenoder et al., 2018), including the
modalities of CDR deployment (e.g., on marginal vs. productive land)
(Bauer et al., 2018), socio-economic developments (Popp et al., 2017),
dietary choices (Stehfest et al., 2009; Popp et al., 2010; van Sluisveld et
al., 2016; Weindl et al., 2017; van Vuuren et al., 2018), yield increases,
livestock productivity and other advances in agricultural technology
(Havlik et al., 2013; Valin et al., 2013; Havlik et al., 2014; Weindl et al.,
2015; Erb et al., 2016b), land policies (Schmitz et al., 2012; Calvin et al.,
2014; Popp et al., 2014a), and governance of land use (Unruh, 2011;
Buck, 2016; Honegger and Reiner, 2018).
Figure 2.11 shows the land requirements for BECCS and afforestation
in the selected 1.5C-consistent pathway archetypes, including the LED
(Grubler et al., 2018) and S1 pathways (Fujimori, 2017; Rogelj et al.,
2018) following a sustainable development paradigm. As discussed,
these land-use patterns are heavily influenced by assumptions about,
among other things, future population levels, crop yields, livestock
production systems, and food and livestock demand, which all vary
between the pathways (Popp et al., 2017) (Section 2.3.1.1). In pathways
that allow for large-scale afforestation in addition to BECCS, land
demand for afforestation can be larger than for BECCS (Humpenoder
et al., 2014). This follows from the assumption in the modelled
pathways that, unlike bioenergy crops, forests are not harvested to

Chapter 2

allow unabated carbon storage on the same patch of land. If wood
harvest and subsequent processing or burial are taken into account,
this finding can change. There are also synergies between the various
uses of land, which are not reflected in the depicted pathways. Trees
can grow on agricultural land (Zomer et al., 2016), and harvested
wood can be used with BECCS and pyrolysis systems (Werner et al.,
2018). The pathways show a very substantial land demand for the two
CDR measures combined, up to the magnitude of the current global
cropland area. This is achieved in IAMs in particular by a conversion of
pasture land freed by intensification of livestock production systems,
pasture intensification and/or demand changes (Weindl et al., 2017),
and to a more limited extent, cropland for food production, as well
as expansion into natural land. However, pursuing such large-scale
changes in land use would pose significant food supply, environmental
and governance challenges, concerning both land management and
tenure (Unruh, 2011; Erb et al., 2012, 2016b; Haberl et al., 2013;
Haberl, 2015; Buck, 2016), particularly if synergies between land
uses, the relevance of dietary changes for reducing land demand, and
co-benefits with other sustainable development objectives are not
fully recognized. A general discussion of the land-use transformation in
1.5C-consistent pathways is provided in Section 2.4.4.
An important consideration for CDR which moves carbon from the
atmosphere to the geological, oceanic or terrestrial carbon pools is the
permanence of carbon stored in these different pools (Matthews and
Caldeira, 2008; NRC, 2015; Fuss et al., 2016; Jones et al., 2016) (see
also Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7 for a discussion). Terrestrial carbon can
be returned to the atmosphere on decadal time scales by a variety of
mechanisms, such as soil degradation, forest pest outbreaks and forest
fires, and therefore requires careful consideration of policy frameworks
to manage carbon storage, for example, in forests (Gren and Aklilu,
2016). There are similar concerns about outgassing of CO2 from ocean
storage (Herzog et al., 2003), unless it is transformed to a substance
that does not easily exchange with the atmosphere, for example, ocean
alkalinity or buried marine biomass (Rau, 2011). Understanding of the
assessment and management of the potential risk of CO2 release from
geological storage of CO2 has improved since the IPCC Special Report
on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage (IPCC, 2005) with experience
and the development of management practices in geological storage
projects, including risk management to prevent sustentative leakage
(Pawar et al., 2015). Estimates of leakage risk have been updated to
include scenarios of unregulated drilling and limited wellbore integrity
(Choi et al., 2013) and find that about 70% of stored CO2 would still
be retained after 10,000 years in these circumstances (Alcalde et al.,
2018). The literature on the potential environmental impacts from the
leakage of CO2 - and approaches to minimize these impacts should
a leak occur - has also grown and is reviewed by Jones et al. (2015).
To the extent that non-permanence of terrestrial and geological carbon
storage is driven by socio-economic and political factors, there are
parallels to questions of fossil-fuel reservoirs remaining in the ground
(Scott et al., 2015).

125

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2

Figure 2.11 | Land-use changes in 2050 and 2100 in the illustrative 1.5C-consistent pathway archetypes (Fricko et al., 2017; Fujimori, 2017; Kriegler et
al., 2017; Grubler et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018). Changes in land for food crops, energy crops, forest, pasture and other natural land are shown, compared to 2010.

2.3.5

Implications of Near-Term Action in 1.5C Pathways

Less CO2 emission reductions in the near term would require steeper
and deeper reductions in the longer term in order to meet specific
warming targets afterwards (Riahi et al., 2015; Luderer et al., 2016a).
This is a direct consequence of the quasi-linear relationship between
the total cumulative amount of CO2 emitted into the atmosphere and
global mean temperature rise (Matthews et al., 2009; Zickfeld et al.,
2009; Collins et al., 2013; Knutti and Rogelj, 2015). Besides this clear
geophysical trade-off over time, delaying GHG emissions reductions
over the coming years also leads to economic and institutional lock-in
into carbon-intensive infrastructure, that is, the continued investment
in and use of carbon-intensive technologies that are difficult or costly
to phase-out once deployed (Unruh and Carrillo-Hermosilla, 2006;
Jakob et al., 2014; Erickson et al., 2015; Steckel et al., 2015; Seto et al.,
2016; Michaelowa et al., 2018). Studies show that to meet stringent
climate targets despite near-term delays in emissions reductions,
models prematurely retire carbon-intensive infrastructure, in particular
coal without CCS (Bertram et al., 2015a; Johnson et al., 2015). The AR5
reports that delaying mitigation action leads to substantially higher
rates of emissions reductions afterwards, a larger reliance on CDR
technologies in the long term, and higher transitional and long-term
economic impacts (Clarke et al., 2014). The literature mainly focuses
on delayed action until 2030 in the context of meeting a 2C goal
(den Elzen et al., 2010; van Vuuren and Riahi, 2011; Kriegler et al.,
2013b; Luderer et al., 2013, 2016a; Rogelj et al., 2013b; Riahi et al.,
2015; OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017). However, because of the smaller
carbon budget consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C and the
absence of a clearly declining long-term trend in global emissions
to date, these general insights apply equally, or even more so, to the
more stringent mitigation context of 1.5C-consistent pathways. This

5

is further supported by estimates of committed emissions due to fossil
fuel-based infrastructure (Seto et al., 2016; Edenhofer et al., 2018).
All available 1.5C pathways that explore consistent mitigation action
from 2020 onwards peak global Kyoto-GHG emissions in the next
decade and already decline Kyoto-GHG emissions to below 2010 levels
by 2030. The near-term emissions development in these pathways
can be compared with estimated emissions in 2030 implied by the
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) submitted by Parties
to the Paris Agreement (Figure 2.12). Altogether, the unconditional
(conditional) NDCs are assessed to result in global Kyoto-GHG
emissions on the order of 52-58 (50-54) GtCO2e yr-1 in 2030 (e.g.,
den Elzen et al., 2016; Fujimori et al., 2016; UNFCCC, 2016; Rogelj et
al., 2017; Rose et al., 2017b; Benveniste et al., 2018; Vrontisi et al.,
2018; see Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4 for detailed assessment).
In contrast, 1.5C pathways with limited overshoot available to this
assessment show an interquartile range of about 26-31 (median 28)
GtCO2e yr-1 in 20305 (Table 2.4, Section 2.3.3). Based on these ranges,
this report assesses the emissions gap for a two-in-three chance of
limiting warming to 1.5C to be 26 (19-29) and 28 (22-33) GtCO2e
(median and interquartile ranges) for conditional and unconditional
NDCs, respectively (Cross-Chapter Box 11, applying GWP-100 values
from the IPCC Second Assessment Report).
The later emissions peak and decline, the more CO2 will have
accumulated in the atmosphere. Peak cumulated CO2 emissions -
and consequently peak temperatures - increase with higher 2030
emissions levels (Figure 2.12). Current NDCs (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in
Chapter 4) are estimated to lead to CO2 emissions of about 400-560
GtCO2 from 2018 to 2030 (Rogelj et al., 2016a). Available 1.5C- and
2C-consistent pathways with 2030 emissions in the range estimated

Note that aggregated Kyoto-GHG emissions implied by the NDCs from Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4 and Kyoto-GHG ranges from the pathway classes in Chapter 2
are only approximately comparable, because this chapter applies GWP-100 values from the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report while the NDC Cross-Chapter Box 11 applies
GWP-100 values from the IPCC Second Assessment Report. At a global scale, switching between GWP-100 values of the Second to the Fourth IPCC Assessment Report
would result in an increase in estimated aggregated Kyoto-GHG emissions of no more than about 3% in 2030 (UNFCCC, 2016).

126

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

1.8

1.7

1.6

1.5

NDC
range
1.4
15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Kyoto gas emissions in 2030 (GtCO2 eq yr )
-

post-2030 transition, and the assessment of carbon budgets in Section
2.2.2, global warming is assessed to exceed 1.5C if emissions stay at
the levels implied by the NDCs until 2030 (Figure 2.12). The chances
of remaining below 1.5C in these circumstances remain conditional
upon geophysical properties that are uncertain, but these Earth
system response uncertainties would have to serendipitously align
beyond current median estimates in order for current NDCs to become
consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C.

Peak Cumulative CO2 Emissions from 2018 (GtCO2)

Below 1.5C
1.5C Low OS
1.5C High OS
NDC pathways

(a)

o

Median global warming since preindustrial ( C)

for the NDCs rely on an assumed swift and widespread deployment of
CDR after 2030, and show peak cumulative CO2 emissions from 2018
of about 800-1000 GtCO2, above the remaining carbon budget for a
one-in-two chance of remaining below 1.5C. These emissions reflect
that no pathway is able to project a phase-out of CO2 emissions starting
from year-2030 NDC levels of about 40 GtCO2 yr-1 (Fawcett et al., 2015;
Rogelj et al., 2016a) to net zero in less than about 15 years. Based on
the implied emissions until 2030, the high challenges of the assumed

Chapter 2

1000

900

2

800

700

Kriegler et al., 2018a

600

500

400
15

NDC
range

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Kyoto gas emissions in 2030 (GtCO2 eq yr-)

Figure 2.12 | Median global warming estimated by MAGICC (panel a) and peak cumulative CO2 emissions (panel b) in 1.5C-consistent pathways in the
SR1.5 scenario database, as a function of CO2-equivalent emissions (based on AR4 GWP-100) of Kyoto-GHGs in 2030. Pathways that were forced to go through
the NDCs or a similarly high emissions point in 2030 by design are highlighted by yellow marker edges (see caption of Figure 2.13 and text for further details on the design
of these pathways). The combined range of global Kyoto-GHG emissions in 2030 for the conditional and unconditional NDCs assessed in Cross-Chapter Box 11 is shown by
the grey shaded area (adjusted to AR4 GWPs for comparison). As a second line of evidence, peak cumulative CO2 emissions derived from a 1.5C pathway sensitivity analysis
(Kriegler et al., 2018b) are shown by grey circles in the right-hand panel. Circles show gross fossil-fuel and industry emissions of the sensitivity cases, increased by assumptions
about the contributions from AFOLU (5 GtCO2 yr-1 until 2020, followed by a linear phase out until 2040) and non-CO2 Kyoto-GHGs (median non-CO2 contribution from
1.5C-consistent pathways available in the database: 10 GtCO2e yr-1 in 2030), and reduced by assumptions about CDR deployment until the time of net zero CO2 emissions
(limiting case for CDR deployment assumed in (Kriegler et al., 2018b) (logistic growth to 1, 4, 10 GtCO2 yr-1 in 2030, 2040, and 2050, respectively, leading to approximately
100 GtCO2 of CDR by mid-century).

It is unclear whether following NDCs until 2030 would still allow
global mean temperature to return to 1.5C by 2100 after a temporary
overshoot, due to the uncertainty associated with the Earth system
response to net negative emissions after a peak (Section 2.2). Available
IAM studies are working with reduced-form carbon cycle-climate
models like MAGICC, which assume a largely symmetric Earthsystem response to positive and net negative CO2 emissions. The IAM
findings on returning warming to 1.5C from NDCs after a temporary
temperature overshoot are hence all conditional on this assumption.
Two types of pathways with 1.5C-consistent action starting in 2030
have been considered in the literature (Luderer et al., 2018) (Figure
2.13): pathways aiming to obtain the same end-of-century carbon
budget as 1.5C-consistent pathways starting in 2020 despite higher
emissions until 2030, and pathways assuming the same mitigation
stringency after 2030 as in 1.5C-consistent pathways starting in
2020 (approximated by using the same global price of emissions as

found in least-cost pathways starting from 2020). An IAM comparison
study found increasing challenges to implementing pathways with the
same end-of-century carbon budgets after following NDCs until 2030
(Luderer et al., 2018). The majority of model experiments (four out of
seven) failed to produce NDC pathways that would return cumulative
CO2 emissions over the 2016-2100 period to 200 GtCO2, indicating
limitations to the availability and timing of CDR. The few such
pathways that were identified show highly disruptive features in 2030
(including abrupt transitions from moderate to very large emissions
reduction and low carbon energy deployment rates) indicating a high
risk that the required post-2030 transformations are too steep and
abrupt to be achieved by the mitigation measures in the models (high
confidence). NDC pathways aiming for a cumulative 2016-2100 CO2
emissions budget of 800 GtCO2 were more readily obtained (Luderer et
al., 2018), and some were classified as 1.5C-high-OS pathways in this
assessment (Section 2.1).
127

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2

40

b
Additional global mean
temperature rise (C)

a

50

Net CO2 emissions (GtCO2/yr)

Variations in global CO2 emissions
over next decade

30
20

A

10

P

Legend
Data from the same model for
the set of three pathways with
near-term emissions variations
0.2

MAGICC

B
A

FAIR

0.1

P
Change relative to
pathway with deep
CO2 reductions
from 2020

0

2020

2040

2060

2080

Other pathways with
a similar design

2100

0
-10

Range of below-1.5C
and 1.5C-low-OS pathways

B

-20
2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100

Year

1500

d

0.6

1000

0.4
0.2

500

0

-0.2

0

2030

2050

2100

2020-2030

f
1400
1200
1000
800
600

Remaining 1.5C
carbon budget

400

Annual average FF & Ind CO2
emissions reductions (GtCO2/yr])

e
Cumulative FF & Ind CO2
emissions from 2018 (GtCO2)

0.8

Annual average CDR addition
(GtCO2/yr)

Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)

c

2030-2050

2050-2100

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

-0.5

200

2030

2050

2100

2020-2030

2030-2050

2050-2100

Figure 2.13 | Comparison of 1.5C-consistent pathways starting action as of 2020 (A; light-blue diamonds) with pathways following the NDCs until 2030
and aiming to limit warming to 1.5C thereafter. The 1.5C pathways that follow the NDCs until 2030 either aim for the same cumulative CO2 emissions by 2100 as the
pathways that start action as of 2020 (B; red diamonds) or assume the same mitigation stringency as reflected by the price of emissions in associated least-cost 1.5C-consistent
pathways starting from 2020 (P; black diamonds). Panels show (a) the underlying emissions pathways, (b) additional warming in the delay scenarios compared to 2020 action
case, (c) cumulated CDR, (d) CDR ramp-up rates, (e) cumulated gross CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel combustion and industrial (FFI) processes over the 2018-2100 period, and (f)
gross FFI CO2 emissions reductions rates. Scenario pairs or triplets (circles and diamonds) with 2020 and 2030 action variants were calculated by six (out of seven) models in the
ADVANCE study symbols (Luderer et al., 2018) and five of them (passing near-term plausibility checks) are shown by symbols. Only two of five models could identify pathways
with post-2030 action leading to a 2016-2100 carbon budget of about 200 GtCO2 (red). The range of all 1.5C pathways with no and low overshoot is shown by the boxplots.

128

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

NDC pathways that apply a post-2030 price of emissions as found in
least-cost pathways starting from 2020 show infrastructural carbon
lock-in as a result of following NDCs instead of least-cost action until
2030. A key finding is that carbon lock-ins persist long after 2030, with
the majority of additional CO2 emissions occurring during the 2030-
2050 period. Luderer et al. (2018) find 90 (80-120) GtCO2 additional
emissions until 2030, growing to 240 (190-260) GtCO2 by 2050 and
290 (200-200) GtCO2 by 2100. As a result, peak warming is about 0.2C
higher and not all of the modelled pathways return warming to 1.5C
by the end of the century. There is a four sided trade-off between (i)
near-term ambition, (ii) degree of overshoot, (iii) transitional challenges
during the 2030-2050 period, and (iv) the amount of CDR deployment
required during the century (Figure 2.13) (Holz et al., 2018b; Strefler
et al., 2018b). Transition challenges, overshoot, and CDR requirements
can be significantly reduced if global emissions peak before 2030

and fall below levels in line with current NDCs by 2030. For example,
Strefler et al. (2018b) find that CDR deployment levels in the second
half of the century can be halved in 1.5C-consistent pathways with
similar CO2 emissions reductions rates during the 2030-2050 period
if CO2 emissions by 2030 are reduced by an additional 30% compared
to NDC levels. Kriegler et al. (2018a) investigate a global rollout of
selected regulatory policies and moderate carbon pricing policies.
They show that additional reductions of about 10 GtCO2e yr-1 can be
achieved in 2030 compared to the current NDCs. Such a 20% reduction
of year-2030 emissions compared to current NDCs would effectively
lower the disruptiveness of post-2030 action. The strengthening of
short-term policies in deep mitigation pathways has hence been
identified as a way of bridging options to keep the Paris climate goals
within reach (Bertram et al., 2015b; IEA, 2015a; Spencer et al., 2015;
Kriegler et al., 2018a).

2.4

2.4.1

Disentangling the Whole-System
Transformation

Mitigation pathways map out prospective transformations of the
energy, land and economic systems over this century (Clarke et al.,
2014). There is a diversity of potential pathways consistent with 1.5C,
yet they share some key characteristics summarized in Table 2.5. To
explore characteristics of 1.5C pathways in greater detail, this section
focuses on changes in energy supply and demand, and changes in the
AFOLU sector.

Energy System Transformation

The energy system links energy supply (Section 2.4.2) with energy
demand (Section 2.4.3) through final energy carriers, including
electricity and liquid, solid or gaseous fuels, that are tailored to
their end-uses. To chart energy-system transformations in mitigation
pathways, four macro-level decarbonization indicators associated with
final energy are useful: limits on the increase of final energy demand,
reductions in the carbon intensity of electricity, increases in the share
of final energy provided by electricity, and reductions in the carbon

Table 2.5 | Overview of Key Characteristics of 1.5C Pathways.
1.5C Pathway
Characteristic

Supporting Information

Reference

Rapid and profound near-term

Strong upscaling of renewables and sustainable biomass and reduction of unabated (no CCS) fossil fuels,

Section 2.4.1

decarbonisation of energy supply

along with the rapid deployment of CCS, lead to a zero-emission energy supply system by mid-century.

Section 2.4.2

Greater mitigation efforts

All end-use sectors show marked demand reductions beyond the reductions projected for 2C pathways. Demand

on the demand side

reductions from IAMs for 2030 and 2050 lie within the potential assessed by detailed sectoral bottom-up assessments.

Switching from fossil fuels to
electricity in end-use sectors
Comprehensive emission

Both in the transport and the residential sector, electricity covers markedly larger shares of total demand by mid-century.

neutrality around mid-century. In 2030, below-1.5C and 1.5C-low-OS pathways show maximum net CO2 emissions

in the coming decade

of 18 and 28 GtCO2 yr-1, respectively. GHG emissions in these scenarios are not higher than 34 GtCO2e yr-1 in 2030.

reductions from both CO2 and
non-CO2 required for 2C,
are mainly from CO2

Section 2.4.3.2
Section 2.4.3.3

Virtually all 1.5C-consistent pathways decline net annual CO2 emissions between 2020 and 2030, reaching carbon

reductions are implemented
Additional reductions, on top of

Section 2.4.3

Section 2.3.4

Both CO2 and the non-CO2 GHGs and aerosols are strongly reduced by 2030 and until 2050 in 1.5C pathways.
The greatest difference to 2C pathways, however, lies in additional reductions of CO2, as the non-CO2 mitigation

Section 2.3.1.2

potential that is currently included in integrated pathways is mostly already fully deployed for reaching a 2C pathway.
Low-carbon investments in the energy supply side (energy production and refineries) are projected to average

Considerable shifts in

1.6-3.8 trillion 2010USD yr-1 globally to 2050. Investments in fossil fuels decline, with investments in unabated coal

investment patterns

halted by 2030 in most available 1.5C-consistent projections, while the literature is less conclusive for investments

Section 2.5.2

in unabated gas and oil. Energy demand investments are a critical factor for which total estimates are uncertain.
Options are available to
align 1.5C pathways with
sustainable development

Synergies can be maximized, and risks of trade-offs limited or avoided through an informed choice of mitigation
strategies. Particularly pathways that focus on a lowering of demand show many synergies and few trade-offs.

Section 2.5.3

By 2050, 1.5C pathways project deployment of BECCS at a scale of 3-7 GtCO2yr-1 (range of medians across
CDR at scale before mid-century

1.5C pathway classes), depending on the level of energy demand reductions and mitigation in other sectors.

Section 2.3.3, 2.3.4.1

Some 1.5C pathways are available that do not use BECCS, but only focus terrestrial CDR in the AFOLU sector.

129

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

intensity of final energy other than electricity (referred to in this section
as the carbon intensity of the residual fuel mix). Figure 2.14 shows
changes of these four indicators for the pathways in the scenario
database (Section 2.1.3 and Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3) for
1.5C and 2C pathways (Table 2.1).
Pathways in both the 1.5C and 2C classes (Figure 2.14) generally
show rapid transitions until mid-century, with a sustained but slower
evolution thereafter. Both show an increasing share of electricity
accompanied by a rapid decline in the carbon intensity of electricity.
Both also show a generally slower decline in the carbon intensity of
the residual fuel mix, which arises from the decarbonization of liquids,
gases and solids provided to industry, residential and commercial
activities, and the transport sector.

The largest differences between 1.5C and 2C pathways are seen in the
first half of the century (Figure 2.14), where 1.5C pathways generally
show lower energy demand, a faster electrification of energy end-use,
and a faster decarbonization of the carbon intensity of electricity and
the residual fuel mix. There are very few pathways in the Below-1.5C
class (Figure 2.14). Those scenarios that are available, however, show
a faster decline in the carbon intensity of electricity generation and
residual fuel mix by 2030 than most pathways that are projected to
temporarily overshoot 1.5C and return by 2100 (or 2C pathways).
The Below-1.5C pathways also appear to differentiate themselves
from the other pathways as early as 2030 through reductions in final
energy demand and increases in electricity share (Figure 2.14).

2

Figure 2.14 | Decomposition of transformation pathways into (a) energy demand, (b) carbon intensity of electricity, (c) the electricity share in final energy,
and (d) the carbon intensity of the residual (non-electricity) fuel mix. Box plots show median, interquartile range and full range of pathways. Pathway temperature classes
(Table 2.1) and illustrative pathway archetypes are indicated in the legend. Values following the class labels give the number of available pathways in each class.

2.4.2

Energy Supply

Several energy supply characteristics are evident in 1.5C pathways
assessed in this section: (i) growth in the share of energy derived
from low-carbon-emitting sources (including renewables, nuclear and
fossil fuel with CCS) and a decline in the overall share of fossil fuels
without CCS (Section 2.4.2.1), (ii) rapid decline in the carbon intensity
of electricity generation simultaneous with further electrification of
energy end-use (Section 2.4.2.2), and (iii) the growth in the use of CCS
applied to fossil and biomass carbon in most 1.5C pathways (Section
2.4.2.3).
130

2.4.2.1

Evolution of primary energy contributions over time

By mid-century, the majority of primary energy comes from non-fossilfuels (i.e., renewables and nuclear energy) in most 1.5C pathways
(Table 2.6). Figure 2.15 shows the evolution of primary energy supply
over this century across 1.5C pathways, and in detail for the four
illustrative pathway archetypes highlighted in this chapter. Note that
this section reports primary energy using the direct equivalent method
on the basis of lower heating values (Bruckner et al., 2014).

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.15 | Primary energy supply for the four illustrative pathway archetypes plus the IEA's Faster Transition Scenario (OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017) (panel
a), and their relative location in the ranges for pathways limiting warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot (panel b). The category `Other renewables'
includes primary energy sources not covered by the other categories, for example, hydro and geothermal energy. The number of pathways that have higher primary energy than the
scale in the bottom panel are indicated by the numbers above the whiskers. Black horizontal dashed lines indicates the level of primary energy supply in 2015 (IEA, 2017e). Box
plots in the lower panel show the minimum-maximum range (whiskers), interquartile range (box), and median (vertical thin black line). Symbols in the lower panel show the four
pathway archetypes S1 (white square), S2 (yellow square), S5 (black square), LED (white disc), as well as the IEA-(red disc). Pathways with no or limited overshoot included the
Below-1.5C and 1.5C-low-OS classes.

The share of energy from renewable sources (including biomass, hydro,
solar, wind and geothermal) increases in all 1.5C pathways with no or
limited overshoot, with the renewable energy share of primary energy
reaching 38-88% in 2050 (Table 2.6), with an interquartile range of
52-67%. The magnitude and split between bioenergy, wind, solar,
and hydro differ between pathways, as can be seen in the illustrative
pathway archetypes in Figure 2.15. Bioenergy is a major supplier of
primary energy, contributing to both electricity and other forms of
final energy such as liquid fuels for transportation (Bauer et al., 2018).
In 1.5C pathways, there is a significant growth in bioenergy used in
combination with CCS for pathways where it is included (Figure 2.15).
Nuclear power increases its share in most 1.5C pathways with no or
limited overshoot by 2050, but in some pathways both the absolute
capacity and share of power from nuclear generators decrease (Table
2.15). There are large differences in nuclear power between models
and across pathways (Kim et al., 2014; Rogelj et al., 2018). One of
the reasons for this variation is that the future deployment of nuclear
can be constrained by societal preferences assumed in narratives
underlying the pathways (O'Neill et al., 2017; van Vuuren et al., 2017b).
Some 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot no longer see a role

for nuclear fission by the end of the century, while others project about
95 EJ yr-1 of nuclear power in 2100 (Figure 2.15).
The share of primary energy provided by total fossil fuels decreases from
2020 to 2050 in all 1.5C pathways, but trends for oil, gas and coal differ
(Table 2.6). By 2050, the share of primary energy from coal decreases
to 0-11% across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot, with
an interquartile range of 1-7%. From 2020 to 2050 the primary energy
supplied by oil changes by -93 to -9% (interquartile range -77 to
-39%); natural gas changes by -88 to +85% (interquartile range
-62 to -13%), with varying levels of CCS. Pathways with higher use
of coal and gas tend to deploy CCS to control their carbon emissions
(see Section 2.4.2.3). As the energy transition is accelerated by several
decades in 1.5C pathways compared to 2C pathways, residual fossilfuel use (i.e., fossil fuels not used for electricity generation) without
CCS is generally lower in 2050 than in 2C pathways, while combined
hydro, solar, and wind power deployment is generally higher than in
2C pathways (Figure 2.15).
In addition to the 1.5C pathways included in the scenario database
(Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3), there are other analyses in the
131

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

challenges related to its land use and impact on food supply (Burns
and Nicholson, 2017) (assessed in greater detail in Sections 2.3.4.2,
4.3.7 and 5.4). These analyses could, provided their assumptions prove
plausible, expand the range of 1.5C pathways.

literature including, for example, sector-based analyses of energy
demand and supply options. Even though they were not necessarily
developed in the context of the 1.5C target, they explore in greater
detail some options for deep reductions in GHG emissions. For example,
there are analyses of transitions to up to 100% renewable energy by
2050 (Creutzig et al., 2017; Jacobson et al., 2017), which describe
what is entailed for a renewable energy share largely from solar and
wind (and electrification) that is above the range of 1.5C pathways
available in the database, although there have been challenges to the
assumptions used in high-renewable analyses (e.g., Clack et al., 2017).
There are also analyses that result in a large role for nuclear energy
in mitigation of GHGs (Hong et al., 2015; Berger et al., 2017a, b; Xiao
and Jiang, 2018). BECCS could also contribute a larger share, but faces

2

In summary, the share of primary energy from renewables increases
while that from coal decreases across 1.5C pathways (high
confidence). This statement is true for all 1.5C pathways in the
scenario database and associated literature (Supplementary Material
2.SM.1.3), and is consistent with the additional studies mentioned
above, an increase in energy supply from lower-carbon-intensity
energy supply, and a decrease in energy supply from higher-carbonintensity energy supply.

Table 2.6 | Global primary energy supply of 1.5C pathways from the scenario database (Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3).
Values given for the median (maximum, minimum) across the full range of 85 available 1.5C pathways. Growth Factor = [(primary energy supply in 2050)/(primary
energy supply in 2020) - 1]

Below1.5C and
1.5Clow-OS
pathways

1.5Chigh-OS

132

Median
(max, min)

Count

total primary

Primary Energy Supply (EJ)

Share in Primary Energy (%)

Growth (factor)
2020-2050

2020

2030

2050

2020

2030

2050

50

565.33
(619.70, 483.22)

464.50
(619.87, 237.37)

553.23
(725.40, 289.02)

NA

NA

NA

-0.05
(0.48, -0.51)

renewables

50

87.14
(101.60, 60.16)

146.96
(203.90, 87.75)

291.33
(584.78, 176.77)

14.90
(20.39, 10.60)

29.08
(62.15, 18.24)

60.24
(87.89, 38.03)

2.37 (6.71, 0.91)

biomass

50

60.41
(70.03, 40.54)

77.07
(113.02, 44.42)

152.30
(311.72, 40.36)

10.17
(13.66, 7.14)

17.22
(35.61, 9.08)

27.29
(54.10, 10.29)

1.71
(5.56, -0.42)

non-biomass

50

26.35
(36.57, 17.78)

62.58
(114.41, 25.79)

146.23
(409.94, 53.79)

4.37
(7.19, 3.01)

13.67
(26.54, 5.78)

27.98
(61.61, 12.04)

4.28 (13.46, 1.45)

wind & solar

44

10.93
(20.16, 2.61)

40.14
(82.66, 7.05)

121.82
(342.77, 27.95)

1.81
(3.66, 0.45)

9.73
(19.56, 1.54)

21.13
(51.52, 4.48)

10.00 (53.70, 3.71)

nuclear

50

10.91
(18.55, 8.52)

16.26
(36.80, 6.80)

24.51
(66.30, 3.09)

2.10
(3.37, 1.45)

3.52
(9.61, 1.32)

4.49
(12.84, 0.44)

1.24 (5.01, -0.64)

fossil

50

462.95
(520.41, 376.30)

310.36
(479.13, 70.14)

183.79
(394.71, 54.86)

82.53
(86.65, 77.73)

66.58
(77.30, 29.55)

32.79
60.84, 8.58)

-0.59 (-0.21, -0.89)

coal

50

136.89
(191.02, 83.23)

44.03
(127.98, 5.97)

24.15
(71.12, 0.92)

25.63
(30.82, 17.19)

9.62 (20.65, 1.31)

5.08 (11.43, 0.15)

-0.83 (-0.57, -0.99)

gas

50

132.95
(152.80, 105.01)

112.51
(173.56, 17.30)

76.03
(199.18, 14.92)

23.10
(28.39, 18.09)

22.52
(35.05, 7.08)

13.23
(34.83, 3.68)

-0.40 (0.85, -0.88)

oil

50

197.26
(245.15, 151.02)

156.16
(202.57, 38.94)

69.94
(167.52, 15.07)

34.81
(42.24, 29.00)

31.24
(39.84, 16.41)

12.89
(27.04, 2.89)

-0.66 (-0.09, -0.93)

total primary

35

594.96
(636.98, 510.55)

559.04
(749.05, 419.28)

651.46
(1012.50, 415.31)

NA

NA

NA

0.13 (0.59, -0.27)

renewables

35

89.84
(98.60, 66.57)

135.12
(159.84, 87.93)

323.21
(522.82, 177.66)

15.08
(18.58, 11.04)

23.65
(29.32, 13.78)

62.16
(86.26, 28.47)

2.68 (4.81, 1.17)

biomass

35

62.59
(73.03, 48.42)

69.05
(98.27, 56.54)

160.16
(310.10, 71.17)

10.30
(14.23, 8.03)

13.64
(16.37, 9.03)

23.79
(45.79, 10.64)

1.71 (3.71, 0.19)

non-biomass

35

28.46
(36.58, 17.60)

59.81
(92.12, 27.39)

164.91
(329.69, 55.72)

4.78
(6.64, 2.84)

10.23
(16.59, 4.49)

31.17
(45.86, 9.87)

6.10 (10.63, 1.38)

wind & solar

26

11.32
(20.17, 1.91)

40.31
(65.50, 8.14)

139.20
(275.47, 30.92)

1.95 (3.66, 0.32)

7.31 (11.61, 1.83)

26.01
(38.79, 6.33)

16.06 (63.34, 3.13)

nuclear

35

10.94
(14.27, 8.52)

16.12
(41.73, 6.80)

22.98
(115.80, 3.09)

1.86 (2.37, 1.45)

2.99 (5.57, 1.20)

4.17
(13.60, 0.43)

1.49 (7.22, -0.64)

fossil

35

497.30
(543.29, 407.49)

397.76
(568.91, 300.63)

209.80
(608.39, 43.87)

83.17
(86.59, 79.39)

73.87
(82.94, 68.00)

33.58
(60.09, 7.70)

-0.56 (0.12, -0.91)

coal

35

155.65
(193.55, 118.40)

70.99
(176.99, 19.15)

18.95
(134.69, 0.36)

25.94
(30.82, 19.10)

14.53
(26.35, 3.64)

4.14 (13.30, 0.05)

-0.87 (-0.30, -1.00)

gas

35

138.01
(169.50, 107.07)

147.43
(208.55, 76.45)

97.71
(265.66, 15.96)

23.61
(27.35, 19.26)

25.79
(32.73, 14.69)

15.67
(33.80, 2.80)

-0.31 (0.99, -0.88)

oil

35

195.02
(236.40, 154.66)

198.50
(319.80, 102.10)

126.20
(208.04, 24.68)

32.21
(38.87, 28.07)

33.27
(50.12, 24.35)

18.61
(27.30, 4.51)

-0.34 (0.06, -0.87)

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Table 2.6 (continued)

Two above
classes
combined

Median
(max, min)

Count

total primary

Primary Energy Supply (EJ)

Share in Primary Energy (%)

2020

2030

2050

2020

2030

2050

Growth (factor)
2020-2050

85

582.12
(636.98, 483.22)

502.81
(749.05, 237.37)

580.78
(1012.50, 289.02)

-

-

-

0.03 (0.59, -0.51)

renewables

85

87.70
(101.60, 60.16)

139.48
(203.90, 87.75)

293.80
(584.78, 176.77)

15.03
(20.39, 10.60)

27.90
(62.15, 13.78)

60.80
(87.89, 28.47)

2.62 (6.71, 0.91)

biomass

85

61.35
(73.03, 40.54)

75.28
(113.02, 44.42)

154.13
(311.72, 40.36)

10.27
(14.23, 7.14)

14.38
(35.61, 9.03)

26.38
(54.10, 10.29)

1.71 (5.56, -0.42)

non-biomass

85

26.35
(36.58, 17.60)

61.60
(114.41, 25.79)

157.37
(409.94, 53.79)

4.40
(7.19, 2.84)

11.87
(26.54, 4.49)

28.60
(61.61, 9.87)

4.63 (13.46, 1.38)

wind & solar

70

10.93
(20.17, 1.91)

40.17
(82.66, 7.05)

125.31
(342.77, 27.95)

1.81 (3.66, 0.32)

8.24 (19.56, 1.54)

22.10
(51.52, 4.48)

11.64 (63.34, 3.13)

nuclear

85

10.93
(18.55, 8.52)

16.22
(41.73, 6.80)

24.48
(115.80, 3.09)

1.97 (3.37, 1.45)

3.27 (9.61, 1.20)

4.22
(13.60, 0.43)

1.34 (7.22, -0.64)

fossil

85

489.52
(543.29, 376.30)

343.48
(568.91, 70.14)

198.58
(608.39, 43.87)

83.05
(86.65, 77.73)

69.19
(82.94, 29.55)

33.06
(60.84, 7.70)

-0.58 (0.12, -0.91)

coal

85

147.09
(193.55, 83.23)

49.46
(176.99, 5.97)

23.84
(134.69, 0.36)

25.72
(30.82, 17.19)

10.76
(26.35, 1.31)

4.99 (13.30, 0.05)

-0.85 (-0.30, -1.00)

gas

85

135.58
(169.50, 105.01)

127.99
(208.55, 17.30)

88.97
(265.66, 14.92)

23.28
(28.39, 18.09)

24.02
(35.05, 7.08)

13.46
(34.83, 2.80)

-0.37 (0.99, -0.88)

oil

85

195.02
(245.15, 151.02)

175.69
(319.80, 38.94)

93.48
(208.04, 15.07)

33.79
(42.24, 28.07)

32.01
(50.12, 16.41)

16.22
(27.30, 2.89)

-0.54 (0.06, -0.93)

Table 2.7 | Global electricity generation of 1.5C pathways from the scenarios database.
(Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3). Values given for the median (maximum, minimum) values across the full range across 89 available 1.5C pathways. Growth
Factor = [(primary energy supply in 2050)/(primary energy supply in 2020) - 1].

Median
(max, min)
TBelow
-1.5C and
1.5Clow-OS
pathways

1.5Chigh-OS

Count

Electricity Generation (EJ)

Share in Electricity Generation (%)

2020

2030

2050

2020

2030

2050

Growth (factor)
2020-2050

total
generation

50

98.45
(113.98, 83.53)

115.82
(152.40, 81.28)

215.58
(354.48, 126.96)

NA

NA

NA

1.15 (2.55, 0.28)

renewables

50

26.28
(41.80, 18.50)

63.30
(111.70, 32.41)

145.50
(324.26, 90.66)

26.32
(41.84, 18.99)

53.68
(79.67, 37.30)

77.12
(96.65, 58.89)

4.48 (10.88, 2.65)

biomass

50

2.02 (7.00, 0.76)

4.29
(11.96, 0.79)

20.35
(39.28, 0.24)

1.97 (6.87, 0.82)

3.69 (13.29, 0.73)

8.77
(30.28, 0.10)

6.42 (38.14, -0.93)

non-biomass

50

24.21
(35.72, 17.70)

57.12
(101.90, 25.79)

135.04
(323.91, 53.79)

24.38
(40.43, 17.75)

49.88
(78.27, 29.30)

64.68
(96.46, 41.78)

4.64 (10.64, 1.45)

wind & solar

50

1.66 (6.60, 0.38)

8.91
(48.04, 0.60)

39.04
(208.97, 2.68)

1.62 (7.90, 0.38)

8.36 (41.72, 0.53)

19.10
(60.11, 1.65)

26.31 (169.66, 5.23)

nuclear

50

10.84
(18.55, 8.52)

15.46
(36.80, 6.80)

21.97
(64.72, 3.09)

12.09
(18.34, 8.62)

14.33
(31.63, 5.24)

8.10
(27.53, 1.02)

0.71 (4.97, -0.64)

fossil

50

59.43
(68.75, 39.48)

36.51
(66.07, 2.25)

14.81
(57.76, 0.00)

61.32
(67.40, 47.26)

30.04
(52.86, 1.95)

8.61 (25.18, 0.00)

-0.74 (0.01, -1.00)

coal

50

31.02
(42.00, 14.40)

8.83
(34.11, 0.00)

1.38
(17.39, 0.00)

32.32
40.38, 17.23)

7.28 (27.29, 0.00)

0.82 (7.53, 0.00)

-0.96 (-0.56, -1.00)

gas

50

24.70
(32.46, 13.44)

22.59
(42.08, 2.01)

12.79
(53.17, 0.00)

24.39
(35.08, 11.80)

20.18
(37.23, 1.75)

6.93 (24.87, 0.00)

-0.47 (1.27, -1.00)

oil

50

2.48
(13.36, 1.12)

1.89 (7.56, 0.24)

0.10 (8.78, 0.00)

2.82
(11.73, 1.01)

1.95 (5.67, 0.21)

0.05 (3.80, 0.00)

-0.92 (0.36, -1.00)

total
generation

35

101.44
(113.96, 88.55)

125.26
(177.51, 89.60)

251.50
(363.10, 140.65)

NA

NA

NA

1.38 (2.19, 0.39)

renewables

35

26.38
(31.83, 18.26)

53.32
(86.85, 30.06)

173.29
(273.92, 84.69)

28.37
(32.96, 17.38)

42.73
(65.73, 25.11)

82.39
(94.66, 35.58)

5.97 (8.68, 2.37)

biomass

35

1.23 (6.47, 0.66)

2.14 (7.23, 0.86)

10.49
(40.32, 0.21)

1.22 (7.30, 0.63)

1.59 (6.73, 0.72)

3.75
(28.09, 0.08)

7.93 (33.32, -0.81)

non-biomass

35

24.56
(30.70, 17.60)

47.96
(85.83, 27.39)

144.13
(271.17, 55.72)

26.77
(31.79, 16.75)

40.07
(64.96, 23.10)

69.72
(94.58, 27.51)

5.78 (8.70, 1.38)

Table 2.7 (continued next page)

133

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Table 2.7 (continued)

1.5Chigh-OS

2

Two above
classes
combined

2.4.2.2

Median
(max, min)

Count

wind & solar

Electricity Generation (EJ)

Growth (factor)
2020-2050

2030

2050

2020

2030

2050

35

2.24 (5.07, 0.42)

8.95
(36.52, 1.18)

65.08
(183.38, 13.79)

2.21 (5.25, 0.41)

7.48 (27.90, 0.99)

25.88
(61.24, 8.71)

30.70 (106.95, 4.87)

nuclear

35

10.84
(14.08, 8.52)

16.12
(41.73, 6.80)

22.91
(115.80, 3.09)

10.91
(13.67, 8.62)

14.65
(23.51, 5.14)

11.19
(39.61, 1.12)

1.49 (7.22, -0.64)

fossil

35

62.49
(76.76, 49.09)

48.08
(87.54, 30.99)

11.84
(118.12, 0.78)

61.58
(71.03, 54.01)

42.02
(59.48, 24.27)

6.33 (33.19, 0.27)

-0.80 (0.54, -0.99)

coal

35

32.37
(46.20, 26.00)

16.22
(43.12, 1.32)

1.18
(46.72, 0.01)

32.39
(40.88, 24.41)

14.23
(29.93, 1.19)

0.55 (12.87, 0.00)

-0.96 (0.01, -1.00)

gas

35

26.20
(41.20, 20.11)

26.45
(51.99, 16.45)

10.66
(67.94, 0.76)

26.97
(39.20, 19.58)

22.29
(43.43, 14.03)

5.29 (32.59, 0.26)

-0.57 (1.63, -0.97)

oil

35

1.51 (6.28, 1.12)

0.61 (7.54, 0.36)

0.04 (7.47, 0.00)

1.51 (6.27, 1.01)

0.55 (6.20, 0.26)

0.02 (3.31, 0.00)

-0.99 (0.98, -1.00)

total
generation

85

100.09
(113.98, 83.53)

120.01
(177.51, 81.28)

224.78
(363.10, 126.96)

NA

NA

NA

1.31 (2.55, 0.28)

renewables

85

26.38
(41.80, 18.26)

59.50
(111.70, 30.06)

153.72
(324.26, 84.69)

27.95
(41.84, 17.38)

51.51
(79.67, 25.11)

77.52
(96.65, 35.58)

5.08 (10.88, 2.37)

biomass

85

1.52 (7.00, 0.66)

3.55
(11.96, 0.79)

16.32
(40.32, 0.21)

1.55 (7.30, 0.63)

2.77 (13.29, 0.72)

8.02
(30.28, 0.08)

6.53 (38.14, -0.93)

non-biomass

85

24.48
(35.72, 17.60)

55.68
(101.90, 25.79)

136.40
(323.91, 53.79)

25.00
(40.43, 16.75)

47.16
(78.27, 23.10)

66.75
(96.46, 27.51)

4.75 (10.64, 1.38)

wind & solar

85

1.66 (6.60, 0.38)

8.95
(48.04, 0.60)

43.20
(208.97, 2.68)

1.67
(7.90, 0.38)

8.15
(41.72, 0.53)

19.70
(61.24, 1.65)

28.02 (169.66, 4.87)

nuclear

85

10.84
(18.55, 8.52)

15.49
(41.73, 6.80)

22.64
(115.80, 3.09)

10.91
(18.34, 8.62)

14.34
(31.63, 5.14)

8.87
(39.61, 1.02)

1.21 (7.22, -0.64)

fossil

85

61.35
(76.76, 39.48)

38.41
(87.54, 2.25)

14.10
(118.12, 0.00)

61.55
(71.03, 47.26)

33.96
(59.48, 1.95)

8.05 (33.19, 0.00)

-0.76 (0.54, -1.00)

coal

85

32.37
(46.20, 14.40)

10.41
(43.12, 0.00)

1.29
(46.72, 0.00)

32.39
(40.88, 17.23)

8.95 (29.93, 0.00)

0.59 (12.87, 0.00)

-0.96 (0.01, -1.00)

gas

85

24.70
(41.20, 13.44)

25.00
(51.99, 2.01)

11.92
(67.94, 0.00)

24.71
(39.20, 11.80)

21.03
(43.43, 1.75)

6.78 (32.59, 0.00)

-0.52 (1.63, -1.00)

oil

85

1.82
(13.36, 1.12)

0.92 (7.56, 0.24)

0.08 (8.78, 0.00)

2.04
(11.73, 1.01)

0.71 (6.20, 0.21)

0.04 (3.80, 0.00)

-0.97 (0.98, -1.00)

Evolution of electricity supply over time

Electricity supplies an increasing share of final energy, reaching
34-71% in 2050, across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot
(Figure 2.14), extending the historical increases in electricity share
seen over the past decades (Bruckner et al., 2014). From 2020 to 2050,
the quantity of electricity supplied in most 1.5C pathways with no or
limited overshoot more than doubles (Table 2.7). By 2050, the carbon
intensity of electricity has fallen rapidly to -92 to +11 gCO2 MJ-1
electricity across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot from
a value of around 140 gCO2 MJ-1 (range: 88-181 gCO2 MJ-1) in 2020
(Figure 2.14). A negative contribution to carbon intensity is provided by
BECCS in most pathways (Figure 2.16).
By 2050, the share of electricity supplied by renewables increases from
23% in 2015 (IEA, 2017b) to 59-97% across 1.5C pathways with no
or limited overshoot. Wind, solar, and biomass together make a major
contribution in 2050, although the share for each spans a wide range
across 1.5C pathways (Figure 2.16). Fossil fuels on the other hand
have a decreasing role in electricity supply, with their share falling to
0-25% by 2050 (Table 2.7).

134

Share in Electricity Generation (%)

2020

In summary, 1.5C pathways include a rapid decline in the carbon
intensity of electricity and an increase in electrification of energy enduse (high confidence). This is the case across all 1.5C pathways and
their associated literature (Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3), with
pathway trends that extend those seen in past decades, and results
that are consistent with additional analyses (see Section 2.4.2.2).

2.4.2.3

Deployment of carbon capture and storage

Studies have shown the importance of CCS for deep mitigation pathways
(Krey et al., 2014a; Kriegler et al., 2014b), based on its multiple roles to
limit fossil-fuel emissions in electricity generation, liquids production,
and industry applications along with the projected ability to remove
CO2 from the atmosphere when combined with bioenergy. This remains
a valid finding for those 1.5C and 2C pathways that do not radically
reduce energy demand or do not offer carbon-neutral alternatives to
liquids and gases that do not rely on bioenergy.
There is a wide range of CCS that is deployed across 1.5C pathways
(Figure 2.17). A few 1.5C pathways with very low energy demand
do not include CCS at all (Grubler et al., 2018). For example, the LED
pathway has no CCS, whereas other pathways, such as the S5 pathway,

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.16 | Electricity generation for the four illustrative pathway archetypes plus the IEA's Faster Transition Scenario (IEA, 2017d) (panel a), and their
relative location in the ranges for pathways limiting warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot (panel b). The category `Other renewables' includes electricity
generation not covered by the other categories, for example, hydro and geothermal. The number of pathways that have higher primary energy than the scale in the bottom panel
are indicated by the numbers above the whiskers. Black horizontal dashed lines indicate the level of primary energy supply in 2015 (IEA, 2017e). Box plots in the lower panel show
the minimum-maximum range (whiskers), interquartile range (box), and median (vertical thin black line). Symbols in the lower panel show the four pathway archetypes - S1 (white
square), S2 (yellow square), S5 (black square), LED (white disc) - as well as the IEA's Faster Transition Scenario (red disc). Pathways with no or limited overshoot included the Below1.5C and 1.5C-low-OS classes.

rely on a large amount of BECCS to get to net-zero carbon emissions.
The cumulative fossil and biomass CO2 stored through 2050 ranges from
zero to 300 GtCO2 across 1.5C pathways with no or limited overshoot,
with zero up to 140 GtCO2 from biomass captured and stored. Some
pathways have very low fossil-fuel use overall, and consequently little
CCS applied to fossil fuels. In 1.5C pathways where the 2050 coal use
remains above 20 EJ yr-1 in 2050, 33-100% is combined with CCS.
While deployment of CCS for natural gas and coal vary widely across
pathways, there is greater natural gas primary energy connected to
CCS than coal primary energy connected to CCS in many pathways
(Figure 2.17).
CCS combined with fossil-fuel use remains limited in some 1.5C
pathways (Rogelj et al., 2018), as the limited 1.5C carbon budget
penalizes CCS if it is assumed to have incomplete capture rates or if
fossil fuels are assumed to continue to have significant lifecycle GHG
emissions (Pehl et al., 2017). However, high capture rates are technically
achievable now at higher cost, although efforts to date have focussed
on reducing the costs of capture (IEAGHG, 2006; NETL, 2013).

The quantity of CO2 stored via CCS over this century in 1.5C pathways
with no or limited overshoot ranges from zero to more than 1,200
GtCO2, (Figure 2.17). The IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide
Capture and Storage (IPCC, 2005) found that that, worldwide, it is
likely that there is a technical potential of at least about 2,000 GtCO2
of storage capacity in geological formations. Furthermore, the IPCC
(2005) recognized that there could be a much larger potential for
geological storage in saline formations, but the upper limit estimates
are uncertain due to lack of information and an agreed methodology.
Since IPCC (2005), understanding has improved and there have been
detailed regional surveys of storage capacity (Vangkilde-Pedersen
et al., 2009; Ogawa et al., 2011; Wei et al., 2013; Bentham et al.,
2014; Riis and Halland, 2014; Warwick et al., 2014; NETL, 2015) and
improvement and standardization of methodologies (e.g., Bachu et al.
2007a, b). Dooley (2013) synthesized published literature on both the
global geological storage resource as well as the potential demand
for geologic storage in mitigation pathways, and found that the
cumulative demand for CO2 storage was small compared to a practical
storage capacity estimate (as defined by Bachu et al., 2007a) of 3,900
GtCO2 worldwide. Differences remain, however, in estimates of storage
capacity due to, for example, the potential storage limitations of
135

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

2

Figure 2.17 | CCS deployment in 1.5C and 2C pathways for (a) biomass, (b) coal and (c) natural gas (EJ of primary energy) and (d) the cumulative quantity
of fossil (including from, e.g., cement production) and biomass CO2 stored via CCS (in GtCO2 stored). TBox plots show median, interquartile range and full range of
pathways in each temperature class. Pathway temperature classes (Table 2.1), illustrative pathway archetypes, and the IEA's Faster Transition Scenario (IEA WEM) (OECD/IEA and
IRENA, 2017) are indicated in the legend.

subsurface pressure build-up (Szulczewski et al., 2014) and assumptions
on practices that could manage such issues (Bachu, 2015). Kearns et
al. (2017) constructed estimates of global storage capacity of 8,000 to
55,000 GtCO2 (accounting for differences in detailed regional and local
estimates), which is sufficient at a global level for this century, but
found that at a regional level, robust demand for CO2 storage exceeds
their lower estimate of regional storage available for some regions.
However, storage capacity is not solely determined by the geological
setting, and Bachu (2015) describes storage engineering practices
that could further extend storage capacity estimates. In summary,
the storage capacity of all of these global estimates is larger than the
cumulative CO2 stored via CCS in 1.5C pathways over this century.
There is uncertainty in the future deployment of CCS given the
limited pace of current deployment, the evolution of CCS technology
that would be associated with deployment, and the current lack of
incentives for large-scale implementation of CCS (Bruckner et al., 2014;
Clarke et al., 2014; Riahi et al., 2017). Given the importance of CCS in
most mitigation pathways and its current slow pace of improvement,
the large-scale deployment of CCS as an option depends on the further
development of the technology in the near term. Chapter 4 discusses
how progress on CCS might be accelerated.

136

2.4.3

Energy End-Use Sectors

Since the power sector is almost decarbonized by mid-century in both
1.5C and 2C pathways, major differences come from CO2 emission
reductions in end-use sectors. Energy-demand reductions are key
and common features in 1.5C pathways, and they can be achieved
by efficiency improvements and various specific demand-reduction
measures. Another important feature is end-use decarbonization
including by electrification, although the potential and challenges in
each end-use sector vary significantly.
In the following sections, the potential and challenges of CO2 emission
reductions towards 1.5C and 2C- consistent pathways are discussed
for each end-use energy sector (industry, buildings, and transport).
For this purpose, two types of pathways are analysed and compared:
IAM (integrated assessment modelling) studies and sectoral (detailed)
studies. IAM data are extracted from the database that was compiled
for this assessment (see Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.3), and the
sectoral data are taken from a recent series of publications; `Energy
Technology Perspectives' (ETP) (IEA, 2014, 2015b, 2016a, 2017a), the
IEA/IRENA report (OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017), and the Shell Sky report
(Shell International B.V., 2018). The IAM pathways are categorized
according to their temperature rise in 2100 and the overshoot of
temperature during the century (see Table 2.1 in Section 2.1). Since
the number of Below-1.5C pathways is small, the following analyses

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

focus only on the features of the 1.5C-low-OS and 1.5C-high-OS
pathways (hereafter denoted together as 1.5C overshoot pathways
or IAM-1.5DS-OS) and 2C-consistent pathways (IAM-2DS). In order to
show the diversity of IAM pathways, we again show specific data from
the four illustrative pathways archetypes used throughout this chapter
(see Sections 2.1 and 2.3).
IEA ETP-B2DS (`Beyond 2 Degrees') and ETP-2DS are pathways with
a 50% chance of limiting temperature rise below 1.75C and 2C
by 2100, respectively (IEA, 2017a). The IEA-66%2DS pathway keeps
global mean temperature rise below 2C, not just in 2100 but also
over the course of the 21st century, with a 66% chance of being below
2C by 2100 (OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017). The comparison of CO2
emission trajectories between ETP-B2DS and IAM-1.5DS-OS show that
these are consistent up to 2060 (Figure 2.18). IEA scenarios assume
that only a very low level of BECCS is deployed to help offset emissions
in difficult-to-decarbonize sectors, and that global energy-related CO2
emissions do not turn net negative at any time but stay at zero from
2060 to 2100 (IEA, 2017a). Therefore, although its temperature rise
in 2100 is below 1.75C rather than below 1.5C, this scenario can
give information related to a 1.5C overshoot pathway up to 2050.
The trajectory of IEA-66%2DS (also referred to in other publications as
IEA's `Faster Transition Scenario') lies between IAM-1.5DS-OS and IAM2DS pathway ranges, and IEA-2DS stays in the range of 2C-consistent
IAM pathways. The Shell-Sky scenario aims to hold the temperature
rise to well below 2C, but it is a delayed action pathway relative to
others, as can be seen in Figure 2.18.
Energy-demand reduction measures are key to reducing CO2 emissions
from end-use sectors for low-carbon pathways. The upstream energy
reductions can be from several times to an order of magnitude larger
than the initial end-use demand reduction. There are interdependencies
among the end-use sectors and between energy-supply and end-use
sectors, which elevate the importance of a wide, systematic approach.
As shown in Figure 2.19, global final energy consumption grows by 30%
and 10% from 2010 to 2050 for 2C-consistent and 1.5C overshoot
pathways from IAMs, respectively, while much higher growth of 75% is
projected for reference scenarios. The ranges within a specific pathway
class are due to a variety of factors as introduced in Section 2.3.1, as
well as differences between modelling frameworks. The important
energy efficiency and conservation improvements that facilitate many
of the 1.5C pathways raise the issue of potential rebound effects
(Saunders, 2015), which, while promoting development, can make
the achievement of low-energy demand futures more difficult than
modelling studies anticipate (see Sections 2.5 and 2.6).
Final energy demand is driven by demand in energy services for
mobility, residential and commercial activities (buildings), and
manufacturing. Projections of final energy demand depend heavily on
assumptions about socio-economic futures as represented by the SSPs
(Bauer et al., 2017) (see Sections 2.1, 2.3 and 2.5). The structure of this
demand drives the composition of final energy use in terms of energy
carriers (electricity, liquids, gases, solids, hydrogen etc.).

6

Figure 2.18 | Comparison of CO2 emission trajectories of sectoral pathways
(IEA ETP-B2DS, ETP-2DS, IEA-66%2DS, Shell-Sky) with the ranges of IAM pathway (2DS
are 2C-consistent pathways and 1.5DS-OS are1.5C overshoot pathways). The CO2
emissions shown here are the energy-related emissions, including industrial process
emissions.

Figure 2.19 shows the structure of global final energy demand in 2030
and 2050, indicating the trend toward electrification and fossil fuel
usage reduction. This trend is more significant in 1.5C pathways than
2C pathways. Electrification continues throughout the second half of
the century, leading to a 3.5- to 6-fold increase in electricity demand
(interquartile range; median 4.5) by the end of the century relative to
today (Grubler et al., 2018; Luderer et al., 2018). Since the electricity
sector is completely decarbonized by mid-century in 1.5C pathways
(see Figure 2.20), electrification is the primary means to decarbonize
energy end-use sectors.
The CO2 emissions6 of end-use sectors and carbon intensity are shown
in Figure 2.20. The projections of IAMs and IEA studies show rather
different trends, especially in the carbon intensity. These differences
come from various factors, including the deployment of CCS, the
level of fuel switching and efficiency improvements, and the effect
of structural and behavioural changes. IAM projections are generally
optimistic for the industry sectors, but not for buildings and transport
sectors. Although GDP increases by a factor of 3.4 from 2010 to 2050,
the total energy consumption of end-use sectors grows by only about
30% and 20% in 1.5C overshoot and 2C-consistent pathways,
respectively. However, CO2 emissions would need to be reduced further
to achieve the stringent temperature limits. Figure 2.20 shows that the
reduction in CO2 emissions of end-use sectors is larger and more rapid
in 1.5C overshoot than 2C-consistent pathways, while emissions
from the power sector are already almost zero in 2050 in both sets
of pathways, indicating that supply-side emissions reductions are
almost fully exploited already in 2C-consistent pathways (see Figure
2.20) (Rogelj et al., 2015b, 2018; Luderer et al., 2016b). The emission
reductions in end-use sectors are largely made possible by efficiency
improvements, demand reduction measures and electrification, but
the level of emissions reductions varies across end-use sectors. While
the carbon intensity of the industry and buildings sectors decreases

This section reports `direct' CO2 emissions as reported for pathways in the database for the report. As shown below, the emissions from electricity are nearly zero around
2050, so the impact of indirect emissions on the whole emission contributions of each sector is very small in 2050.

137

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

60

20

2DS

Sectoral

1.5DS-H
1.5DS-L

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-OS

1.5DS-OS
2050

2030

10
Max
75% Percentile

5

2DS

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

L2DS

1.5DS-

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

Sectoral
Shell-Sky
IEA-66%2DS
IEA-2DS
IEA-B2DS

1.5DS-OS

Coal

100
80

Biomass

Sectoral

120

Sectoral

Sectoral

Liquid

300

60

200

40
2010 level
2DS 1.5DS 2DS 1.5DS

2030

2050

Sectoral

100
0

25% Percentile
Min

IAM-archetypes
S1
S2
S5
LED

2050

Electricity

d

2DS

1.5DS-OS

2030
400

1.5DS-H

2DS-

1.5DS-

Median

0

Final Energy (EJ)

2DS

2010 level

15

L2DS

2

25

0

Carbon Emissions

b

H2DS

CO2 Emissions (GtCO2)

30

10

1.5DS-L

200

20

Sectoral

2010 level

300

30

1.5DS-H

400

2010 level

40

L2DS

500

50

1.5DS-

600

Carbon Intensity

c

H2DS

Final Energy

a

2DS-

700

Carbon Intensity (gCO2/MJ)

Final Energy Consumption (EJ)

Energy consumption and CO2 emissions of Demand-side

20
2DS 1.5DS 2DS 1.5DS

2030

2050

0

2DS 1.5DS 2DS 1.5DS

2030

2050

2DS 1.5DS 2DS 1.5DS

2030

2050

Figure 2.19 | (a) Global final energy, (b) direct CO2 emissions from the all energy demand sectors, (c) carbon intensity, and (d) structure of final energy
(electricity, liquid fuel, coal, and biomass). The squares and circles indicate the IAM archetype pathways and diamonds indicate the data of sectoral scenarios. The red dotted
line indicates the 2010 level. H2DS = Higher-2C, L2DS = Lower-2C, 1.5DS-H = 1.5C-high-OS, 1.5DS-L = 1.5C-low-OS. The label 1.5DS combines both high and low overshoot
1.5C-consistent pathway. See Section 2.1 for descriptions.

to a very low level of around 10 gCO2 MJ-1, the carbon intensity of
transport becomes the highest of any sector by 2040 due to its higher
reliance on oil-based fuels. In the following subsections, the potential
and challenges of CO2 emission reduction in each end-use sector are
discussed in detail.

2.4.3.1

Industry

The industry sector is the largest end-use sector, both in terms of
final energy demand and GHG emissions. Its direct CO2 emissions
currently account for about 25% of total energy-related and process
CO2 emissions, and emissions have increased at an average annual
rate of 3.4% between 2000 and 2014, significantly faster than total
CO2 emissions (Hoesly et al., 2018). In addition to emissions from
the combustion of fossil fuels, non-energy uses of fossil fuels in the
petrochemical industry and metal smelting, as well as non-fossil fuel
process emissions (e.g., from cement production) contribute a small
amount (~5%) to the sector's CO2 emissions inventory. Material
industries are particularly energy and emissions intensive: together,
the steel, non-ferrous metals, chemicals, non-metallic minerals, and
138

pulp and paper industries accounted for close to 66% of final energy
demand and 72% of direct industry-sector emissions in 2014 (IEA,
2017a). In terms of end-uses, the bulk of energy in manufacturing
industries is required for process heating and steam generation,
while most electricity (but smaller shares of total final energy) is used
for mechanical work (Banerjee et al., 2012; IEA, 2017a).
As shown in Figure 2.21, a major share of the additional emission
reductions required for 1.5C-overshoot pathways compared to
those in 2C-consistent pathways comes from industry. Final energy,
CO2 emissions, and carbon intensity are consistent in IAM and
sectoral studies, but in IAM-1.5C-overshoot pathways the share of
electricity is higher than IEA-B2DS (40% vs. 25%) and hydrogen is
also considered to have a share of about 5% versus 0%. In 2050, final
energy is increased by 30% and 5% compared with the 2010 level
(red dotted line) for 1.5C-overshoot and 2C-consistent pathways,
respectively, but CO2 emissions are decreased by 80% and 50%
and carbon intensity by 80% and 60%, respectively. This additional
decarbonization is brought by switching to low-carbon fuels and CCS
deployment.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

300 (a)

Carbon Intensity (gCO2/MJ)

250
200

Carbon Intensity
2010 level

40

2010 level

2DS

10
2010 level

Max
75% Percentile

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2050

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

L2DS

1.5DS-

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

20

2DS
2030

1.5DS-OS

2DS

2050

Sectoral

L1.5DS

H1.5DS

1.5DS-

L2DS-66

H2DS-50

0

2DS-

10
Sectoral

Sectoral

L1.5DS

H1.5DS

1.5DS-

L2DS-66

2DS-

H2DS-50

Sectoral

L1.5DS

H1.5DS

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

50

30

L1.5DS

75

40

H1.5DS

100

1.5DS-OS

Sectoral
Shell-Sky
IEA-66%2DS
IEA-2DS
IEA-B2DS

Biomass

1.5DS-

125

2030

IAM-archetypes
S1
S2
S5
LED

50

L2DS

Biomass consumption (EJ)

Electricity

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2050

1.5DS-OS

H2DS

150 (d)

2050

25% Percentile
Min

2DS-

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2030

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

L2DS

1.5DS-

H2DS

Median

25

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2030

5

0

1.5DS-H

L2DS

0

Carbon Emissions

1.5DS-

Lore

50
15 (b)

20

H2DS

100

2DS-

150

2DS

Electricity consumption (EJ)

Industry Sector
(c)

Final Energy

60

2DS-

(CO2 Emissions (GtCO2)

Final Energy Consumption (EJ)

Figure 2.20 | Comparison of (a) direct CO2 emissions and (b) carbon intensity of the power and energy end-use sectors (industry, buildings, and transport
sectors) between IAMs and sectoral studies (IEA-ETP and IEA/IRENA). Diamond markers in panel (b) show data for IEA-ETP scenarios (2DS and B2DS), and IEA/IRENA
scenario (66%2DS). Note: for the data from IAM studies, there is rather large variation of projections for each indicator. Please see the details in the following figures in each enduse sector section.

1.5DS-OS

Figure 2.21 | Comparison of (a) final energy, (b) direct CO2 emissions, (c) carbon intensity, (d) electricity and biomass consumption in the industry sector
between IAM and sectoral studies. The squares and circles indicate the IAM archetype pathways and diamonds the data of sectoral scenarios. The red dotted line indicates the
2010 level. H2DS = Higher-2C, L2DS = Lower-2C, 1.5DS-H = 1.5C-high-OS, 1.5DS-L = 1.5C-low-OS. The label 1.5DS combines both high and low overshoot 1.5C-consistent
pathways. Section 2.1 for descriptions.

139

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Broadly speaking, the industry sector's mitigation measures can
be categorized in terms of the following five strategies: (i) reducing
demand, (ii) energy efficiency, (iii) increasing electrification of energy
demand, (iv) reducing the carbon content of non-electric fuels, and
(v) deploying innovative processes and application of CCS. IEA ETP
estimates the relative contribution of different measures for CO2
emission reduction in their B2DS scenario compared with their reference
scenario in 2050 as follows: energy efficiency 42%, innovative process
and CCS 37%, switching to low-carbon fuels and feedstocks 13% and
material efficiency (include efficient production and use to contribute
to demand reduction) 8%. The remainder of this section delves more
deeply into the potential mitigation contributions of these strategies as
well as their limitations.

2

Reduction in the use of industrial materials, while delivering similar
services, or improving the quality of products could help to reduce
energy demand and overall system-level CO2 emissions. Strategies
include using materials more intensively, extending product lifetimes,
increasing recycling, and increasing inter-industry material synergies,
such as clinker substitution in cement production (Allwood et al., 2013;
IEA, 2017a). Related to material efficiency, use of fossil-fuel feedstocks
could shift to lower-carbon feedstocks, such as from oil to natural gas
and biomass, and end-uses could shift to more sustainable materials,
such as biomass-based materials, reducing the demand for energyintensive materials (IEA, 2017a).
Reaping energy efficiency potentials hinges critically on advanced
management practices, such as energy management systems, in
industrial facilities as well as targeted policies to accelerate adoption of
the best available technology (see Section 2.5). Although excess energy,
usually as waste heat, is inevitable, recovering and reusing this waste
heat under economically and technically viable conditions benefits
the overall energy system. Furthermore, demand-side management
strategies could modulate the level of industrial activity in line with
the availability of resources in the power system. This could imply a
shift away from peak demand and as power supply decarbonizes, this
demand-shaping potential could shift some load to times with high
portions of low-carbon electricity generation (IEA, 2017a).
In the industry sector, energy demand increases more than 40%
between 2010 and 2050 in baseline scenarios. However, in the
1.5C-overshoot and 2C-consistent pathways from IAMs, the increase
is only 30% and 5%, respectively (Figure 2.21). These energy-demand
reductions encompass both efficiency improvements in production and
reductions in material demand, as most IAMs do not discern these two
factors.

century, CO2 emissions per unit of electricity are projected to decrease
to near zero in both sets of pathways (see Figure 2.20). An accelerated
electrification of the industry sector thus becomes an increasingly
powerful mitigation option. In the IAM pathways, the share of electricity
increases up to 30% by 2050 in 1.5C-overshoot pathways (Figure
2.21) from 20% in 2010. Some industrial fuel uses are substantially
more difficult to electrify than others, and electrification would have
other effects on the process, including impacts on plant design, cost
and available process integration options (IEA, 2017a).7
In 1.5C-overshoot pathways, the carbon intensity of non-electric fuels
consumed by industry decreases to 16 gCO2 MJ-1 by 2050, compared
to 25 gCO2 MJ-1 in 2C-consistent pathways. Considerable carbon
intensity reductions are already achieved by 2030, largely via a rapid
phase-out of coal. Biomass becomes an increasingly important energy
carrier in the industry sector in deep-decarbonization pathways, but
primarily in the longer term (in 2050, biomass accounts for only 10%
of final energy consumption even in 1.5C-overshoot pathways). In
addition, hydrogen plays a considerable role as a substitute for fossilbased non-electric energy demands in some pathways.
Without major deployment of new sustainability-oriented low-carbon
industrial processes, the 1.5C-overshoot target is difficult to achieve.
Bringing such technologies and processes to commercial deployment
requires significant investment in research and development. Some
examples of innovative low-carbon process routes include: new
steelmaking processes such as upgraded smelt reduction and upgraded
direct reduced iron, inert anodes for aluminium smelting, and full oxyfuelling kilns for clinker production in cement manufacturing (IEA,
2017a).
CCS plays a major role in decarbonizing the industry sector in the
context of 1.5C and 2C pathways, especially in industries with
higher process emissions, such as cement, iron and steel industries.
In 1.5C-overshoot pathways, CCS in industry reaches 3 GtCO2 yr-1
by 2050, albeit with strong variations across pathways. Given the
projected long-lead times and need for technological innovation, early
scale-up of industry-sector CCS is essential to achieving the stringent
temperature target. Development and demonstration of such projects
has been slow, however. Currently, only two large-scale industrial CCS
projects outside of oil and gas processing are in operation (Global
CCS Institute, 2016). The estimated current cost8 of CO2 avoided (in
USD2015) ranges from $20-27 tCO2-1 for gas processing and bioethanol production, and $60-138 tCO2-1 for fossil fuel-fired power
generation up to $104-188 tCO2-1 for cement production (Irlam, 2017).

2.4.3.2
CO2 emissions from industry increase by 30% in 2050 compared to
2010 in baseline scenarios. By contrast, these emissions are reduced
by 80% and 50% relative to 2010 levels in 1.5C-overshoot and
2C-consistent pathways from IAMs, respectively (Figure 2.21). By mid-

Buildings

In 2014, the buildings sector accounted for 31% of total global final
energy use, 54% of final electricity demand, and 8% of energy-related
CO2 emissions (excluding indirect emissions due to electricity). When

7

Electrification can be linked with the heating and drying process by electric boilers and electro-thermal processes, and also with low-temperature heat demand by heat
pumps. In the iron and steel industry, hydrogen produced by electrolysis can be used as a reduction agent of iron instead of coke. Excess resources, such as black liquor,
will provide the opportunity to increase the systematic efficiency to use for electricity generation.

8

These are first-of-a-kind (FOAK) cost data.

140

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Buildings Sector
Final Energy

Carbon Intensity (gCO2/MJ)

200

30

5

2DS

4
2

Max
75% Percentile

1
1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

50

1.5DS-OS

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2050

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

2DS
2030

1.5DS-OS

2DS

Sectoral

1.5DS-L

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

0

2DS-

10
Sectoral

Sectoral

1.5DS-L

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

Sectoral

1.5DS-L

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

50

20

1.5DS-L

75

30

1.5DS-

100

40

L2DS

125

2030

2

Biomass

H2DS

Biomass consumption (EJ)

Electricity

2DS

Sectoral
Shell-Sky
IEA-66%2DS
IEA-2DS
IEA-B2DS

1.5DS-OS

150

25

1.5DS-OS
2050

IAM-archetypes
S1
S2
S5
LED

1.5DS-H

L2DS

2050

25% Percentile
Min

2DS-

(d)

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

2DS

1.5DS-OS

2030
175

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

Median

2DS

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2030

2010 level

3

0

1.5DS-

6

L2DS

0

Carbon Emissions

H2DS

(b)

2DS-

10

H2DS

CO2Emissions (GtCO2)

2010 level

20

2010 level

100
50

Carbon Intensity

40

150

7

Electricity consumption (EJ)

60 (c)
50

2DS-

Final Energy Consumption (EJ)

250 (a)

1.5DS-OS
2050

Figure 2.22 | Comparison of (a) final energy, (b) direct CO2 emissions, (c) carbon intensity, (d) electricity and biomass consumption in the buildings sector
between IAM and sectoral studies. The squares and circles indicate the IAM archetype pathways and diamonds the data of sectoral scenarios. The red dotted line indicates the
2010 level. H2DS = Higher-2C, L2DS = Lower-2C, 1.5DS-H = 1.5C-high-OS, 1.5DS-L = 1.5C-low-OS. The label 1.5DS combines both high and low overshoot 1.5C-consistent
pathways. Section 2.1 for descriptions.

upstream electricity generation is taken into account, buildings were
responsible for 23% of global energy-related CO2 emissions, with onethird of those from direct fossil fuel consumption (IEA, 2017a).
Past growth of energy consumption has been mainly driven by
population and economic growth, with improved access to electricity,
and higher use of electrical appliances and space cooling resulting
from increasing living standards, especially in developing countries
(Lucon et al., 2014). These trends will continue in the future and in
2050, energy consumption is projected to increase by 20% and 50%
compared to 2010 in the IAM-1.5C-overshoot and 2C-consistent
pathways, respectively (Figure 2.22). However, sectoral studies (IEAETP scenarios) show different trends. Energy consumption in 2050
decreases compared to 2010 in ETP-B2DS, and the reduction rate of
CO2 emissions is higher than in IAM pathways (Figure 2.22). Mitigation
options are often more widely covered in sectoral studies (Lucon et al.,
2014), leading to greater reductions in energy consumption and CO2
emissions.
Emissions reductions are driven by a clear tempering of energy
demand and a strong electrification of the buildings sector. The share
of electricity in 2050 is 60% in 1.5C-overshoot pathways, compared

with 50% in 2C-consistent pathways (Figure 2.22). Electrification
contributes to the reduction of direct CO2 emissions by replacing
carbon-intensive fuels, like oil and coal. Furthermore, when combined
with a rapid decarbonization of the power system (see Section 2.4.1) it
also enables further reduction of indirect CO2 emissions from electricity.
Sectoral bottom-up models generally estimate lower electrification
potentials for the buildings sector in comparison to global IAMs (see
Figure 2.22). Besides CO2 emissions, increasing global demand for
air conditioning in buildings may also lead to increased emissions of
HFCs in this sector over the next few decades. Although these gases
are currently a relatively small proportion of annual GHG emissions,
their use in the air conditioning sector is expected to grow rapidly over
the next few decades if alternatives are not adopted. However, their
projected future impact can be significantly mitigated through better
servicing and maintenance of equipment and switching of cooling
gases (Shah et al., 2015; Purohit and Hoglund-Isaksson, 2017).
IEA-ETP (IEA, 2017a) analysed the relative importance of various
technology measures toward the reduction of energy and CO2
emissions in the buildings sector. The largest energy savings potential
is in heating and cooling demand, largely due to building envelope
improvements and high efficiency and renewable equipment. In the
141

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

ETP-B2DS, energy demand for space heating and cooling is 33% lower
in 2050 than in the reference scenario, and these reductions account
for 54% of total reductions from the reference scenario. Energy savings
from shifts to high-performance lighting, appliances, and water heating
equipment account for a further 24% of the total reduction. The longterm, strategic shift away from fossil-fuel use in buildings, alongside
the rapid uptake of energy efficient, integrated and renewable
energy technologies (with clean power generation), leads to a drastic
reduction of CO2 emissions. In ETP-B2DS, the direct CO2 emissions are
79% lower than the reference scenario in 2050, and the remaining
emissions come mainly from the continued use of natural gas.

2

The buildings sector is characterized by very long-living infrastructure,
and immediate steps are hence important to avoid lock-in of inefficient
carbon and energy-intensive buildings. This applies both to new buildings
in developing countries where substantial new construction is expected
in the near future and to retrofits of existing building stock in developed
regions. This represents both a significant risk and opportunity for
mitigation.9 A recent study highlights the benefits of deploying the most
advanced renovation technologies, which would avoid lock-in into less
efficient measures (Guneralp et al., 2017).Aside from the effect of building
envelope measures, adoption of energy-efficient technologies such as
heat pumps and, more recently, light-emitting diodes is also important
for the reduction of energy and CO2 emissions (IEA, 2017a). Consumer
choices, behaviour and building operation can also significantly affect
energy consumption (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3).

2.4.3.3

Transport

Transport accounted for 28% of global final energy demand and 23%
of global energy-related CO2 emissions in 2014. Emissions increased by
2.5% annually between 2010 and 2015, and over the past half century
the sector has witnessed faster emissions growth than any other. The
transport sector is the least diversified energy end-use sector; the
sector consumed 65% of global oil final energy demand, with 92% of
transport final energy demand consisting of oil products (IEA, 2017a),
suggesting major challenges for deep decarbonization.
Final energy, CO2 emissions, and carbon intensity for the transport
sector are shown in Figure 2.23. The projections of IAMs are more
pessimistic than IEA-ETP scenarios, though both clearly project deep
cuts in energy consumption and CO2 emissions by 2050. For example,
1.5C-overshoot pathways from IAMs project a reduction of 15% in
energy consumption between 2015 and 2050, while ETP-B2DS projects
a reduction of 30% (Figure 2.23). Furthermore, IAM pathways are
generally more pessimistic in the projections of CO2 emissions and
carbon intensity reductions. In AR5 (Clarke et al., 2014; Sims et al.,
2014), similar comparisons between IAMs and sectoral studies were
performed and these were in good agreement with each other. Since
the AR5, two important changes can be identified: rapid growth of
electric vehicle sales in passenger cars, and more attention towards

structural changes in this sector. The former contributes to reduction
of CO2 emissions and the latter to reduction of energy consumption.
Deep emissions reductions in the transport sector would be achieved by
several means. Technology-focused measures such as energy efficiency
and fuel-switching are two of these. Structural changes that avoid or
shift transport activity are also important. While the former solutions
(technologies) always tend to figure into deep decarbonization
pathways in a major way, this is not always the case with the latter,
especially in IAM pathways. Comparing different types of global
transport models, Yeh et al. (2016) find that sectoral (intensive) studies
generally envision greater mitigation potential from structural changes
in transport activity and modal choice. Though, even there, it is primarily
the switching of passengers and freight from less- to more-efficient
travel modes (e.g., cars, trucks and airplanes to buses and trains) that is
the main strategy; other actions, such as increasing vehicle load factors
(occupancy rates) and outright reductions in travel demand (e.g., as
a result of integrated transport, land-use and urban planning), figure
much less prominently. Whether these dynamics accurately reflect the
actual mitigation potential of structural changes in transport activity
and modal choice is a point of investigation. According to the recent
IEA-ETP scenarios, the share of avoid (reduction of mobility demand)
and shift (shifting to more efficient modes) measures in the reduction of
CO2 emissions from the reference to B2DS scenarios in 2050 amounts
to 20% (IEA, 2017a).
The potential and strategies to reduce energy consumption and CO2
emissions differ significantly among transport modes. In ETP-B2DS,
the shares of energy consumption and CO2 emissions in 2050 for each
mode are rather different (see Table 2.8), indicating the challenge
of decarbonizing heavy-duty vehicles (HDV, trucks), aviation, and
shipping. The reduction of CO2 emissions in the whole sector from
the reference scenario to ETP-B2DS is 60% in 2050, with varying
contributions per mode (Table 2.8). Since there is no silver bullet for
this deep decarbonization, every possible measure would be required
to achieve this stringent emissions outcome. The contribution of
various measures for the CO2 emission reduction from the reference
scenario to the IEA-B2DS in 2050 can be decomposed to efficiency
improvement (29%), biofuels (36%), electrification (15%), and avoid/
shift (20%) (IEA, 2017a). It is noted that the share of electrification
becomes larger compared with older studies, reflected by the recent
growth of electric vehicle sales worldwide. Another new trend is the
allocation of biofuels to each mode of transport. In IEA-B2DS, the total
amount of biofuels consumed in the transport sector is 24EJ10 in 2060,
and allocated to LDV (light-duty vehicles, 17%), HDV (35%), aviation
(28%), and shipping (21%), that is, more biofuels is allocated to the
difficult-to-decarbonize modes (see Table 2.8).
In road transport, incremental vehicle improvements (including
engines) are relevant, especially in the short to medium term. Hybrid
electric vehicles are also instrumental to enabling the transition from

9

In this section, we only discuss the direct emissions from the sector, but the selection of building materials has a significant impact on the reduction of energy and emissions
during production, such as shift from the steel and concrete to wood-based materials.

10

This is estimated for the biofuels produced in a "sustainable manner" from non-food crop feedstocks, which are capable of delivering significant lifecycle GHG emissions
savings compared with fossil fuel alternatives, and which do not directly compete with food and feed crops for agricultural land or cause adverse sustainability impacts.

142

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Table 2.8 | Transport sector indicators by mode in 2050 (IEA, 2017a).
Share of energy consumption, biofuel consumption, CO2 emissions, and reduction of energy consumption and CO2 emissions from 2014. (CO2 emissions are wellto-wheel emissions, including the emission during the fuel production.), LDV: light duty vehicle, HDV: heavy duty vehicle.

Share of Each Mode (%)

Reduction from 2014 (%)

Energy

Biofuel

CO2

Energy

CO2

LDV

36

17

30

51

81

HDV

33

35

36

8

56

Rail

6

-

-1

-136

107

Aviation

12

28

14

14

56

Shipping

17

21

21

26

29

(a)

The share of low-carbon fuels in the total transport fuel mix
increases to 10% and 16% by 2030 and to 40% and 58% by 2050

Carbon Intensity (gCO2/MJ)

150

2010 level

40

10

2DS

8
4

Max
75% Percentile

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

1.5DS-OS

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2050

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

2DS-

Sectoral
Shell-Sky
IEA-66%2DS
IEA-2DS
IEA-B2DS

Biofuel

89

68

30
20

2DS

2DS

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

1.5DS-OS
2030

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

0

1.5DS-

10

L2DS

Sectoral

1.5DS-L

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

Sectoral

1.5DS-L

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

10

61

40

H2DS

Biomass consumption (EJ)

20

2030

IAM-archetypes
S1
S2
S5
LED

1.5DS-OS

Electricity

2DS

1.5DS-OS
2050

2050

30

0

25% Percentile
Min

2DS-

40 (d)

L2DS

2DS

1.5DS-OS

2030

H2DS

2DS-

1.5DS-L

Sectoral

1.5DS-H

1.5DS-

L2DS

H2DS

2DS-

Median

2DS

1.5DS-OS

2030

2010 level

6

1.5DS-H

12

1.5DS-

0
Carbon Emissions

L2DS

50
14 (b)

H2DS

20

2010 level

2DS-

100

2
0

Carbon Intensity

60

2DS

Electricity consumption (EJ)

transport modes. Both modes would need to pursue highly ambitious
efficiency improvements and use of low-carbon fuels. In the near and
medium term, this would be advanced biofuels while in the long term
it could be hydrogen as direct use for shipping or an intermediate
product for synthetic fuels for both modes (IEA, 2017a).

Transport Sector
(c)
80

Final Energy

200

(CO2 Emissions (GtCO2)

Final Energy Consumption (EJ)

internal combustion engine vehicles to electric vehicles, especially
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. Electrification is a powerful measure to
decarbonize short-distance vehicles (passenger cars and two and three
wheelers) and the rail sector. In road freight transport (trucks), systemic
improvements (e.g., in supply chains, logistics, and routing) would be
effective measures in conjunction with efficiency improvement of
vehicles. Shipping and aviation are more challenging to decarbonize,
while their demand growth is projected to be higher than other

1.5DS-OS
2050

Figure 2.23 | Comparison of (a) final energy, (b) direct CO2 emissions, (c) carbon intensity, (d) electricity and biofuel consumption in the transport sector
between IAM and sectoral studies. The squares and circles indicate the IAM archetype pathways and diamonds the data of sectoral scenarios. The red dotted line indicates the
2010 level. H2DS = Higher-2C, L2DS = Lower-2C, 1.5DS-H = 1.5C-high-OS, 1.5DS-L = 1.5C-low-OS. The label 1.5DS combines both high and low overshoot 1.5C-consistent
pathways. Section 2.1 for descriptions.

143

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

in 1.5C-overshoot pathways from IAMs and the IEA-B2DS pathway,
respectively. The IEA-B2DS scenario is on the more ambitious side,
especially in the share of electricity. Hence, there is wide variation
among scenarios, including the IAM pathways, regarding changes
in the transport fuel mix over the first half of the century. As seen in
Figure 2.23, the projections of energy consumption, CO2 emissions and
carbon intensity are quite different between IAM and ETP scenarios.
These differences can be explained by more weight on efficiency
improvements and avoid/shift decreasing energy consumption, and
the higher share of biofuels and electricity accelerating the speed of
decarbonization in ETP scenarios. Although biofuel consumption and
electric vehicle sales have increased significantly in recent years, the
growth rates projected in these pathways would be unprecedented
and far higher than has been experienced to date.

2

The 1.5C pathways require an acceleration of the mitigation solutions
already featured in 2C-consistent pathways (e.g., more efficient
vehicle technologies operating on lower-carbon fuels), as well as
those having received lesser attention in most global transport
decarbonization pathways up to now (e.g., mode-shifting and travel
demand management). Current-generation, global pathways generally
do not include these newer transport sector developments, whereby
technological solutions are related to shifts in traveller's behaviour.

2.4.4

Land-Use Transitions and Changes
in the Agricultural Sector

The agricultural and land system described together under the umbrella
of the AFOLU (agriculture, forestry, and other land use) sector plays
an important role in 1.5C pathways (Clarke et al., 2014; Smith and
Bustamante, 2014; Popp et al., 2017). On the one hand, its emissions
need to be limited over the course of this century to be in line with
pathways limiting warming to 1.5C (see Sections 2.2-3). On the other
hand, the AFOLU system is responsible for food and feed production;
for wood production for pulp and construction; for the production of
biomass that is used for energy, CDR or other uses; and for the supply of
non-provisioning (ecosystem) services (Smith and Bustamante, 2014).
Meeting all demands together requires changes in land use, as well as
in agricultural and forestry practices, for which a multitude of potential
options have been identified (Smith and Bustamante, 2014; Popp et
al., 2017) (see also Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2 and Chapter 4,
Section 4.3.1, 4.3.2 and 4.3.7).
This section assesses the transformation of the AFOLU system, mainly
making use of pathways from IAMs (see Section 2.1) that are based on
quantifications of the SSPs and that report distinct land-use evolutions
in line with limiting warming to 1.5C (Calvin et al., 2017; Fricko et
al., 2017; Fujimori, 2017; Kriegler et al., 2017; Popp et al., 2017; Riahi
et al., 2017; van Vuuren et al., 2017b; Doelman et al., 2018; Rogelj
et al., 2018). The SSPs were designed to vary mitigation challenges
(O'Neill et al., 2014) (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1), including
for the AFOLU sector (Popp et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017). The SSP
pathway ensemble hence allows for a structured exploration of AFOLU
transitions in the context of climate change mitigation in line with
1.5C, taking into account technological and socio-economic aspects.
Other considerations, like food security, livelihoods and biodiversity,
are also of importance when identifying AFOLU strategies. These are
144

at present only tangentially explored by the SSPs. Further assessments
of AFOLU mitigation options are provided in other parts of this report
and in the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL).
Chapter 4 provides an assessment of bioenergy (including feedstocks,
see Section 4.3.1), livestock management (Section 4.3.1), reducing
rates of deforestation and other land-based mitigation options (as
mitigation and adaptation option, see Section 4.3.2), and BECCS,
afforestation and reforestation options (including the bottom-up
literature of their sustainable potential, mitigation cost and side
effects, Section 4.3.7). Chapter 3 discusses impacts land-based CDR
(Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3). Chapter 5 assesses the sustainable
development implications of AFOLU mitigation, including impacts on
biodiversity (Section 5.4). Finally, the SRCCL will undertake a more
comprehensive assessment of land and climate change aspects. For
the sake of complementarity, this section focusses on the magnitude
and pace of land transitions in 1.5C pathways, as well as on the
implications of different AFOLU mitigation strategies for different land
types. The interactions with other societal objectives and potential
limitations of identified AFOLU measures link to these large-scale
evolutions, but these are assessed elsewhere (see above).
Land-use changes until mid-century occur in the large majority of
SSP pathways, both under stringent mitigation and in absence of
mitigation (Figure 2.24). In the latter case, changes are mainly due
to socio-economic drivers like growing demands for food, feed and
wood products. General transition trends can be identified for many
land types in 1.5C pathways, which differ from those in baseline
scenarios and depend on the interplay with mitigation in other
sectors (Figure 2.24) (Popp et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et
al., 2018). Mitigation that demands land mainly occurs at the expense
of agricultural land for food and feed production. Additionally, some
biomass is projected to be grown on marginal land or supplied from
residues and waste, but at lower shares. Land for second-generation
energy crops (such as Miscanthus or poplar) expands by 2030
and 2050 in all available pathways that assume a cost-effective
achievement of a 1.5C temperature goal in 2100 (Figure 2.24), but
the scale depends strongly on underlying socio-economic assumptions
(see later discussion of land pathway archetypes). Reducing rates of
deforestation restricts agricultural expansion, and forest cover can
expand strongly in 1.5C and 2C pathways alike compared to its
extent in no-climate-policy baselines due to reduced deforestation and
afforestation and reforestation measures. However, the extent to which
forest cover expands varies highly across models in the literature,
with some models projecting forest cover to stay virtually constant or
decline slightly. This is due to whether afforestation and reforestation is
included as a mitigation technology in these pathways and interactions
with other sectors.
As a consequence of other land-use changes, pasture land is generally
projected to be reduced compared to both baselines in which no climate
change mitigation action is undertaken and 2C-consistent pathways.
Furthermore, cropland for food and feed production decreases in
most 1.5C pathways, both compared to a no-climate baseline and
relative to 2010. These reductions in agricultural land for food and feed
production are facilitated by intensification on agricultural land and in
livestock production systems (Popp et al., 2017), as well as changes
in consumption patterns (Frank et al., 2017; Fujimori, 2017) (see

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.24 | Overview of land-use change transitions in 2030 and 2050, relative to 2010 based on pathways based on the Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs) (Popp et
al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018). Grey: no-climate-policy baseline; green: 2.6 W m-2 pathways; blue: 1.9 W m-2 pathways. Pink: 1.9 W m-2 pathways grouped per
underlying socio-economic assumption (from left to right: SSP1 sustainability, SSP2 middle-of-the-road, SSP5 fossil-fuelled development). Ranges show the minimum-maximum
range across the SSPs. Single pathways are shown with plus signs. Illustrative archetype pathways are highlighted with distinct icons. Each panel shows the changes for a different
land type. The 1.9 and 2.6 W m-2 pathways are taken as proxies for 1.5C and 2C pathways, respectively. The 2.6 W m-2 pathways are mostly consistent with the Lower-2C and
Higher-2C pathway classes. The 1.9 W m-2 pathways are consistent with the 1.5C-low-OS (mostly SSP1 and SSP2) and 1.5C-high-OS (SSP5) pathway classes. In 2010, pasture
was estimated to cover about 3-3.5 103 Mha, food and feed crops about 1.5-1.6 103 Mha, energy crops about 0-14 Mha and forest about 3.7-4.2 103 Mha, across the models
that reported SSP pathways (Popp et al., 2017). When considering pathways limiting warming to 1.5C with no or limited overshoot, the full set of scenarios shows a conversion
of 50-1100 Mha of pasture into 0-600 Mha for energy crops, a 200 Mha reduction to 950 Mha increase forest, and a 400 Mha decrease to a 250 Mha increase in non-pasture
agricultural land for food and feed crops by 2050 relative to 2010. The large range across the literature and the understanding of the variations across models and assumptions
leads to medium confidence in the size of these ranges.

also Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2 for an assessment of these mitigation
options). For example, in a scenario based on rapid technological
progress (Kriegler et al., 2017), global average cereal crop yields in
2100 are assumed to be above 5 tDM ha-1 yr-1 in mitigation scenarios
aiming at limiting end-of-century radiative forcing to 4.5 or 2.6 W m-2,
compared to 4 tDM ha-1 yr-1 in the SSP5 baseline to ensure the same
food production. Similar improvements are present in 1.5C variants
of such scenarios. Historically, cereal crop yields are estimated at
1 tDM ha-1 yr-1 and about 3 tDM ha-1 yr-1 in 1965 and 2010,
respectively (calculations based on FAOSTAT, 2018). For aggregate
energy crops, models assume 4.2-8.9 tDM ha-1 yr-1 in 2010, increasing
to about 6.9-17.4 tDM ha-1 yr-1 in 2050, which fall within the range
found in the bottom-up literature yet depend on crop, climatic zone,
land quality and plot size (Searle and Malins, 2014).
The pace of projected land transitions over the coming decades can
differ strongly between 1.5C and baseline scenarios without climate
change mitigation and from historical trends (Table 2.9). However,
there is uncertainty in the sign and magnitude of these future landuse changes (Prestele et al., 2016; Popp et al., 2017; Doelman et al.,
2018). The pace of projected cropland changes overlaps with historical
trends over the past four decades, but in several cases also goes well
beyond this range. By the 2030-2050 period, the projected reductions

in pasture and potentially strong increases in forest cover imply a
reversed dynamic compared to historical and baseline trends. This
suggests that distinct policy and government measures would be
needed to achieve forest increases, particularly in a context of projected
increased bioenergy use.
Changes in the AFOLU sector are driven by three main factors: demand
changes, efficiency of production, and policy assumptions (Smith et
al., 2013; Popp et al., 2017). Demand for agricultural products and
other land-based commodities is influenced by consumption patterns
(including dietary preferences and food waste affecting demand for
food and feed) (Smith et al., 2013; van Vuuren et al., 2018), demand for
forest products for pulp and construction (including less wood waste),
and demand for biomass for energy production (Lambin and Meyfroidt,
2011; Smith and Bustamante, 2014). Efficiency of agricultural and
forestry production relates to improvements in agricultural and forestry
practices (including product cascades, by-products and more waste- and
residue-based biomass for energy production), agricultural and forestry
yield increases, and intensification of livestock production systems
leading to higher feed efficiency and changes in feed composition
(Havlik et al., 2014; Weindl et al., 2015). Policy assumptions relate to
the level of land protection, the treatment of food waste, policy choices
about the timing of mitigation action (early vs late), the choice and
145

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Table 2.9 | Annual pace of land-use change in baseline, 2C and 1.5C pathways.
All values in Mha yr-1. The 2.6 W m-2 pathways are mostly consistent with the Lower-2C and Higher-2C pathway classes. The 1.9 W m-2 pathways are
broadly consistent with the 1.5C-low-OS (mostly SSP1 and SSP2) and 1.5C-high-OS (SSP5) pathway classes. Baseline projections reflect land-use developments
projected by integrated assessment models under the assumptions of the Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs) in absence of climate policies (Popp et al., 2017;
Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018). Values give the full range across SSP scenarios. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAOSTAT, 2018), 4.9 billion hectares (approximately 40% of the land surface) was under agricultural use in 2005, either as cropland (1.5 billion hectares) or
pasture (3.4 billion hectares). FAO data in the table are equally from FAOSTAT (2018).

Annual Pace of Land-Use Change [Mha yr-1]
Land Type
Pasture

2

Cropland for food,
feed and material
Cropland for energy

Pathway
1.9 W m

Time Window

Historical

2010-2030

2030-2050

[-14.6/3.0]

[-28.7/-5.2]

2.6 W m-2

[-9.3/4.1]

[-21.6/0.4]

-2

Baseline

[-5.1/14.1]

[-9.6/9.0]

1.9 W m-2

[-12.7/9.0]

[-18.5/0.1]

2.6 W m-2

[-12.9/8.3]

[-16.8/2.3]

Baseline

[-5.3/9.9]

[-2.7/6.7]

1.9 W m-2

[0.7/10.5]

[3.9/34.8]

2.6 W m

[0.2/8.8]

[2.0/22.9]

Baseline

[0.2/4.2]

[-0.2/6.1]

-2

Total cropland (Sum
of cropland for food
and feed & energy)

1.9 W m-2

[-6.8/12.8]

[-5.8/26.7]

2.6 W m

[-8.4/9.3]

[-7.1/17.8]

Baseline

[-3.0/11.3]

[0.6/11.0]

Forest

1.9 W m-2

[-4.8/23.7]

[0.0/34.3]

2.6 W m

[-4.7/22.2]

[-2.4/31.7]

[-13.6/3.3]

[-6.5/4.3]

-2

-2

Baseline

preference of land-based mitigation options (for example, the inclusion
of afforestation and reforestation as mitigation options), interactions
with other sectors (Popp et al., 2017), and trade (Schmitz et al., 2012;
Wiebe et al., 2015).
A global study (Stevanovi et al., 2017) reported similar GHG reduction
potentials for both production-side (agricultural production measures
in combination with reduced deforestation) and consumption-side
(diet change in combination with lower shares of food waste) measures
on the order of 40% in 210011 (compared to a baseline scenario
without land-based mitigation). Lower consumption of livestock
products by 2050 could also substantially reduce deforestation and
cumulative carbon losses (Weindl et al., 2017). On the supply side,
minor productivity growth in extensive livestock production systems
is projected to lead to substantial CO2 emission abatement, but the
emission-saving potential of productivity gains in intensive systems is
limited, mainly due to trade-offs with soil carbon stocks (Weindl et al.,
2017). In addition, even within existing livestock production systems, a
transition from extensive to more productive systems bears substantial
GHG abatement potential, while improving food availability (Gerber et
al., 2013; Havlik et al., 2014). Many studies highlight the capability of
agricultural intensification for reducing GHG emissions in the AFOLU
sector or even enhancing terrestrial carbon stocks (Valin et al., 2013;
Popp et al., 2014a; Wise et al., 2014). Also the importance of immediate
and global land-use regulations for a comprehensive reduction of
11

1970-1990

1990-2010

8.7
Permanent meadows
and pastures (FAO)

0.9
Permanent meadows
and pastures (FAO)

4.6
Arable land and
Permanent crops

0.9
Arable land and
Permanent crops

N.A.
Forest (FAO)

-5.6
Forest (FAO)

land-related GHG emissions (especially related to deforestation)
has been shown by several studies (Calvin et al., 2017; Fricko et al.,
2017; Fujimori, 2017). Ultimately, there are also interactions between
these three factors and the wider society and economy, for example,
if CDR technologies that are not land-based are deployed (like direct
air capture - DACCS, see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7) or if other sectors
over- or underachieve their projected mitigation contributions (Clarke
et al., 2014). Variations in these drivers can lead to drastically different
land-use implications (Popp et al., 2014b) (Figure 2.24).
Stringent mitigation pathways inform general GHG dynamics in
the AFOLU sector. First, CO2 emissions from deforestation can be
abated at relatively low carbon prices if displacement effects in
other regions (Calvin et al., 2017) or other land-use types with high
carbon density (Calvin et al., 2014; Popp et al., 2014a; Kriegler et
al., 2017) can be avoided. However, efficiency and costs of reducing
rates of deforestation strongly depend on governance performance,
institutions and macroeconomic factors (Wang et al., 2016). Secondly,
besides CO2 reductions, the land system can play an important role
for overall CDR efforts (Rogelj et al., 2018) via BECCS, afforestation
and reforestation, or a combination of options. The AFOLU sector also
provides further potential for active terrestrial carbon sequestration,
for example, via land restoration, improved management of forest and
agricultural land (Griscom et al., 2017), or biochar applications (Smith,
2016) (see also Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7). These options have so far

Land-based mitigation options on the supply and the demand side are assessed in 4.3.2, and CDR options with a land component in 4.3.7. Chapter 5 (Section 5.4) assesses
the implications of land-based mitigation for related SDGs, e.g., food security.

146

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Figure 2.25 | Agricultural emissions in transformation pathways. Global agricultural (a) CH4 and (b) N2O emissions. Box plots show median, interquartile range and full
range. Classes are defined in Section 2.1.

not been extensively integrated in the mitigation pathway literature
(see Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2), but in theory their availability
would impact the deployment of other CDR technologies, like BECCS
(Section 2.3.4) (Strefler et al., 2018a). These interactions will be
discussed further in the SRCCL.
Residual agricultural non-CO2 emissions of CH4 and N2O play an
important role for temperature stabilization pathways, and their relative
importance increases in stringent mitigation pathways in which CO2 is
reduced to net zero emissions globally (Gernaat et al., 2015; Popp et al.,
2017; Stevanovi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018), for example, through
their impact on the remaining carbon budget (Section 2.2). Although
agricultural non-CO2 emissions show marked reduction potentials
in 2C-consistent pathways, complete elimination of these emission
sources does not occur in IAMs based on the evolution of agricultural
practice assumed in integrated models (Figure 2.25) (Gernaat et al.,
2015). Methane emissions in 1.5C pathways are reduced through
improved agricultural management (e.g., improved management of
water in rice production, manure and herds, and better livestock quality
through breeding and improved feeding practices) as well as dietary
shifts away from emissions-intensive livestock products. Similarly,
N2O emissions decrease due to improved N-efficiency and manure
management (Frank et al., 2018). However, high levels of bioenergy
production can also result in increased N2O emissions (Kriegler et
al., 2017), highlighting the importance of appropriate management
approaches (Davis et al., 2013). Residual agricultural emissions can be
further reduced by limiting demand for GHG-intensive foods through
shifts to healthier and more sustainable diets (Tilman and Clark, 2014;
Erb et al., 2016b; Springmann et al., 2016) and reductions in food waste
(Bajelj et al., 2014; Muller et al., 2017; Popp et al., 2017) (see also
Chapter 4 and SRCCL). Finally, several mitigation measures that could
affect these agricultural non-CO2 emissions are not, or only to a limited
degree, considered in the current integrated pathway literature (see
Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.2). Such measures (like plant-based
and synthetic proteins, methane inhibitors and vaccines in livestock,
alternate wetting and drying in paddy rice, or nitrification inhibitors)
are very diverse and differ in their development or deployment stages.
Their potentials have not been explicitly assessed here.
Pathways consistent with 1.5C rely on one or more of the three
strategies highlighted above (demand changes, efficiency gains, and

policy assumptions), and can apply these in different configurations.
For example, among the four illustrative archetypes used in this
chapter (Section 2.1), the LED and S1 pathways focus on generally
low resource and energy consumption (including healthy diets with
low animal-calorie shares and low food waste) as well as significant
agricultural intensification in combination with high levels of nature
protection. Under such assumptions, comparably small amounts of
land are needed for land-demanding mitigation activities such as
BECCS and afforestation and reforestation, leaving the land footprint
for energy crops in 2050 virtually the same compared to 2010 levels for
the LED pathway. In contrast, future land-use developments can look
very different under the resource- and energy-intensive S5 pathway
that includes less healthy diets with high animal shares and high
shares of food waste (Tilman and Clark, 2014; Springmann et al., 2016)
combined with a strong orientation towards technology solutions to
compensate for high reliance on fossil-fuel resources and associated
high levels of GHG emissions in the baseline. In such pathways, climate
change mitigation strategies strongly depend on the availability of
CDR through BECCS (Humpenoder et al., 2014). As a consequence, the
S5 pathway sources significant amounts of biomass through bioenergy
crop expansion in combination with agricultural intensification. Also,
further policy assumptions can strongly affect land-use developments,
highlighting the importance for land use of making appropriate
policy choices. For example, within the SSP set, some pathways rely
strongly on a policy to incentivize afforestation and reforestation for
CDR together with BECCS, which results in an expansion of forest area
and a corresponding increase in terrestrial carbon stock. Finally, the
variety of pathways illustrates how policy choices in the AFOLU and
other sectors strongly affect land-use developments and associated
sustainable development interactions (Chapter 5, Section 5.4) in 1.5C
pathways.
The choice of strategy or mitigation portfolio impacts the GHG
dynamics of the land system and other sectors (see Section 2.3), as well
as the synergies and trade-offs with other environmental and societal
objectives (see Section 2.5.3 and Chapter 5, Section 5.4). For example,
AFOLU developments in 1.5C pathways range from strategies
that differ by almost an order of magnitude in their projected land
requirements for bioenergy (Figure 2.24), and some strategies would
allow an increase in forest cover over the 21st century compared to
strategies under which forest cover remains approximately constant.
147

2

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

High agricultural yields and application of intensified animal husbandry,
implementation of best-available technologies for reducing non-CO2
emissions, or lifestyle changes including a less-meat-intensive diet and
less CO2-intensive transport modes, have been identified as allowing
for such a forest expansion and reduced footprints from bioenergy
without compromising food security (Frank et al., 2017; Doelman et al.,
2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018).

2

The IAMs used in the pathways underlying this assessment (Popp
et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018) do not include all
potential land-based mitigation options and side-effects, and their
results are hence subject to uncertainty. For example, recent research
has highlighted the potential impact of forest management practices
on land carbon content (Erb et al., 2016a; Naudts et al., 2016) and
the uncertainty surrounding future crop yields (Haberl et al., 2013;
Searle and Malins, 2014) and water availability (Liu et al., 2014).
These aspects are included in IAMs in varying degrees but were not
assessed in this report. Furthermore, land-use modules of some IAMs
can depict spatially resolved climate damages to agriculture (Nelson et
al., 2014), but this option was not used in the SSP quantifications (Riahi
et al., 2017). Damages (e.g., due to ozone exposure or varying indirect
fertilization due to atmospheric N and Fe deposition (e.g., Shindell et
al., 2012; Mahowald et al., 2017) are also not included. Finally, this
assessment did not look into the literature of agricultural sector models
which could provide important additional detail and granularity to the
discussion presented here.12 This limits their ability to capture the full
mitigation potentials and benefits between scenarios. An in-depth
assessment of these aspects lies outside the scope of this Special
Report. However, their existence affects the confidence assessment of
the AFOLU transition in 1.5C pathways.
Despite the limitations of current modelling approaches, there is high
agreement and robust evidence across models and studies that the
AFOLU sector plays an important role in stringent mitigation pathways.
The findings from these multiple lines of evidence also result in high
confidence that AFOLU mitigation strategies can vary significantly
based on preferences and policy choices, facilitating the exploration of
strategies that can achieve multiple societal objectives simultaneously
(see also Section 2.5.3). At the same time, given the many uncertainties
and limitations, only low to medium confidence can be attributed by
this assessment to the more extreme AFOLU developments found in
the pathway literature, and low to medium confidence to the level of
residual non-CO2 emissions.

2.5

Challenges, Opportunities and Co-Impacts
of Transformative Mitigation Pathways

This section examines aspects other than climate outcomes of 1.5C
mitigation pathways. Focus is given to challenges and opportunities
related to policy regimes, price of carbon and co-impacts, including
sustainable development issues, which can be derived from the existing
integrated pathway literature. Attention is also given to uncertainties
and critical assumptions underpinning mitigation pathways. The
12

challenges and opportunities identified in this section are further
elaborated Chapter 4 (e.g., policy choice and implementation) and
Chapter 5 (e.g., sustainable development). The assessment indicates
unprecedented policy and geopolitical challenges.

2.5.1

Policy Frameworks and Enabling Conditions

Moving from a 2C to a 1.5C pathway implies bold integrated policies
that enable higher socio-technical transition speeds, larger deployment
scales, and the phase-out of existing systems that may lock in
emissions for decades (high confidence) (Geels et al., 2017; Kuramochi
et al., 2017; Rockstrom et al., 2017; Vogt-Schilb and Hallegatte, 2017;
Kriegler et al., 2018a; Michaelowa et al., 2018). This requires higher
levels of transformative policy regimes in the near term, which allow
deep decarbonization pathways to emerge and a net zero carbon
energy-economy system to emerge in the 2040-2060 period (Rogelj
et al., 2015b; Bataille et al., 2016b). This enables accelerated levels
of technological deployment and innovation (Geels et al., 2017; IEA,
2017a; Grubler et al., 2018) and assumes more profound behavioural,
economic and political transformation (Sections 2.3, 2.4 and 4.4).
Despite inherent levels of uncertainty attached to modelling studies
(e.g., related to climate and carbon cycle response), studies stress the
urgency for transformative policy efforts to reduce emissions in the
short term (Riahi et al., 2015; Kuramochi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al.,
2018).
The available literature indicates that mitigation pathways in line
with 1.5C pathways would require stringent and integrated policy
interventions (very high confidence). Higher policy ambition often
takes the form of stringent economy-wide emission targets (and
resulting peak-and-decline of emissions), larger coverage of NDCs to
more gases and sectors (e.g., land-use, international aviation), much
lower energy and carbon intensity rates than historically seen, carbon
prices much higher than the ones observed in real markets, increased
climate finance, global coordinated policy action, and implementation
of additional initiatives (e.g., by non-state actors) (Sections 2.3, 2.4 and
2.5.2). The diversity (beyond explicit carbon pricing) and effectiveness
of policy portfolios are of prime importance, particularly in the shortterm (Mundaca and Markandya, 2016; Kuramochi et al., 2017; OECD,
2017; Kriegler et al., 2018a; Michaelowa et al., 2018). For instance,
deep decarbonization pathways in line with a 2C target (covering
74% of global energy-system emissions) include a mix of stringent
regulation (e.g., building codes, minimum performance standards),
carbon pricing mechanisms and R&D (research and development)
innovation policies (Bataille et al., 2016a). Explicit carbon pricing,
direct regulation and public investment to enable innovation are
critical for deep decarbonization pathways (Grubb et al., 2014).
Effective planning (including compact city measures) and integrated
regulatory frameworks are also key drivers in the IEA-ETP B2DS study
for the transport sector (IEA, 2017a). Effective urban planning can
reduce GHG emissions from urban transport between 20% and 50%
(Creutzig, 2016). Comprehensive policy frameworks would be needed
if the decarbonization of the power system is pursued while increasing
end-use electrification (including transport) (IEA, 2017a). Technology
policies (e.g., feed-in-tariffs), financing instruments, carbon pricing

For example, the GLEAM (http://www.fao.org/gleam/en/) model from the UN Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO).

148

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

and system integration management driving the rapid adoption of
renewable energy technologies are critical for the decarbonization
of electricity generation (Bruckner et al., 2014; Luderer et al., 2014;
Creutzig et al., 2017; Pietzcker et al., 2017). Likewise, low-carbon and
resilient investments are facilitated by a mix of coherent policies,
including fiscal and structural reforms (e.g., labour markets), public
procurement, carbon pricing, stringent standards, information schemes,
technology policies, fossil-fuel subsidy removal, climate risk disclosure,
and land-use and transport planning (OECD, 2017). Pathways in which
CDR options are restricted emphasize the strengthening of near-term
policy mixes (Luderer et al., 2013; Kriegler et al., 2018a). Together with
the decarbonization of the supply side, ambitious policies targeting
fuel switching and energy efficiency improvements on the demand
side play a major role across mitigation pathways (Clarke et al., 2014;
Kriegler et al., 2014b; Riahi et al., 2015; Kuramochi et al., 2017; Brown
and Li, 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018; Wachsmuth and Duscha, 2018).
The combined evidence suggests that aggressive policies addressing
energy efficiency are central in keeping 1.5C within reach and lowering
energy system and mitigation costs (high confidence) (Luderer et al.,
2013; Rogelj et al., 2013b, 2015b; Grubler et al., 2018). Demand-side
policies that increase energy efficiency or limit energy demand at a
higher rate than historically observed are critical enabling factors for
reducing mitigation costs in stringent mitigation pathways across the
board (Luderer et al., 2013; Rogelj et al., 2013b, 2015b; Clarke et al.,
2014; Bertram et al., 2015a; Bataille et al., 2016b). Ambitious sectorspecific mitigation policies in industry, transportation and residential
sectors are needed in the short run for emissions to peak in 2030
(Mejean et al., 2018). Stringent demand-side policies (e.g., tightened
efficiency standards for buildings and appliances) driving the expansion,
efficiency and provision of high-quality energy services are essential
to meet a 1.5C mitigation target while reducing the reliance on CDR
(Grubler et al., 2018). A 1.5C pathway for the transport sector is possible
using a mix of additional and stringent policy actions preventing (or
reducing) the need for transport, encouraging shifts towards efficient
modes of transport, and improving vehicle-fuel efficiency (Gota et al.,
2018). Stringent demand-side policies also reduce the need for CCS
(Wachsmuth and Duscha, 2018). Even in the presence of weak near
term policy frameworks, increased energy efficiency lowers mitigation
costs noticeably compared to pathways with reference energy intensity
(Bertram et al., 2015a). Common issues in the literature relate to the
rebound effect, the potential overestimation of the effectiveness
of energy efficiency policy, and policies to counteract the rebound
(Saunders, 2015; van den Bergh, 2017; Grubler et al., 2018) (Sections
2.4 and 4.4).
SSP-based modelling studies underline that socio-economic and
climate policy assumptions strongly influence mitigation pathway
characteristics and the economics of achieving a specific climate
target (very high confidence) (Bauer et al., 2017; Guivarch and Rogelj,
2017; Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018). SSP assumptions related
to economic growth and energy intensity are critical determinants
of projected CO2 emissions (Marangoni et al., 2017). A multimodel
inter-comparison study found that mitigation challenges in line with
a 1.5C target vary substantially across SSPs and policy assumptions
(Rogelj et al., 2018). Under SSP1-SPA1 (sustainability) and SSP2-SPA2
(middle-of-the-road), the majority of IAMs were capable of producing

Chapter 2

1.5C pathways. On the contrary, none of the IAMs contained in the
SR1.5 database could produce a 1.5C pathway under SSP3-SPA3
assumptions. Preventing elements include, for instance, climate
policy fragmentation, limited control of land-use emissions, heavy
reliance on fossil fuels, unsustainable consumption and marked
inequalities (Rogelj et al., 2018). Dietary aspects of the SSPs are also
critical: climate-friendly diets were contained in `sustainability' (SSP1)
and meat-intensive diets in SSP3 and SSP5 (Popp et al., 2017). CDR
requirements are reduced under `sustainability' related assumptions
(Strefler et al., 2018b). These are major policy-related reasons for why
SSP1-SPA1 translates into relatively low mitigation challenges whereas
SSP3-SPA3 and SSP5-SPA5 entail futures that pose the highest sociotechnical and economic challenges. SSPs/SPAs assumptions indicate
that policy-driven pathways that encompass accelerated change away
from fossil fuels, large-scale deployment of low-carbon energy supplies,
improved energy efficiency and sustainable consumption lifestyles
reduce the risks of climate targets becoming unreachable (Clarke et
al., 2014; Riahi et al., 2015, 2017; Marangoni et al., 2017; Rogelj et al.,
2017, 2018; Strefler et al., 2018b).
Policy assumptions that lead to weak or delayed mitigation action from
what would be possible in a fully cooperative world strongly influence
the achievability of mitigation targets (high confidence) (Luderer et al.,
2013; Rogelj et al., 2013b; OECD, 2017; Holz et al., 2018a; Strefler et al.,
2018b). Such regimes also include current NDCs (Fawcett et al., 2015;
Aldy et al., 2016; Rogelj et al., 2016a, 2017; Hof et al., 2017; van Soest et
al., 2017), which have been reported to make achieving a 2C pathway
unattainable without CDR (Strefler et al., 2018b). Not strengthening
NDCs would make it very challenging to keep 1.5C within reach (see
Section 2.3 and Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4). One multimodel
inter-comparison study (Luderer et al., 2016b, 2018) explored the effects
on 1.5C pathways assuming the implementation of current NDCs
until 2030 and stringent reductions thereafter. It finds that delays in
globally coordinated actions lead to various models reaching no 1.5C
pathways during the 21st century. Transnational emission reduction
initiatives (TERIs) outside the UNFCCC have also been assessed and
found to overlap (70-80%) with NDCs and be inadequate to bridge
the gap between NDCs and a 2C pathway (Roelfsema et al., 2018).
Weak and fragmented short-term policy efforts use up a large share of
the long-term carbon budget before 2030-2050 (Bertram et al., 2015a;
van Vuuren et al., 2016) and increase the need for the full portfolio
of mitigation measures, including CDR (Clarke et al., 2014; Riahi
et al., 2015; Xu and Ramanathan, 2017). Furthermore, fragmented
policy scenarios also exhibit `carbon leakage' via energy and capital
markets (Arroyo-Curras et al., 2015; Kriegler et al., 2015b). A lack of
integrated policy portfolios can increase the risks of trade-offs between
mitigation approaches and sustainable development objectives (see
Sections 2.5.3 and 5.4). However, more detailed analysis is needed
about realistic (less disruptive) policy trajectories until 2030 that can
strengthen near-term mitigation action and meaningfully decrease
post-2030 challenges (see Chapter 4, Section 4.4).
Whereas the policy frameworks and enabling conditions identified
above pertain to the `idealized' dimension of mitigation pathways,
aspects related to 1.5C mitigation pathways in practice are of prime
importance. For example, issues related to second-best stringency
levels, international cooperation, public acceptance, distributional
149

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

consequences, multilevel governance, non-state actions, compliance
levels, capacity building, rebound effects, linkages across highly
heterogeneous policies, sustained behavioural change, finance and
intra- and inter-generational issues need to be considered (see Chapter
4, Section 4.4) (Bataille et al., 2016a; Mundaca and Markandya, 2016;
Baranzini et al., 2017; MacDougall et al., 2017; van den Bergh, 2017;
Vogt-Schilb and Hallegatte, 2017; Chan et al., 2018; Holz et al., 2018a;
Klinsky and Winkler, 2018; Michaelowa et al., 2018; Patterson et al.,
2018). Furthermore, policies interact with a wide portfolio of preexisting policy instruments that address multiple areas (e.g., technology
markets, economic growth, poverty alleviation, climate adaptation) and
deal with various market failures (e.g., information asymmetries) and
behavioural aspects (e.g., heuristics) that prevent or hinder mitigation
actions (Kolstad et al., 2014; Mehling and Tvinnereim, 2018). The sociotechnical transition literature points to multiple complexities in realworld settings that prevent reaching `idealized' policy conditions but
at the same time can still accelerate transformative change through
other co-evolutionary processes of technology and society (Geels et

al., 2017; Rockstrom et al., 2017). Such co-processes are complex and
go beyond the role of policy (including carbon pricing) and comprise
the role of citizens, businesses, stakeholder groups or governments,
as well as the interplay of institutional and socio-political dimensions
(Michaelowa et al., 2018; Veland et al., 2018). It is argued that large
system transformations, similar to those in 1.5C pathways, require
prioritizing an evolutionary and behavioural framework in economic
theory rather than an optimization or equilibrium framework as is
common in current IAMs (Grubb et al., 2014; Patt, 2017). Accumulated
know-how, accelerated innovation and public investment play a key
role in (rapid) transitions (see Sections 4.2 and 4.4) (Geels et al., 2017;
Michaelowa et al., 2018).
In summary, the emerging literature supports the AR5 on the need for
integrated, robust and stringent policy frameworks targeting both the
supply and demand-side of energy-economy systems (high confidence).
Continuous ex-ante policy assessments provide learning opportunities
for both policy makers and stakeholders.

Cross-Chapter Box 5 | Economics of 1.5C Pathways and the Social Cost of Carbon
Contributing Authors:
Luis Mundaca (Sweden/Chile), Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Johannes Emmerling (Italy/Germany), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Jean-Charles
Hourcade (France), Elmar Kriegler (Germany), Anil Markandya (Spain/UK), Joyashree Roy (India), Drew Shindell (USA)
Two approaches have been commonly used to assess alternative emissions pathways: cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) and
cost-benefit analysis (CBA). CEA aims at identifying emissions pathways minimising the total mitigation costs of achieving
a given warming or GHG limit (Clarke et al., 2014). CBA has the goal to identify the optimal emissions trajectory minimising the
discounted flows of abatement expenditures and monetized climate change damages (Boardman et al., 2006; Stern, 2007). A third
concept, the Social Cost of Carbon (SCC) measures the total net damages of an extra metric ton of CO2 emissions due to the
associated climate change (Nordhaus, 2014; Pizer et al., 2014; Rose et al., 2017a). Negative and positive impacts are monetized,
discounted and the net value is expressed as an equivalent loss of consumption today. The SCC can be evaluated for any emissions
pathway under policy consideration (Rose, 2012; NASEM, 2016, 2017).
Along the optimal trajectory determined by CBA, the SCC equals the discounted value of the marginal abatement cost of a metric ton
of CO2 emissions. Equating the present value of future damages and marginal abatement costs includes a number of critical value
judgements in the formulation of the social welfare function (SWF), particularly in how non-market damages and the distribution of
damages across countries and individuals and between current and future generations are valued (Kolstad et al., 2014). For example,
since climate damages accrue to a larger extent farther in the future and can persist for many years, assumptions and approaches
to determine the social discount rate (normative `prescriptive' vs. positive `descriptive') and social welfare function (e.g., discounted
utilitarian SWF vs. undiscounted prioritarian SWF) can heavily influence CBA outcomes and associated estimates of SCC (Kolstad et
al., 2014; Pizer et al., 2014; Adler and Treich, 2015; Adler et al., 2017; NASEM, 2017; Nordhaus, 2017; Rose et al., 2017a).
In CEA, the marginal abatement cost of carbon is determined by the climate goal under consideration. It equals the shadow price
of carbon associated with the goal which in turn can be interpreted as the willingness to pay for imposing the goal as a political
constraint. Emissions prices are usually expressed in carbon (equivalent) prices using the GWP-100 metric as the exchange rate
for pricing emissions of non-CO2 GHGs controlled under internationally climate agreements (like CH4, N2O and fluorinated gases,
see Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1).13 Since policy goals like the goals of limiting warming to 1.5C or well below 2C do not
directly result from a money metric trade-off between mitigation and damages, associated shadow prices can differ from the SCC in
a CBA. In CEA, value judgments are to a large extent concentrated in the choice of climate goal and related implications, while more
explicit assumptions about social values are required to perform CBA. For example, in CEA assumptions about the social discount
rate no longer affect the overall abatement levels now set by the climate goal, but the choice and timing of investments in individual
measures to reach these levels.
13

Also other metrics to compare emissions have been suggested and adopted by governments nationally (Kandlikar, 1995; Marten et al., 2015; Shindell, 2015; IWG, 2016).

150

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Cross Chapter Box 5 (continued)

Although CBA-based and CEA-based assessment are both subject to large uncertainty about socio-techno-economic trends, policy
developments and climate response, the range of estimates for the SCC along an optimal trajectory determined by CBA is far wider
than for estimates of the shadow price of carbon in CEA-based approaches. In CBA, the value judgments about inter- and intragenerational equity combined with uncertainties in the climate damage functions assumed, including their empirical basis, are
important (Pindyck, 2013; Stern, 2013; Revesz et al., 2014). In a CEA-based approach, the value judgments about the aggregate
welfare function matter less, and uncertainty about climate response and impacts can be tied into various climate targets and
related emissions budgets (Clarke et al., 2014).
The CEA- and CBA-based carbon cost estimates are derived with a different set of tools. They are all summarised as integrated
assessment models (IAMs) but in fact are of very different nature (Weyant, 2017). Detailed process IAMs such as AIM (Fujimori,
2017), GCAM (Thomson et al., 2011; Calvin et al., 2017), IMAGE (van Vuuren et al., 2011b, 2017b), MESSAGE-GLOBIOM (Riahi
et al., 2011; Havlik et al., 2014; Fricko et al., 2017), REMIND-MAgPIE (Popp et al., 2010; Luderer et al., 2013; Kriegler et al., 2017)
and WITCH (Bosetti et al., 2006, 2008, 2009) include a process-based representation of energy and land systems, but in most
cases lack a comprehensive representation of climate damages, and are typically used for CEA. Diagnostic analyses across CBAIAMs indicate important dissimilarities in modelling assembly, implementation issues and behaviour (e.g., parametric uncertainty,
damage responses, income sensitivity) that need to be recognized to better understand SCC estimates (Rose et al., 2017a).

2

CBA-IAMs such as DICE (Nordhaus and Boyer, 2000; Nordhaus, 2013, 2017), PAGE (Hope, 2006) and FUND (Tol, 1999; Anthoff and
Tol, 2009) attempt to capture the full feedback from climate response to socio-economic damages in an aggregated manner, but are
usually much more stylised than detailed process IAMs. In a nutshell, the methodological framework for estimating SCC involves
projections of population growth, economic activity and resulting emissions; computations of atmospheric composition and global
mean temperatures as a result of emissions; estimations of physical impacts of climate changes; monetization of impacts (positive
and negative) on human welfare; and the discounting of the future monetary value of impacts to year of emission (Kolstad et al.,
2014; Revesz et al., 2014; NASEM, 2017; Rose et al., 2017a). There has been a discussion in the literature to what extent CBAIAMs underestimate the SCC due to, for example, a limited treatment or difficulties in addressing damages to human well-being,
labour productivity, value of capital stock, ecosystem services and the risks of catastrophic climate change for future generations
(Ackerman and Stanton, 2012; Revesz et al., 2014; Moore and Diaz, 2015; Stern, 2016). However, there has been progress in `bottomup' empirical analyses of climate damages (Hsiang et al., 2017), the insights of which could be integrated into these models (Dell et
al., 2014). Most of the models used in Chapter 2 on 1.5C mitigation pathways are detailed process IAMs and thus deal with CEA.
An important question is how results from CEA- and CBA-type approaches can be compared and synthesized. Such synthesis needs
to be done with care, since estimates of the shadow price of carbon under the climate goal and SCC estimates from CBA might not
be directly comparable due to different tools, approaches and assumptions used to derive them. Acknowledging this caveat, the
SCC literature has identified a range of factors, assumptions and value judgements that support SCC values above $100 tCO2-1 that
are also found as net present values of the shadow price of carbon in 1.5C pathways. These factors include accounting for tipping
points in the climate system (Lemoine and Traeger, 2014; Cai et al., 2015; Lontzek et al., 2015), a low social discount rate (Nordhaus,
2007a; Stern, 2007) and inequality aversion (Schmidt et al., 2013; Dennig et al., 2015; Adler et al., 2017).
The SCC and the shadow price of carbon are not merely theoretical concepts but used in regulation (Pizer et al., 2014; Revesz et al.,
2014; Stiglitz et al., 2017). As stated by the report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon Pricing (Stiglitz et al., 2017), in the real
world there is a distinction to be made between the implementable and efficient explicit carbon prices and the implicit (notional)
carbon prices to be retained for policy appraisal and the evaluation of public investments, as is already done in some jurisdictions
such as the USA, UK and France. Since 2008, the U.S. government has used SCC estimates to assess the benefits and costs related
to CO2 emissions resulting from federal policymaking (NASEM, 2017; Rose et al., 2017a).
The use of the SCC for policy appraisals is, however, not straightforward in an SDG context. There are suggestions that a broader
range of polluting activities than only CO2 emissions, for example emissions of air pollutants, and a broader range of impacts
than only climate change, such as impacts on air quality, health and sustainable development in general (see Chapter 5 for a
detailed discussion), would need to be included in social costs (Sarofim et al., 2017; Shindell et al., 2017a). Most importantly,
a consistent valuation of the SCC in a sustainable development framework would require accounting for the SDGs in the social
welfare formulation (see Chapter 5).

151

Chapter 2

2.5.2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Economic and Investment Implications of 1.5C
Pathways

2.5.2.1 Price of carbon emissions
The price of carbon assessed here is fundamentally different from the
concepts of optimal carbon price in a cost-benefit analysis, or the social
cost of carbon (see Cross-Chapter Box 5 in this chapter and Chapter
3, Section 3.5.2). Under a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) modelling
framework, prices for carbon (mitigation costs) reflect the stringency of
mitigation requirements at the margin (i.e., cost of mitigating one extra
unit of emission). Explicit carbon pricing is briefly addressed here to the
extent it pertains to the scope of Chapter 2. For detailed policy issues
about carbon pricing see Section 4.4.5.

2

Based on data available for this special report, the price of carbon
varies substantially across models and scenarios, and their values
increase with mitigation efforts (see Figure 2.26) (high confidence).
For instance, undiscounted values under a Higher-2C pathway range
from 15-220 USD2010 tCO2-eq-1 in 2030, 45-1050 USD2010 tCO2-eq-1
in 2050, 120-1100 USD2010 tCO2-eq-1 in 2070 and 175-2340 USD2010
tCO2-eq-1 in 2100. On the contrary, estimates for a Below-1.5C
pathway range from 135-6050 USD2010 tCO2-eq-1 in 2030, 245-14300
USD2010 tCO2-eq-1 in 2050, 420-19300 USD2010 tCO2-eq-1 in 2070
and 690-30100 USD2010 tCO2-eq-1 in 2100. Values for 1.5C-low-OS
pathway are relatively higher than 1.5C-high-OS pathway in 2030,
but the difference decreases over time, particularly between 2050 and
2070. This is because in 1.5C-high-OS pathways there is relatively
less mitigation activity in the first half of the century, but more in
the second half. The low energy demand (LED, P1 in the Summary for
Policymakers) scenario exhibits the lowest values across the illustrative
pathway archetypes. As a whole, the global average discounted price
of emissions across 1.5C- and 2C pathways differs by a factor of
four across models (assuming a 5% annual discount rate, comparing to
Below-1.5C and 1.5C-low-OS pathways). If 1.5C-high-OS pathways
(with peak warming 0.1-0.4C higher than 1.5C) or pathways with
very large land-use sinks are also considered, the differential value is
reduced to a limited degree, from a factor 4 to a factor 3. The increase
in mitigation costs between 1.5C and 2C pathways is based on a
direct comparison of pathway pairs from the same model and the
same study in which the 1.5C pathway assumes a significantly smaller
carbon budget compared to the 2C pathway (e.g., 600 GtCO2 smaller
in the CD-LINKS and ADVANCE studies). This assumption is the main
driver behind the increase in the price of carbon (Luderer et al., 2018;
McCollum et al., 2018).14
The wide range of values depends on numerous aspects, including
methodologies, projected energy service demands, mitigation targets,
fuel prices and technology availability (high confidence) (Clarke et al.,
2014; Kriegler et al., 2015b; Rogelj et al., 2015c; Riahi et al., 2017;
Stiglitz et al., 2017). The characteristics of the technology portfolio,
particularly in terms of investment costs and deployment rates, play a
key role (Luderer et al., 2013, 2016a; Clarke et al., 2014; Bertram et al.,
2015a; Riahi et al., 2015; Rogelj et al., 2015c). Models that encompass
14

a higher degree of technology granularity and that entail more
flexibility regarding mitigation response often produce relatively lower
mitigation costs than those that show less flexibility from a technology
perspective (Bertram et al., 2015a; Kriegler et al., 2015a). Pathways
providing high estimates often have limited flexibility of substituting
fossil fuels with low-carbon technologies and the associated need
to compensate fossil-fuel emissions with CDR. The price of carbon is
also sensitive to the non-availability of BECCS (Bauer et al., 2018).
Furthermore, and due to the treatment of future price anticipation,
recursive-dynamic modelling approaches (with `myopic anticipation')
exhibit higher prices in the short term but modest increases in the long
term compared to optimization modelling frameworks with `perfect
foresight' that show exponential pricing trajectories (Guivarch and
Rogelj, 2017). The chosen social discount rate in CEA studies (range
of 2-8% per year in the reported data, varying over time and sectors)
can also affect the choice and timing of investments in mitigation
measures (Clarke et al., 2014; Kriegler et al., 2015b; Weyant, 2017).
However, the impacts of varying discount rates on 1.5C (and 2C)
mitigation strategies can only be assessed to a limited degree. The
above highlights the importance of sampling bias in pathway analysis
ensembles towards outcomes derived from models which are more
flexible, have more mitigation options and cheaper cost assumptions
and thus can provide feasible pathways in contrast to other who are
unable to do so (Tavoni and Tol, 2010; Clarke et al., 2014; Bertram et
al., 2015a; Kriegler et al., 2015a; Guivarch and Rogelj, 2017). All CEAbased IAM studies reveal no unique path for the price of emissions
(Bertram et al., 2015a; Kriegler et al., 2015b; Akimoto et al., 2017; Riahi
et al., 2017).
Socio-economic conditions and policy assumptions also influence the
price of carbon (very high confidence) (Bauer et al., 2017; Guivarch and
Rogelj, 2017; Hof et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018). A
multimodel study (Riahi et al., 2017) estimated the average discounted
price of carbon (2010-2100, 5% discount rate) for a 2C target to
be nearly three times higher in the SSP5 marker than in the SSP1
marker. Another multimodel study (Rogelj et al., 2018) estimated the
average discounted price of carbon (2020-2100, 5%) to be 35-65%
lower in SSP1 compared to SSP2 in 1.5C pathways. Delayed nearterm mitigation policies and measures, including the limited extent of
international global cooperation, result in increases in total economic
mitigation costs and corresponding prices of carbon (Luderer et al.,
2013; Clarke et al., 2014). This is because stronger efforts are required
in the period after the delay to counterbalance the higher emissions
in the near term. Staged accession scenarios also produce higher
mitigation costs than immediate action mitigation scenarios under the
same stringency level of emissions (Kriegler et al., 2015b).
It has been long argued that an explicit carbon pricing mechanism
(whether via a tax or cap-and-trade scheme) can theoretically achieve
cost-effective emission reductions (Nordhaus, 2007b; Stern, 2007;
Aldy and Stavins, 2012; Goulder and Schein, 2013; Somanthan et al.,
2014; Weitzman, 2014; Tol, 2017). Whereas the integrated assessment
literature is mostly focused on the role of carbon pricing to reduce
emissions (Clarke et al., 2014; Riahi et al., 2017; Weyant, 2017), there

Unlike AR5, which only included cost-effective scenarios for estimating discounted average carbon prices for 2015-2100 (also using a 5% discount rate) (see Clarke et al.,
2014, p.450), please note that values shown in Figure 2.26b include delays or technology constraint cases (see Sections 2.1 and 2.3).

152

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

is an emerging body of studies (including bottom-up approaches) that
focuses on the interaction and performance of various policy mixes (e.g.,
regulation, subsidies, standards). Assuming global implementation of
a mix of regionally existing best-practice policies (mostly regulatory
policies in the electricity, industry, buildings, transport and agricultural
sectors) and moderate carbon pricing (between 5-20 USD2010 tCO2-1
in 2025 in most world regions and average prices around 25 USD2010
tCO2-1 in 2030), early action mitigation pathways are generated that
reduce global CO2 emissions by an additional 10 GtCO2e in 2030
compared to the NDCs (Kriegler et al., 2018a) (see Section 2.3.5).
Furthermore, a mix of stringent energy efficiency policies (e.g., minimum
performance standards, building codes) combined with a carbon tax
(rising from 10 USD2010 tCO2-1 in 2020 to 27 USD2010 tCO2-1 in 2040)
is more cost-effective than a carbon tax alone (from 20 to 53 USD2010
tCO2-1) to generate a 1.5C pathway for the U.S. electric sector (Brown
and Li, 2018). Likewise, a policy mix encompassing a moderate carbon
price (7 USD2010 tCO2-1 in 2015) combined with a ban on new coalbased power plants and dedicated policies addressing renewable
electricity generation capacity and electric vehicles reduces efficiency
losses compared with an optimal carbon pricing in 2030 (Bertram et al.,
2015b). One study estimates the carbon prices in high energy-intensive
pathways to be 25-50% higher than in low energy-intensive pathways
that assume ambitious regulatory instruments, economic incentives
(in addition to a carbon price) and voluntary initiatives (Mejean et
al., 2018). A bottom-up approach shows that stringent minimum
performance standards (MEPS) for appliances (e.g., refrigerators) can
effectively complement explicit carbon pricing, as tightened MEPS can
achieve ambitious efficiency improvements that cannot be assured by
carbon prices of 100 USD2010 tCO2-1 or higher (Sonnenschein et al.,
2018). In addition, the revenue recycling effect of carbon pricing can
reduce mitigation costs by displacing distortionary taxes (Baranzini et
al., 2017; OECD, 2017; McFarland et al., 2018; Sands, 2018; Siegmeier
et al., 2018), and the reduction of capital tax (compared to a labour
tax) can yield greater savings in welfare costs (Sands, 2018). The effect
on public budgets is particularly important in the near term; however,
it can decline in the long term as carbon neutrality is achieved (Sands,
2018). The literature indicates that explicit carbon pricing is relevant
but needs to be complemented with other policies to drive the required
changes in line with 1.5C cost-effective pathways (low to medium
evidence, high agreement) (see Chapter 4, Section 4.4.5) (Stiglitz et al.,
2017; Mehling and Tvinnereim, 2018; Mejean et al., 2018; Michaelowa
et al., 2018).
In summary, new analyses are consistent with AR5 and show
that the price of carbon increases significantly if a higher level of
stringency is pursued (high confidence). Values vary substantially
across models, scenarios and socio-economic, technology and policy
assumptions. While an explicit carbon pricing mechanism is central
to prompt mitigation scenarios compatible with 1.5C pathways, a
complementary mix of stringent policies is required.

Chapter 2

2

Figure 2.26 | Global price of carbon emissions consistent with mitigation
pathways. Panels show (a) undiscounted price of carbon (2030-2100) and (b) average
price of carbon (2030-2100) discounted at a 5% discount rate to 2020 in USD2010.
AC: Annually compounded. NPV: Net present value. Median values in floating black line.
The number of pathways included in box plots is indicated in the legend. Number of
pathways outside the figure range is noted at the top.

et al., 2013; Bowen et al., 2014; Gupta and Harnisch, 2014; Marangoni
and Tavoni, 2014; OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017).
Global energy-system investments in the year 2016 are estimated at
approximately 1.7 trillion USD2010 (approximately 2.2% of global GDP
and 10% of gross capital formation), of which 0.23 trillion USD2010
was for incremental end-use energy efficiency and the remainder for
supply-side capacity installations (IEA, 2017c). There is some uncertainty
surrounding this number because not all entities making investments
report them publicly, and model-based estimates show an uncertainty
range of about 15% (McCollum et al., 2018). Notwithstanding, the
trend for global energy investments has been generally upward over
the last two decades: increasing about threefold between 2000 and
2012, then levelling off for three years before declining in both 2015
and 2016 as a result of the oil price collapse and simultaneous capital
cost reductions for renewables (IEA, 2017c).

2.5.2.2 Investments
Realizing the transformations towards a 1.5C world would require a
major shift in investment patterns (McCollum et al., 2018). Literature on
global climate change mitigation investments is relatively sparse, with
most detailed literature having focused on 2C pathways (McCollum

Estimates of demand-side investments, either in total or for incremental
efficiency efforts, are more uncertain, mainly due to a lack of reliable
statistics and definitional issues about what exactly is counted towards
a demand-side investment and what the reference should be for
estimating incremental efficiency (McCollum et al., 2013). Grubler and
153

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Wilson (2014) use two working definitions (a broader and a narrower
one) to provide a first-order estimate of historical end-use technology
investments in total. The broad definition defines end-use technologies
as the technological systems purchasable by final consumers in order
to provide a useful service, for example, heating and air conditioning
systems, cars, freezers, or aircraft. The narrow definition sets the boundary
at the specific energy-using components or subsystems of the larger enduse technologies (e.g., compressor, car engine, heating element). Based
on these two definitions, demand-side energy investments for the year
2005 were estimated about 1-3.5 trillion USD2010 (central estimate 1.7
trillion USD2010) using the broad definition and 0.1-0.6 trillion USD2010
(central estimate 0.3 trillion USD2010) using the narrower definition.
Due to these definitional issues, demand-side investment projections are
uncertain, often underreported, and difficult to compare. Global IAMs
often do not fully and explicitly represent all the various measures that
could improve end-use efficiency.
Research carried out by six global IAM teams found that 1.5C-consistent
climate policies would require a marked upscaling of energy system
supply-side investments (resource extraction, power generation, fuel
conversion, pipelines/transmission, and energy storage) between
now and mid-century, reaching levels of between 1.6-3.8 trillion
USD2010 yr-1 globally on average over the 2016-2050 timeframe
(McCollum et al., 2018) (Figure 2.27). How these investment needs
compare to those in a policy baseline scenario is uncertain: they could
be higher, much higher, or lower. Investments in the policy baselines
from these same models are 1.6-2.7 trillion USD2010 yr-1. Much
hinges on the reductions in energy demand growth embodied in the
1.5C pathways, which require investing in energy efficiency. Studies
suggest that annual supply-side investments by mid-century could be
lowered by around 10% (McCollum et al., 2018) and in some cases up
to 50% (Grubler et al., 2018) if strong policies to limit energy demand
growth are successfully implemented. However, the degree to which
these supply-side reductions would be partially offset by an increase in
demand-side investments is unclear.
Some trends are robust across scenarios (Figure 2.27). First, pursuing
1.5C mitigation efforts requires a major reallocation of the investment
portfolio, implying a financial system aligned to mitigation challenges.
The path laid out by countries' current NDCs until 2030 will not
drive these structural changes; and despite increasing low-carbon
investments in recent years (IEA, 2016b; Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre/
BNEF, 2017), these are not yet aligned with 1.5C. Second, additional
annual average energy-related investments for the period 2016 to 2050
in pathways limiting warming to 1.5C compared to the baseline (i.e.,
pathways without new climate policies beyond those in place today)
are estimated by the models employed in McCollum et al. (2018) to
be around 830 billion USD2010 (range of 150 billion to 1700 billion
USD2010 across six models). This compares to total annual average
energy supply investments in 1.5C pathways of 1460 to 3510 billion
USD2010 and total annual average energy demand investments of
640 to 910 billion USD2010 for the period 2016 to 2050. Total energyrelated investments increase by about 12% (range of 3% to 24%) in
1.5C pathways relative to 2C pathways. Average annual investment
in low-carbon energy technologies and energy efficiency are upscaled
by roughly a factor of six (range of factor of 4 to 10) by 2050 compared
to 2015. Specifically, annual investments in low-carbon energy are
154

projected to average 0.8-2.9 trillion USD2010 yr-1 globally to 2050
in 1.5C pathways, overtaking fossil investments globally already by
around 2025 (McCollum et al., 2018). The bulk of these investments
are projected to be for clean electricity generation, particularly solar
and wind power (0.09-1.0 trillion USD2010 yr-1 and 0.1-0.35 trillion
USD2010 yr-1, respectively) as well as nuclear power (0.1-0.25 trillion
USD2010 yr-1). Third, the precise apportioning of these investments
depends on model assumptions and societal preferences related to
mitigation strategies and policy choices (see Sections 2.1 and 2.3).
Investments for electricity transmission and distribution and storage
are also scaled up in 1.5C pathways (0.3-1.3 trillion USD2010 yr-1),
given their widespread electrification of the end-use sectors (see
Section 2.4). Meanwhile, 1.5C pathways see a reduction in annual
investments for fossil-fuel extraction and unabated fossil electricity
generation (to 0.3-0.85 trillion USD2010 yr-1 on average over the
2016-2050 period). Investments in unabated coal are halted by 2030
in most 1.5C projections, while the literature is less conclusive for
investments in unabated gas (McCollum et al., 2018). This illustrates
how mitigation strategies vary between models, but in the real world
should be considered in terms of their societal desirability (see Section
2.5.3). Furthermore, some fossil investments made over the next few
years - or those made in the last few - will likely need to be retired prior
to fully recovering their capital investment or before the end of their
operational lifetime (Bertram et al., 2015a; Johnson et al., 2015; OECD/
IEA and IRENA, 2017). How the pace of the energy transition will be
affected by such dynamics, namely with respect to politics and society,
is not well captured by global IAMs at present. Modelling studies
have, however, shown how the reliability of institutions influences
investment risks and hence climate mitigation investment decisions
(Iyer et al., 2015), finding that a lack of regulatory credibility or policy
commitment fails to stimulate low-carbon investments (Bosetti and
Victor, 2011; Faehn and Isaksen, 2016).
Low-carbon supply-side investment needs are projected to be largest in
OECD countries and those of developing Asia. The regional distribution
of investments in 1.5C pathways estimated by the multiple models
in (McCollum et al., 2018) are the following (average over 2016-2050
timeframe): 0.30-1.3 trillion USD2010 yr-1(ASIA), 0.35-0.85 trillion
USD2010 yr-1 (OECD), 0.08-0.55 trillion USD2010 yr-1 (MAF), 0.07-0.25
trillion USD2010 yr-1 (LAM), and 0.05-0.15 trillion USD2010 yr-1 (REF)
(regions are defined consistent with their use in AR5 WGIII, see Table
A.II.8 in Krey et al., 2014b).
Until now, IAM investment analyses of 1.5C pathways have focused
on middle-of-the-road socio-economic and technological development
futures (SSP2) (Fricko et al., 2017). Consideration of a broader range
of development futures would yield different outcomes in terms of
the magnitudes of the projected investment levels. Sensitivity analyses
indicate that the magnitude of supply-side investments as well as the
investment portfolio do not change strongly across the SSPs for a given
level of climate policy stringency (McCollum et al., 2018). With only one
dedicated multimodel comparison study published, there is limited to
medium evidence available. For some features, there is high agreement
across modelling frameworks leading, for example, to medium to high
confidence that limiting global temperature increase to 1.5C would
require a major reallocation of the investment portfolio. Given the limited
amount of sensitivity cases available compared to the default SSP2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

assumptions, medium confidence can be assigned to the specific energy
and climate mitigation investment estimates reported here.
Assumptions in modelling studies indicate a number of challenges.
For instance, access to finance and mobilization of funds are critical
(Fankhauser et al., 2016; OECD, 2017). In turn, policy efforts need to be
effective in redirecting financial resources (UNEP, 2015; OECD, 2017) and
reducing transaction costs for bankable mitigation projects (i.e. projects
that have adequate future cash flow, collateral, etc. so lenders are willing
to finance it), particularly on the demand side (Mundaca et al., 2013;
Brunner and Enting, 2014; Grubler et al., 2018). Assumptions also imply
that policy certainty, regulatory oversight mechanisms and fiduciary duty
need to be robust and effective to safeguard credible and stable financial

Chapter 2

markets and de-risk mitigation investments in the long term (Clarke et
al., 2014; Mundaca et al., 2016; EC, 2017; OECD, 2017). Importantly,
the different time horizons that actors have in the competitive finance
industry are typically not explicitly captured by modelling assumptions
(Harmes, 2011). See Chapter 4, Section 4.4.5 for details of climate
finance in practice.
In summary and despite inherent uncertainties, the emerging literature
indicates a gap between current investment patterns and those
compatible with 1.5C (or 2C) pathways (limited to medium evidence,
high agreement). Estimates and assumptions from modelling frameworks
suggest a major shift in investment patterns and entail a financial system
effectively aligned with mitigation challenges (high confidence).

2

Figure 2.27 | Historical and projected global energy investments. (a) Historical investment estimates across six global models from (McCollum et al., 2018) (bars =
model means, whiskers full model range) compared to historical estimates from IEA (International Energy Agency (IEA) 2016) (triangles). (b) Average annual investments over the
2016-2050 period in the "baselines" (i.e., pathways without new climate policies beyond those in place today), scenarios which implement the NDCs (`NDC', including conditional
NDCs), scenarios consistent with the Lower-2C pathway class (`2C'), and scenarios in line with the 1.5C-low-OS pathway class (`1.5C'). Whiskers show the range of models; wide
bars show the multimodel means; narrow bars represent analogous values from individual IEA scenarios (OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017). (c) Average annual mitigation investments
and disinvestments for the 2016-2030 periods relative to the baseline. The solid bars show the values for `2C' pathways, while the hatched areas show the additional investments
for the pathways labelled with `1.5C'. Whiskers show the full range around the multimodel means. T&D stands for transmission and distribution, and CCS stands for carbon capture
and storage. Global cumulative carbon dioxide emissions, from fossil fuels and industrial processes (FF&I) but excluding land use, over the 2016-2100 timeframe range from 880 to
1074 GtCO2 (multimodel mean: 952 GtCO2) in the `2C' pathway and from 206 to 525 GtCO2 (mean: 390 GtCO2) in the `1.5C' pathway.

155

Chapter 2

2.5.3

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Sustainable Development Features
of 1.5C Pathways

Potential synergies and trade-offs between 1.5C mitigation pathways
and different sustainable development (SD) dimensions (see CrossChapter Box 4 in Chapter 1) are an emerging field of research. Chapter
5, Section 5.4 assesses interactions between individual mitigation
measures with other societal objectives, as well as the Sustainable

Development Goals (SDGs) (Table 5.1). This section synthesized
the Chapter 5 insights to assess how these interactions play out
in integrated 1.5C pathways, and the four illustrative pathway
archetypes of this chapter in particular (see Section 2.1). Information
from integrated pathways is combined with the interactions assessed
in Chapter 5 and aggregated for each SDG, with a level of confidence
attributed to each interaction based on the amount and agreement of
the scientific evidence (see Chapter 5).

2

Figure 2.28 | Interactions of individual mitigation measures and alternative mitigations portfolios for 1.5C with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
The assessment of interactions between mitigation measures and individual SDGs is based on the assessment of Chapter 5, Section 5.4. Proxy indicators and synthesis method are
described in Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.5.

156

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Figure 2.28 shows how the scale and combination of individual
mitigation measures (i.e., their mitigation portfolios) influence the
extent of synergies and trade-offs with other societal objectives. All
pathways generate multiple synergies with sustainable development
dimensions and can advance several other SDGs simultaneously. Some,
however, show higher risks for trade-offs. An example is increased
biomass production and its potential to increase pressure on land and
water resources, food production, and biodiversity and to reduce air
quality when combusted inefficiently. At the same time, mitigation
actions in energy-demand sectors and behavioural response options
with appropriate management of rebound effects can advance multiple
SDGs simultaneously, more so than energy supply-side mitigation
actions (see Chapter 5, Section 5.4, Table 5.1 and Figure 5.3 for more
examples). Of the four pathway archetypes used in this chapter (LED,
S1, S2, and S5, referred to as P1, P2, P3, and P4 in the Summary for
Policymakers), the S1 and LED pathways show the largest number of
synergies and least number of potential trade-offs, while for the S5
pathway more potential trade-offs are identified. In general, pathways
with emphasis on demand reductions and policies that incentivize
behavioural change, sustainable consumption patterns, healthy diets
and relatively low use of CDR (or only afforestation) show relatively
more synergies with individual SDGs than other pathways.

interactions. Very limited literature suggests that achieving co-benefits
is not automatically assured but results from conscious and carefully
coordinated policies and implementation strategies (Shukla and
Chaturvedi, 2012; Clarke et al., 2014; McCollum et al., 2018).
Understanding these mitigation-SDG interactions is key for selecting
mitigation options that maximize synergies and minimize trade-offs
towards the 1.5C and sustainable development objectives (van Vuuren
et al., 2015; Hildingsson and Johansson, 2016; Jakob and Steckel, 2016;
von Stechow et al., 2016; Delponte et al., 2017).
In summary, the combined evidence indicates that the chosen
mitigation portfolio can have a distinct impact on the achievement
of other societal policy objectives (high confidence); however, there is
uncertainty regarding the specific extent of climate-SDG interactions.

2
2.6

At the same time, the literature on climate-SDG interactions is still
an emergent field of research and hence there is low to medium
confidence in the precise magnitude of the majority of these

Knowledge Gaps

This section summarizes the knowledge gaps articulated in earlier
sections of the chapter.

2.6.1
There is robust evidence and high agreement in the pathway literature
that multiple strategies can be considered to limit warming to 1.5C (see
Sections 2.1.3, 2.3 and 2.4). Together with the extensive evidence on
the existence of interactions of mitigation measures with other societal
objectives (Chapter 5, Section 5.4), this results in high confidence that
the choice of mitigation portfolio or strategy can markedly affect the
achievement of other societal objectives. For instance, action on SLCFs
has been suggested to facilitate the achievement of SDGs (Shindell et
al., 2017b) and to reduce regional impacts, for example, from black
carbon sources on snow and ice loss in the Arctic and alpine regions
(Painter et al., 2013), with particular focus on the warming sub-set of
SLCFs. Reductions in both surface aerosols and ozone through methane
reductions provide health and ecosystem co-benefits (Jacobson, 2002,
2010; Anenberg et al., 2012; Shindell et al., 2012; Stohl et al., 2015;
Collins et al., 2018). Public health benefits of stringent mitigation
pathways in line with 1.5C pathways can be sizeable. For instance,
a study examining a more rapid reduction of fossil-fuel usage to
achieve 1.5C relative to 2C, similar to that of other recent studies
(Grubler et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018), found that improved
air quality would lead to more than 100 million avoided premature
deaths over the 21st century (Shindell et al., 2018). These benefits are
assumed to be in addition to those occurring under 2C pathways
(e.g., Silva et al., 2016), and could in monetary terms offset either a
large portion or all of the initial mitigation costs (West et al., 2013;
Shindell et al., 2018). However, some sources of SLCFs with important
impacts for public health (e.g., traditional biomass burning) are only
mildly affected by climate policy in the available integrated pathways
and are more strongly impacted by baseline assumptions about future
societal development and preferences, and technologies instead (Rao
et al., 2016, 2017).

Chapter 2

Geophysical Understanding

Knowledge gaps are associated with the carbon cycle response, the
role of non-CO2 emissions and the evaluation of an appropriate historic
baseline.
Quantifying how the carbon cycle responds to negative emissions is
an important knowledge gap for strong mitigation pathways (Section
2.2). Earth system feedback uncertainties are important to consider for
the longer-term response, particularly in how permafrost melting might
affect the carbon budget (Section 2.2). Future research and ongoing
observations over the next years will provide a better indication as to
how the 2006-2015 base period compares with the long-term trends
and might at present bias the carbon budget estimates.
The future emissions of short-lived climate forcers and their
temperature response are a large source of uncertainty in 1.5C
pathways, having a greater relative uncertainty than in higher CO2
emission pathways. Their global emissions, their sectoral and regional
disaggregation, and their climate response are generally less well
quantified than for CO2 (Sections 2.2 and 2.3). Emissions from the
agricultural sector, including land-use based mitigation options, in
1.5C pathways constitute the main source of uncertainty here and
are an important gap in understanding the potential achievement of
stringent mitigation scenarios (Sections 2.3 and 2.4). This also includes
uncertainties surrounding the mitigation potential of the long-lived
GHG nitrous oxide (Sections 2.3 and 2.4).
There is considerable uncertainty in how future emissions of aerosol
precursors will affect the effective radiative forcing from aerosol-cloud
interaction. The potential future warming from mitigation of these
emissions reduces remaining carbon budgets and increases peak
temperatures (Section 2.2). The potential co-benefits of mitigating air
pollutants and how the reduction in air pollution may affect the carbon
sink are also important sources of uncertainty (Sections 2.2 and 2.5).
157

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

The pathway classification employed in this chapter employs results
from the MAGICC model with its AR5 parameter sets. The alternative
representation of the relationship between emissions and effective
radiative forcing and response in the FAIR model would lead to a different
classification that would make 1.5C targets more achievable (Section
2.2 and Supplementary Material 2.SM.1.1). Such a revision would
significantly alter the temperature outcomes for the pathways and, if
the result is found to be robust, future research and assessments would
need to adjust their classifications accordingly. Any possible high bias in
the MAGICC response may be partly or entirely offset by missing Earth
system feedbacks that are not represented in either climate emulator and
that would act to increase the temperature response (Section 2.2). For
this assessment report, any possible bias in the MAGICC setup applied
in this and earlier reports is not established enough in the literature to
change the classification approach. However, we only place medium
confidence in the classification adopted by the chapter.

2.6.2

industry, buildings, and transport sector in that realized by selected
pathways from IAMs, indicating the possibility to strengthen sectoral
decarbonization strategies compared to the IAM 1.5C pathways
assessed in this chapter (Section 2.1).
Studies indicate that a major shift in investment patterns is required
to limit global warming to 1.5C. This assessment would benefit from
a more explicit representation and understanding of the financial
sector within the modelling approaches. Assumptions in modelling
studies imply low-to-zero transaction costs for market agents and
that regulatory oversight mechanisms and fiduciary duty need to be
highly robust to guarantee stable and credible financial markets in
the long term. This area can be subject to high uncertainty, however.
The heterogeneity of actors (e.g., banks, insurance companies, asset
managers, or credit rating agencies) and financial products also needs
to be taken into account, as does the mobilization of capital and
financial flows between countries and regions (Section 2.5).

Integrated Assessment Approaches

IAMs attempt to be as broad as possible in order to explore
interactions between various societal subsystems, like the economy,
land, and energy system. They hence include stylized and simplified
representations of these subsystems. Climate damages, avoided
impacts and societal co-benefits of the modelled transformations
remain largely unaccounted for and are important knowledge gaps.
Furthermore, rapid technological changes and uncertainties about
input data present continuous challenges.

The literature on interactions between 1.5C mitigation pathways
and SDGs is an emergent field of research (Section 2.3.5, 2.5 and Chapter
5). Whereas the choice of mitigation strategies can noticeably affect the
attainment of various societal objectives, there is uncertainty regarding
the extent of the majority of identified interactions. Understanding
climate-SDG interactions helps inform the choice of mitigation options
that minimize trade-offs and risks and maximize synergies towards
sustainable development objectives and the 1.5C goal (Section 2.5).

2.6.3
The IAMs used in this report do not account for climate impacts
(Section 2.1), and similarly, none of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
projections in the mitigation pathway literature assessed in this chapter
included the feedback of climate damages on economic growth (Section
2.3). Although some IAMs do allow for climate impact feedbacks in
their modelling frameworks, particularly in their land components,
such feedbacks were by design excluded in pathways developed in the
context of the SSP framework. The SSP framework aims at providing
an integrative framework for the assessment of climate change
adaptation and mitigation. IAMs are typically developed to inform
the mitigation component of this question, while the assessment of
impacts is carried out by specialized impact models. However, the use
of a consistent set of socio-economic drivers embodied by the SSPs
allows for an integrated assessment of climate change impacts and
mitigation challenges at a later stage. Further integration of these
two strands of research will allow a better understanding of climate
impacts on mitigation studies.
Many of the IAMs that contributed mitigation pathways to this
assessment include a process-based description of the land system in
addition to the energy system, and several have been extended to cover
air pollutants and water use. These features make them increasingly fit
to explore questions beyond those that touch upon climate mitigation
only. The models do not, however, fully account for all constraints that
could affect realization of pathways (Section 2.1).
While the representation of renewable energy resource potentials,
technology costs and system integration in IAMs has been updated
since AR5, bottom-up studies find higher mitigation potentials in the
158

Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)

Most 1.5C and 2C pathways are heavily reliant on CDR at a
speculatively large scale before mid-century. There are a number
of knowledge gaps associated which such technologies. Chapter 4
performs a detailed assessment of CDR technologies.
There is uncertainty in the future deployment of CCS given the
limited pace of current deployment, the evolution of CCS technology
that would be associated with deployment, and the current lack of
incentives for large-scale implementation of CCS (Chapter 4, Section
4.2.7). Technologies other than BECCS and afforestation have yet to
be comprehensively assessed in integrated assessment approaches. No
proposed technology is close to deployment at scale, and regulatory
frameworks are not established. This limits how they can be realistically
implemented within IAMs. (Section 2.3)
Evaluating the potential from BECCS is problematic due to large
uncertainties in future land projections due to differences in modelling
approaches in current land-use models, and these differences are
at least as great as the differences attributed to climate scenario
variations. (Section 2.3)
There is substantial uncertainty about the adverse effects of largescale CDR deployment on the environment and societal sustainable
development goals. It is not fully understood how land-use and
land-management choices for large-scale BECCS will affect various
ecosystem services and sustainable development, and how they further
translate into indirect impacts on climate, including GHG emissions
other than CO2. (Section 2.3, Section 2.5.3)

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 2.1 | What Kind of Pathways Limit Warming to 1.5C and are we on Track?
Summary: There is no definitive way to limit global temperature rise to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. This
Special Report identifies two main conceptual pathways to illustrate different interpretations. One stabilizes
global temperature at, or just below, 1.5C. Another sees global temperature temporarily exceed 1.5C before
coming back down. Countries' pledges to reduce their emissions are currently not in line with limiting global
warming to 1.5C.
Scientists use computer models to simulate the emissions of greenhouse gases that would be consistent with
different levels of warming. The different possibilities are often referred to as `greenhouse gas emission
pathways'. There is no single, definitive pathway to limiting warming to 1.5C.
This IPCC special report identifies two main pathways that explore global warming of 1.5C. The first involves
global temperature stabilizing at or below before 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. The second pathway sees
warming exceed 1.5C around mid-century, remain above 1.5C for a maximum duration of a few decades, and
return to below 1.5C before 2100. The latter is often referred to as an `overshoot' pathway. Any alternative
situation in which global temperature continues to rise, exceeding 1.5C permanently until the end of the 21st
century, is not considered to be a 1.5C pathway.

2

The two types of pathway have different implications for greenhouse gas emissions, as well as for climate change
impacts and for achieving sustainable development. For example, the larger and longer an `overshoot', the
greater the reliance on practices or technologies that remove CO2 from the atmosphere, on top of reducing
the sources of emissions (mitigation). Such ideas for CO2 removal have not been proven to work at scale and,
therefore, run the risk of being less practical, effective or economical than assumed. There is also the risk that
the use of CO2 removal techniques ends up competing for land and water, and if these trade-offs are not
appropriately managed, they can adversely affect sustainable development. Additionally, a larger and longer
overshoot increases the risk for irreversible climate impacts, such as the onset of the collapse of polar ice shelves
and accelerated sea level rise.
Countries that formally accept or `ratify' the Paris Agreement submit pledges for how they intend to address
climate change. Unique to each country, these pledges are known as Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs). Different groups of researchers around the world have analysed the combined effect of adding up all
the NDCs. Such analyses show that current pledges are not on track to limit global warming to 1.5C above preindustrial levels. If current pledges for 2030 are achieved but no more, researchers find very few (if any) ways to
reduce emissions after 2030 sufficiently quickly to limit warming to 1.5C. This, in turn, suggests that with the
national pledges as they stand, warming would exceed 1.5C, at least for a period of time, and practices and
technologies that remove CO2 from the atmosphere at a global scale would be required to return warming to
1.5C at a later date.
A world that is consistent with holding warming to 1.5C would see greenhouse gas emissions rapidly decline
in the coming decade, with strong international cooperation and a scaling up of countries' combined ambition
beyond current NDCs. In contrast, delayed action, limited international cooperation, and weak or fragmented
policies that lead to stagnating or increasing greenhouse gas emissions would put the possibility of limiting
global temperature rise to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels out of reach.

(continued on next page)

159

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

FAQ 2.1 (continued)

2

FAQ 2.1, Figure 1 | Two main pathways for limiting global temperature rise to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels are discussed in this Special Report. These are:
stabilizing global temperature at, or just below, 1.5C (left) and global temperature temporarily exceeding 1.5C before coming back down later in the century
(right). Temperatures shown are relative to pre-industrial but pathways are illustrative only, demonstrating conceptual not quantitative characteristics.

160

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 2.2 | What do Energy Supply and Demand have to do with Limiting Warming
to 1.5C?
Summary: Limiting global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels would require major reductions in greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors. But different sectors are not independent of each other, and making changes
in one can have implications for another. For example, if we as a society use a lot of energy, then this could
mean we have less flexibility in the choice of mitigation options available to limit warming to 1.5C. If we use
less energy, the choice of possible actions is greater - for example, we could be less reliant on technologies that
remove carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere.
To stabilize global temperature at any level, `net' CO2 emissions would need to be reduced to zero. This means the
amount of CO2 entering the atmosphere must equal the amount that is removed. Achieving a balance between
CO2 `sources' and `sinks' is often referred to as `net zero' emissions or `carbon neutrality'. The implication of net
zero emissions is that the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere would slowly decline over time until a new
equilibrium is reached, as CO2 emissions from human activity are redistributed and taken up by the oceans and
the land biosphere. This would lead to a near-constant global temperature over many centuries.

2

Warming will not be limited to 1.5C or 2C unless transformations in a number of areas achieve the required
greenhouse gas emissions reductions. Emissions would need to decline rapidly across all of society's main sectors,
including buildings, industry, transport, energy, and agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU). Actions
that can reduce emissions include, for example, phasing out coal in the energy sector, increasing the amount of
energy produced from renewable sources, electrifying transport, and reducing the `carbon footprint' of the food
we consume.
The above are examples of `supply-side' actions. Broadly speaking, these are actions that can reduce greenhouse
gas emissions through the use of low-carbon solutions. A different type of action can reduce how much energy
human society uses, while still ensuring increasing levels of development and well-being. Known as `demand-side'
actions, this category includes improving energy efficiency in buildings and reducing consumption of energyand greenhouse-gas intensive products through behavioural and lifestyle changes, for example. Demand- and
supply-side measures are not an either-or question, they work in parallel with each other. But emphasis can be
given to one or the other.
Making changes in one sector can have consequences for another, as they are not independent of each other.
In other words, the choices that we make now as a society in one sector can either restrict or expand our
options later on. For example, a high demand for energy could mean we would need to deploy almost all known
options to reduce emissions in order to limit global temperature rise to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, with
the potential for adverse side-effects. In particular, a pathway with high energy demand would increase our
reliance on practices and technologies that remove CO2 from the atmosphere. As of yet, such techniques have
not been proven to work on a large scale and, depending on how they are implemented, could compete for land
and water. By leading to lower overall energy demand, effective demand-side measures could allow for greater
flexibility in how we structure our energy system. However, demand-side measures are not easy to implement
and barriers have prevented the most efficient practices being used in the past.

(continued on next page)

161

Chapter 2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

FAQ 2.2 (continued)

2

FAQ 2.2, Figure 1 | Having a lower energy demand increases the flexibility in choosing options for supplying energy. A larger energy demand means many more
low carbon energy supply options would need to be used.

162

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Chapter 2

References
Ackerman, F. and E.A. Stanton, 2012: Climate Risks and Carbon Prices: Revising
the Social Cost of Carbon. Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment
E-Journal, 6(2012-10), 1-25, doi:10.5018/economics-ejournal.ja.2012-10.
Adler, M.D. and N. Treich, 2015: Prioritarianism and Climate Change. Environmental
and Resource Economics, 62(2), 279-308, doi:10.1007/s10640-015-9960-7.
Adler, M.D. et al., 2017: Priority for the worse-off and the social cost of carbon.
Nature Climate Change, 7(6), 443-449, doi:10.1038/nclimate3298.
Akimoto, K., F. Sano, and T. Tomoda, 2017: GHG emission pathways until 2300
for the 1.5C temperature rise target and the mitigation costs achieving the
pathways. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s11027-017-9762-z.
Alcalde, J. et al., 2018: Estimating geological CO2 storage security to deliver on
climate mitigation. Nature Communications, 9(1), 2201,
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-04423-1.
Aldy, J.E. and R.N. Stavins, 2012: The Promise and Problems of Pricing
Carbon. The Journal of Environment & Development, 21(2), 152-180,
doi:10.1177/1070496512442508.
Aldy, J.E. et al., 2016: Economic tools to promote transparency and comparability in
the Paris Agreement. Nature Climate Change, 6(11), 1000-1004, doi:10.1038/
nclimate3106.
Allen, M.R. et al., 2009: Warming caused by cumulative carbon emissions towards
the trillionth tonne. Nature, 458(7242), 1163-1166,
doi:10.1038/nature08019.
Allen, M.R. et al., 2016: New use of global warming potentials to compare
cumulative and short-lived climate pollutants. Nature Climate Change, 6(5),
1-5, doi:10.1038/nclimate2998.
Allen, M.R. et al., 2018: A solution to the misrepresentations of CO2-equivalent
emissions of short-lived climate pollutants under ambitious mitigation. npj
Climate and Atmospheric Science, 1(1), 16, doi:10.1038/s41612-018-0026-8.
Allwood, J.M., M.F. Ashby, T.G. Gutowski, and E. Worrell, 2013: Material efficiency:
providing material services with less material production. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 371(1986), 20120496, doi:10.1098/rsta.2012.0496.
Anderson, K. and G. Peters, 2016: The trouble with negative emissions. Science,
354(6309), 182-183, doi:10.1126/science.aah4567.
Anenberg, S.C. et al., 2012: Global Air Quality and Health Co-benefits of Mitigating
Near-Term Climate Change through Methane and Black Carbon Emission
Controls. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(6), 831-839,
doi:10.1289/ehp.1104301.
Anthoff, D. and R.S.J. Tol, 2009: The impact of climate change on the balanced
growth equivalent: An application of FUND. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 43(3), 351-367, doi:10.1007/s10640-009-9269-5.
Armour, K.C., 2017: Energy budget constraints on climate sensitivity in light
of inconstant climate feedbacks. Nature Climate Change, 7(5), 331-335,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3278.
Arneth, A. et al., 2010: Terrestrial biogeochemical feedbacks in the climate system.
Nature Geoscience, 3(8), 525-532, doi:10.1038/ngeo905.
Arroyo-Curras, T. et al., 2015: Carbon leakage in a fragmented climate regime:
The dynamic response of global energy markets. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 90, 192-203, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.10.002.
Bachu, S., 2015: Review of CO2 storage efficiency in deep saline aquifers.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40, 188-202, doi:10.1016/j.
ijggc.2015.01.007.
Bachu, S. et al., 2007a: Phase II Final Report from the Task Force for Review and
Identification of Standards for CO2 Storage Capacity Estimation. CSLF-T-2007-04,
Task Force on CO2 Storage Capacity Estimation for the Technical Group (TG) of
the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum (CSLF), 43 pp.
Bachu, S. et al., 2007b: CO2 storage capacity estimation: Methodology and gaps.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 1(4), 430-443,
doi:10.1016/s1750-5836(07)00086-2.
Bajelj, B. et al., 2014: Importance of food-demand management for climate
mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 4(10), 924-929, doi:10.1038/nclimate2353.
Banerjee, R. et al., 2012: Energy End-Use: Industry. In: Global Energy Assessment -
Toward a Sustainable Future [Johansson, T.B., N. Nakicenovic, A. Patwardhan,
and L. Gomez-Echeverri (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA and the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 513-574,
doi:10.1017/cbo9780511793677.014.

Baranzini, A. et al., 2017: Carbon pricing in climate policy: seven reasons,
complementary instruments, and political economy considerations. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 8(4), e462, doi:10.1002/wcc.462.
Bataille, C., H. Waisman, M. Colombier, L. Segafredo, and J. Williams, 2016a: The
Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project (DDPP): insights and emerging issues.
Climate Policy, 16(sup1), S1-S6, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1179620.
Bataille, C. et al., 2016b: The need for national deep decarbonization pathways for
effective climate policy. Climate Policy, 16(sup1), S7-S26,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1173005.
Bauer, N. et al., 2017: Shared Socio-Economic Pathways of the Energy Sector -
Quantifying the Narratives. Global Environmental Change, 42, 316-330,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.07.006.
Bauer, N. et al., 2018: Global energy sector emission reductions and bioenergy use:
overview of the bioenergy demand phase of the EMF-33 model comparison.
Climatic Change, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2226-y.
Beck, S. and M. Mahony, 2017: The IPCC and the politics of anticipation. Nature
Climate Change, 7(5), 311-313, doi:10.1038/nclimate3264.
Bentham, M., T. Mallows, J. Lowndes, and A. Green, 2014: CO2 STORage evaluation
database (CO2 Stored). The UK's online storage atlas. Energy Procedia, 63,
5103-5113, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2014.11.540.
Benveniste, H. et al., 2018: Impacts of nationally determined contributions on
2030 global greenhouse gas emissions: Uncertainty analysis and distribution of
emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 13(1), 014022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa0b9.
Berger, A. et al., 2017a: Nuclear energy and bio energy carbon capture and storage,
keys for obtaining 1.5C mean surface temperature limit. International Journal
of Global Energy Issues, 40(3/4), 240-254, doi:10.1504/ijgei.2017.086622.
Berger, A. et al., 2017b: How much can nuclear energy do about global warming?
International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 40(1/2), 43-78,
doi:10.1504/ijgei.2017.080766.
Bertram, C. et al., 2015a: Carbon lock-in through capital stock inertia associated
with weak near-term climate policies. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 90(Part A), 62-72, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.10.001.
Bertram, C. et al., 2015b: Complementing carbon prices with technology policies
to keep climate targets within reach. Nature Climate Change, 5(3), 235-239,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2514.
Bertram, C. et al., 2018: Targeted policies can compensate most of the increased
sustainability risks in 1.5C mitigation scenarios. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(6), 064038, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac3ec.
Bindoff, N. et al., 2013: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change: from Global
to Regional. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K.
Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 867-
952.
Blanco, G. et al., 2014: Drivers, Trends and Mitigation. In: Climate Change 2014:
Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 351-412.
Boardman, A.E., D.H. Greenberg, A.R. Vining, and D.L. Weimer, 2006: Cost-Benefit
Analysis: Concepts and Practice (3rd edition). Pearson/Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, USA, 560 pp.
Bodirsky, B.L. et al., 2012: N2O emissions from the global agricultural nitrogen
cycle-current state and future scenarios. Biogeosciences, 9(10), 4169-4197,
doi:10.5194/bg-9-4169-2012.
Bodirsky, B.L. et al., 2014: Reactive nitrogen requirements to feed the world in
2050 and potential to mitigate nitrogen pollution. Nature Communications, 5,
3858, doi:10.1038/ncomms4858.
Bond, T.C. et al., 2013: Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system: A
scientific assessment. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 118(11),
5380-5552, doi:10.1002/jgrd.50171.
Bonsch, M. et al., 2014: Trade-offs between land and water requirements for largescale bioenergy production. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 11-24,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12226.

163

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Bosetti, V. and D.G. Victor, 2011: Politics and Economics of Second-Best Regulation
of Greenhouse Gases: The Importance of Regulatory Credibility. The Energy
Journal, 32(1), 1-24, www.jstor.org/stable/41323391.
Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, E. Massetti, and M. Tavoni, 2008: International energy R&D
spillovers and the economics of greenhouse gas atmospheric stabilization.
Energy Economics, 30(6), 2912-2929, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2008.04.008.
Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, A. Sgobbi, and M. Tavoni, 2009: Delayed action and uncertain
stabilisation targets. How much will the delay cost? Climatic Change, 96(3),
299-312, doi:10.1007/s10584-009-9630-2.
Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, M. Galeotti, E. Massetti, and M. Tavoni, 2006: WITCH - A
World Induced Technical Change Hybrid Model. The Energy Journal, 27, 13-37,
www.jstor.org/stable/23297044.
Bosetti, V. et al., 2015: Sensitivity to energy technology costs: A multi-model
comparison analysis. Energy Policy, 80, 244-263,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.12.012.
Boucher, O. and G.A. Folberth, 2010: New Directions: Atmospheric methane
removal as a way to mitigate climate change? Atmospheric Environment,
44(27), 3343-3345, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2010.04.032.
Bowen, A., E. Campiglio, and M. Tavoni, 2014: A macroeconomic perspective on
climate change mitigation: Meeting the financing challenge. Climate Change
Economics, 5(1), 1440005, doi:10.1142/s2010007814400053.
Bowerman, N.H.A., D.J. Frame, C. Huntingford, J.A. Lowe, and M.R. Allen, 2011:
Cumulative carbon emissions, emissions floors and short-term rates of
warming: implications for policy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 369(1934), 45-66,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0288.
Bowerman, N.H.A. et al., 2013: The role of short-lived climate pollutants in meeting
temperature goals. Nature Climate Change, 3(12), 1021-1024,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2034.
Boysen, L.R., W. Lucht, and D. Gerten, 2017a: Trade-offs for food production,
nature conservation and climate limit the terrestrial carbon dioxide removal
potential. Global Change Biology, 23(10), 4303-4317, doi:10.1111/gcb.13745.
Boysen, L.R., W. Lucht, D. Gerten, and V. Heck, 2016: Impacts devalue the potential of
large-scale terrestrial CO2 removal through biomass plantations. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(9), 1-10, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095010.
Boysen, L.R. et al., 2017b: The limits to global-warming mitigation by terrestrial
carbon removal. Earth's Future, 5(5), 463-474, doi:10.1002/2016ef000469.
Breyer, C. et al., 2017: On the role of solar photovoltaics in global energy transition
scenarios. Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 25(8), 727-
745, doi:10.1002/pip.2885.
Brown, M.A. and Y. Li, 2018: Carbon pricing and energy efficiency: pathways
to deep decarbonization of the US electric sector. Energy Efficiency, 1-19,
doi:10.1007/s12053-018-9686-9.
Brown, P.T. and K. Caldeira, 2017: Greater future global warming inferred from
Earth's recent energy budget. Nature, 552(7683), 45-50,
doi:10.1038/nature24672.
Bruckner, T., I.A. Bashmakov, and Y. Mulugetta, 2014: Energy Systems. In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 511-598.
Brunner, S. and K. Enting, 2014: Climate finance: A transaction cost perspective
on the structure of state-to-state transfers. Global Environmental Change, 27,
138-143, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.005.
Brynolf, S., M. Taljegard, M. Grahn, and J. Hansson, 2018: Electrofuels for the
transport sector: A review of production costs. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 81, 1887-1905, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.288.
Buck, H.J., 2016: Rapid scale-up of negative emissions technologies: social barriers
and social implications. Climatic Change, 1-13,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1770-6.
Burke, E.J., I.P. Hartley, and C.D. Jones, 2012: Uncertainties in the global temperature
change caused by carbon release from permafrost thawing. Cryosphere, 6(5),
1063-1076, doi:10.5194/tc-6-1063-2012.
Burke, E.J. et al., 2017: Quantifying uncertainties of permafrost carbon-climate
feedbacks. Biogeosciences, 14(12), 3051-3066, doi:10.5194/bg-14-3051-2017.
Burns, W. and S. Nicholson, 2017: Bioenergy and carbon capture with storage
(BECCS): the prospects and challenges of an emerging climate policy response.
Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, 7(4), 527-534,
doi:10.1007/s13412-017-0445-6.

164

Cadule, P., L. Bopp, and P. Friedlingstein, 2009: A revised estimate of the processes
contributing to global warming due to climate-carbon feedback. Geophysical
Research Letters, 36(14), L14705, doi:10.1029/2009gl038681.
Cai, Y., K.L. Judd, T.M. Lenton, T.S. Lontzek, and D. Narita, 2015: Environmental
tipping points significantly affect the cost-benefit assessment of climate
policies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(15), 4606-
4611, doi:10.1073/pnas.1503890112.
Calvin, K. et al., 2014: Trade-offs of different land and bioenergy policies on
the path to achieving climate targets. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 691-704,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0897-y.
Calvin, K. et al., 2017: The SSP4: A world of deepening inequality. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 284-296, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.010.
Canadell, J.G. and M.R. Raupach, 2008: Managing Forests for Climate Change
Mitigation. Science, 320(5882), 1456-1457, doi:10.1126/science.1155458.
Carslaw, K.S. et al., 2013: Large contribution of natural aerosols to uncertainty in
indirect forcing. Nature, 503(7474), 67-71, doi:10.1038/nature12674.
Ceppi, P. and J.M. Gregory, 2017: Relationship of tropospheric stability to climate
sensitivity and Earth's observed radiation budget. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(50), 13126-13131, doi:10.1073/pnas.1714308114.
Chan, S., P. Ellinger, and O. Widerberg, 2018: Exploring national and regional orchestration
of non-state action for a <1.5C world. International Environmental Agreements:
Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 135-152, doi:10.1007/s10784-018-9384-2.
Chen, C. and M. Tavoni, 2013: Direct air capture of CO2 and climate stabilization: A
model based assessment. Climatic Change, 118(1), 59-72,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0714-7.
Choi, Y.-S., D. Young, S. Nei, and L.G.S. Gray, 2013: Wellbore integrity and
corrosion of carbon steel in CO2 geologic storage environments: A literature
review. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 16, S70-S77,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2012.12.028.
Clack, C.T.M. et al., 2017: Evaluation of a proposal for reliable low-cost grid power
with 100% wind, water, and solar. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 114(26), 6722-6727, doi:10.1073/pnas.1610381114.
Clarke, L. et al., 2014: Assessing transformation pathways. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 413-510.
Collins, M. et al., 2013: Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments and
Irreversibility. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J.
Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1029-1136.
Collins, W.J. et al., 2018: Increased importance of methane reduction for
a 1.5 degree target. Environmental Research Letters, 13(5), 054003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab89c.
Comyn-Platt, E. et al., 2018: Carbon budgets for 1.5 and 2C targets lowered by
natural wetland and permafrost feedbacks. Nature Geoscience, 11(8), 568-
573, doi:10.1038/s41561-018-0174-9.
Cox, P.M., C. Huntingford, and M.S. Williamson, 2018: Emergent constraint on
equilibrium climate sensitivity from global temperature variability. Nature,
553(7688), 319-322, doi:10.1038/nature25450.
Crespo Cuaresma, J., 2017: Income projections for climate change research: A
framework based on human capital dynamics. Global Environmental Change,
42, 226-236, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.02.012.
Creutzig, F., 2016: Evolving Narratives of Low-Carbon Futures in Transportation.
Transport Reviews, 36(3), 341-360, doi:10.1080/01441647.2015.1079277.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2012: Reconciling top-down and bottom-up modelling on future
bioenergy deployment. Nature Climate Change, 2(5), 320-327,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1416.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2015: Bioenergy and climate change mitigation: an assessment.
GCB Bioenergy, 7(5), 916-944, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12205.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2017: The underestimated potential of solar energy to mitigate
climate change. Nature Energy, 2(9), 17140, doi:10.1038/nenergy.2017.140.
Davis, S.C. et al., 2013: Management swing potential for bioenergy crops. GCB
Bioenergy, 5(6), 623-638, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12042.
Davis, S.J. and K. Caldeira, 2010: Consumption-based accounting of CO2 emissions.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(12), 5687-92,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0906974107.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
de Richter, R., T. Ming, P. Davies, W. Liu, and S. Caillol, 2017: Removal of non-CO2
greenhouse gases by large-scale atmospheric solar photocatalysis. Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science, 60, 68-96, doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2017.01.001.
de Vries, W., M. Posch, D. Simpson, and G.J. Reinds, 2017: Modelling long-term
impacts of changes in climate, nitrogen deposition and ozone exposure on
carbon sequestration of European forest ecosystems. Science of The Total
Environment, 605-606, 1097-1116, doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.06.132.
Dell, M., B.F. Jones, and B.A. Olken, 2014: What Do We Learn from the Weather?
The New Climate-Economy Literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3),
740-798, www.jstor.org/stable/24434109.
Dellink, R., J. Chateau, E. Lanzi, and B. Magne, 2017: Long-term economic growth
projections in the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 1-15, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.06.004.
Delponte, I., I. Pittaluga, and C. Schenone, 2017: Monitoring and evaluation of
Sustainable Energy Action Plan: Practice and perspective. Energy Policy, 100,
9-17, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.10.003.
den Elzen, M.G.J., D.P. van Vuuren, and J. van Vliet, 2010: Postponing emission
reductions from 2020 to 2030 increases climate risks and long-term costs.
Climatic Change, 99(1), 313-320, doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9798-5.
den Elzen, M.G.J. et al., 2016: Contribution of the G20 economies to the global
impact of the Paris agreement climate proposals. Climatic Change, 137(3-4),
655-665, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1700-7.
Dennig, F., M.B. Budolfson, M. Fleurbaey, A. Siebert, and R.H. Socolow, 2015: Inequality,
climate impacts on the future poor, and carbon prices. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112(52), 15827-15832, doi:10.1073/pnas.1513967112.
Di, H.J. and K. Cameron, 2016: Inhibition of nitrification to mitigate nitrate leaching
and nitrous oxide emissions in grazed grassland: A review. Journal of Soils and
Sediments, 16, 1401-1420, doi:10.1007/s11368-016-1403-8.
Doelman, J.C. et al., 2018: Exploring SSP land-use dynamics using the IMAGE
model: Regional and gridded scenarios of land-use change and land-based
climate change mitigation. Global Environmental Change, 48, 119-135,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.11.014.
Dooley, J.J., 2013: Estimating the supply and demand for deep geologic CO2
storage capacity over the course of the 21st century: A meta-analysis of the
literature. Energy Procedia, 37, 5141-5150, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2013.06.429.
Dooley, K. and S. Kartha, 2018: Land-based negative emissions: risks for
climate mitigation and impacts on sustainable development. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 79-98,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9382-9.
Duce, R.A. et al., 2008: Impacts of Atmospheric Anthropogenic Nitrogen on the
Open Ocean. Science, 320(5878), 893-897, doi:10.1126/science.1150369.
EC, 2017: High-Level Expert Group on Sustainable Finance interim report -
Financing a sustainable European economy. European Commission, Brussels,
Belgium, 72 pp.
Edenhofer, O., J.C. Steckel, M. Jakob, and C. Bertram, 2018: Reports of coal's
terminal decline may be exaggerated. Environmental Research Letters, 13(2),
024019, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa3a2.
Erb, K.-H., H. Haberl, and C. Plutzar, 2012: Dependency of global primary bioenergy
crop potentials in 2050 on food systems, yields, biodiversity conservation and
political stability. Energy Policy, 47, 260-269, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.04.066.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2016a: Biomass turnover time in terrestrial ecosystems halved by
land use. Nature Geoscience, 9(9), 674-678, doi:10.1038/ngeo2782.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2016b: Exploring the biophysical option space for feeding the
world without deforestation. Nature Communications, 7, 11382,
doi:10.1038/ncomms11382.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2018: Unexpectedly large impact of forest management and
grazing on global vegetation biomass. Nature, 553, 73-76,
doi:10.1038/nature25138.
Erickson, P., S. Kartha, M. Lazarus, and K. Tempest, 2015: Assessing carbon lock-in.
Environmental Research Letters, 10(8), 084023,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084023.
Etminan, M., G. Myhre, E.J. Highwood, and K.P. Shine, 2016: Radiative forcing
of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide: A significant revision of the
methane radiative forcing. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(24), 12,614-
12,623, doi:10.1002/2016gl071930.
Faehn, T. and E. Isaksen, 2016: Diffusion of Climate Technologies in the
Presence of Commitment Problems. The Energy Journal, 37(2), 155-180,
doi:10.5547/01956574.37.2.tfae.
Fankhauser, S., A. Sahni, A. Savvas, and J. Ward, 2016: Where are the gaps in
climate finance? Climate and Development, 8(3), 203-206,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1064811.

Chapter 2

FAOSTAT, 2018: Database Collection of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. FAO. Retrieved from: www.fao.org/faostat.
Fawcett, A.A. et al., 2015: Can Paris pledges avert severe climate change? Science,
350(6265), 1168-1169, doi:10.1126/science.aad5761.
Forster, P.M., 2016: Inference of Climate Sensitivity from Analysis of Earth's
Energy Budget. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 44(1), 85-106,
doi:10.1146/annurev-earth-060614-105156.
Frank, S. et al., 2017: Reducing greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture without
compromising food security? Environmental Research Letters, 12(10), 105004,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa8c83.
Frank, S. et al., 2018: Structural change as a key component for agricultural nonCO2 mitigation efforts. Nature Communications, 9(1), 1060,
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03489-1.
Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre/BNEF, 2017: Global Trends in Renewable Energy
Investment 2017. Frankfurt School of Finance & Management gGmbH,
Frankfurt, Germany, 90 pp.
Fricko, O. et al., 2016: Energy sector water use implications of a 2C climate policy.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034011.
Fricko, O. et al., 2017: The marker quantification of the Shared Socioeconomic
Pathway 2: A middle-of-the-road scenario for the 21st century. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 251-267, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.004.
Friedlingstein, P. et al., 2014a: Persistent growth of CO2 emissions and implications
for reaching climate targets. Nature Geoscience, 7(10), 709-715,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2248.
Friedlingstein, P. et al., 2014b: Uncertainties in CMIP5 climate projections due to
carbon cycle feedbacks. Journal of Climate, 27(2), 511-526,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00579.1.
Frolicher, T.L. and F. Joos, 2010: Reversible and irreversible impacts of greenhouse
gas emissions in multi-century projections with the NCAR global coupled
carbon cycle-climate model. Climate Dynamics, 35(7), 1439-1459,
doi:10.1007/s00382-009-0727-0.
Fuglestvedt, J.S. et al., 2010: Transport impacts on atmosphere and climate:
Metrics. Atmospheric Environment, 44(37), 4648-4677,
doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.04.044.
Fujimori, S., 2017: SSP3: AIM Implementation of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 268-283,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.009.
Fujimori, S. et al., 2016: Implication of Paris Agreement in the context of long-term
climate mitigation goals. SpringerPlus, 5(1), 1620,
doi:10.1186/s40064-016-3235-9.
Fuss, S. et al., 2014: Betting on negative emissions. Nature Climate Change, 4(10),
850-853, doi:10.1038/nclimate2392.
Fuss, S. et al., 2016: Research priorities for negative emissions. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(11), 115007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/11/115007.
Fuss, S. et al., 2018: Negative emissions - Part 2: Costs, potentials and side effects.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063002, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9f.
Geden, O., 2015: Policy: Climate advisers must maintain integrity. Nature,
521(7550), 27-28, doi:10.1038/521027a.
Geels, F.W., B.K. Sovacool, T. Schwanen, and S. Sorrell, 2017: Sociotechnical
transitions for deep decarbonization. Science, 357(6357), 1242-1244,
doi:10.1126/science.aao3760.
Gerber, P.J. et al., 2013: Tackling climate change through livestock - A global
assessment of emissions and mitigation opportunities. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 115 pp.
Gernaat, D.E.H.J. et al., 2015: Understanding the contribution of non-carbon
dioxide gases in deep mitigation scenarios. Global Environmental Change, 33,
142-153, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.04.010.
Ghan, S.J. et al., 2013: A simple model of global aerosol indirect effects. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 118(12), 6688-6707,
doi:10.1002/jgrd.50567.
Giannakidis, G., K. Karlsson, M. Labriet, and B. O Gallachoir (eds.), 2018: Limiting
Global Warming to Well Below 2C: Energy System Modelling and Policy
Development. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 423 pp.,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-74424-7.
Gillett, N.P., V.K. Arora, D. Matthews, and M.R. Allen, 2013: Constraining the Ratio
of Global Warming to Cumulative CO2 Emissions Using CMIP5 Simulations.
Journal of Climate, 26(18), 6844-6858, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00476.1.
Gillett, N.P., V.K. Arora, K. Zickfeld, S.J. Marshall, and W.J. Merryfield, 2011: Ongoing
climate change following a complete cessation of carbon dioxide emissions.
Nature Geoscience, 4(2), 83-87, doi:10.1038/ngeo1047.

165

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Global CCS Institute, 2016: The Global Status of CCS: 2016 Summary Report.
Global CCS Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 28 pp.
Gonzalez-Eguino, M., A. Olabe, and T. Ribera, 2017: New Coal-Fired Plants
Jeopardise Paris Agreement. Sustainability, 9(2), 168, doi:10.3390/su9020168.
Goodwin, P., S. Brown, I.D. Haigh, R.J. Nicholls, and J.M. Matter, 2018a: Adjusting
Mitigation Pathways to Stabilize Climate at 1.5C and 2.0C Rise in Global
Temperatures to Year 2300. Earth's Future, 0-3,
doi:10.1002/2017ef000732.
Goodwin, P. et al., 2018b: Pathways to 1.5 and 2C warming based on observational
and geological constraints. Nature Geoscience, 11(1), 1-22,
doi:10.1038/s41561-017-0054-8.
Gota, S., C. Huizenga, K. Peet, N. Medimorec, and S. Bakker, 2018: Decarbonising
transport to achieve Paris Agreement targets. Energy Efficiency, 1-24,
doi:10.1007/s12053-018-9671-3.
Gough, C. and P. Upham, 2011: Biomass energy with carbon capture and storage
(BECCS or Bio-CCS). Greenhouse Gases: Science and Technology, 1(4), 324-
334, doi:10.1002/ghg.34.
Goulder, L. and A. Schein, 2013: Carbon Taxes vs. Cap and Trade: A Critical Review.
Climate Change Economics, 04(03), 1350010,
doi:10.1142/s2010007813500103.
Grassi, G. et al., 2017: The key role of forests in meeting climate targets requires
science for credible mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 7(3), 220-226,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3227.
Greene, C.H. et al., 2017: Geoengineering, marine microalgae, and
climate stabilization in the 21st century. Earth's Future, 5(3), 278-284,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000486.
Gregory, J.M. and T. Andrews, 2016: Variation in climate sensitivity and feedback
parameters during the historical period. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(8),
3911-3920, doi:10.1002/2016gl068406.
Gren, I.-M. and A.Z. Aklilu, 2016: Policy design for forest carbon sequestration:
A review of the literature. Forest Policy and Economics, 70, 128-136,
doi:10.1016/j.forpol.2016.06.008.
Griscom, B.W. et al., 2017: Natural climate solutions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(44), 11645-11650, doi:10.1073/pnas.1710465114.
Grubb, M., J.C. Hourcade, and K. Neuhoff, 2014: Planetary economics: Energy,
climate change and the three domains of sustainable development. Routledge
Earthscan, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 520 pp.
Grubler, A. and C. Wilson (eds.), 2014: Energy Technology Innovation: Learning
from Historical Successes and Failures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 400 pp.,
doi:10.1017/cbo9781139150880.
Grubler, A. et al., 2018: A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5C target
and sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies.
Nature Energy, 3(6), 515-527, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0172-6.
Guivarch, C. and J. Rogelj, 2017: Carbon price variations in 2C scenarios explored.
Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition (CPLC), 15 pp.
Guneralp, B. et al., 2017: Global scenarios of urban density and its impacts on
building energy use through 2050. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 114(34), 8945-8950, doi:10.1073/pnas.1606035114.
Gupta, S. and J. Harnisch, 2014: Cross-cutting Investment and Finance Issues. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1207-1246.
Haberl, H., 2015: Competition for land: A sociometabolic perspective. Ecological
Economics, 119, 424-431, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.10.002.
Haberl, H. et al., 2011: Global bioenergy potentials from agricultural land in 2050:
Sensitivity to climate change, diets and yields. Biomass and Bioenergy, 35(12),
4753-4769, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2011.04.035.
Haberl, H. et al., 2013: Bioenergy: how much can we expect for 2050? Environmental
Research Letters, 8(3), 031004, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/031004.
Harmes, A., 2011: The Limits of Carbon Disclosure: Theorizing the Business Case
for Investor Environmentalism. Global Environmental Politics, 11(2), 98-119,
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00057.
Hartmann, J. et al., 2013: Enhanced chemical weathering as a geoengineering
strategy to reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide, supply nutrients, and mitigate
ocean acidification. Reviews of Geophysics, 51(2), 113-149,
doi:10.1002/rog.20004.

166

Hauglustaine, D.A., Y. Balkanski, and M. Schulz, 2014: A global model simulation of
present and future nitrate aerosols and their direct radiative forcing of climate.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 14, 11031-11063,
doi:10.5194/acp-14-11031-2014.
Havlik, P. et al., 2013: Crop Productivity and the Global Livestock Sector:
Implications for Land Use Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 95(2), 442-448, doi:10.1093/ajae/aas085.
Havlik, P. et al., 2014: Climate change mitigation through livestock system
transitions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(10), 3709-
3714, doi:10.1073/pnas.1308044111.
Heck, V., D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and L.R. Boysen, 2016: Is extensive terrestrial carbon
dioxide removal a `green' form of geoengineering? A global modelling study.
Global and Planetary Change, 137, 123-130,
doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2015.12.008.
Heck, V., D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and A. Popp, 2018: Biomass-based negative emissions
difficult to reconcile with planetary boundaries. Nature Climate Change, 8(2),
151-155, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0064-y.
Hejazi, M. et al., 2014: Long-term global water projections using six socioeconomic
scenarios in an integrated assessment modeling framework. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 81, 205-226,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.05.006.
Herrero, M. et al., 2016: Greenhouse gas mitigation potentials in the livestock
sector. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 452-461, doi:10.1038/nclimate2925.
Herrington, T. and K. Zickfeld, 2014: Path independence of climate and carbon
cycle response over a broad range of cumulative carbon emissions. Earth
System Dynamics, 5, 409-422, doi:10.5194/esd-5-409-2014.
Herzog, H., K. Caldeira, and J. Reilly, 2003: An Issue of Permanence: Assessing the
Effectiveness of Temporary Carbon Storage. Climatic Change, 59(3), 293-310,
doi:10.1023/a:1024801618900.
Hildingsson, R. and B. Johansson, 2016: Governing low-carbon energy transitions
in sustainable ways: Potential synergies and conflicts between climate and
environmental policy objectives. Energy Policy, 88, 245-252,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2015.10.029.
Hoesly, R.M. et al., 2018: Historical (1750-2014) anthropogenic emissions of
reactive gases and aerosols from the Community Emissions Data System
(CEDS). Geoscientific Model Development, 11(1), 369-408,
doi:10.5194/gmd-11-369-2018.
Hof, A.F. et al., 2017: Global and regional abatement costs of Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) and of enhanced action to levels well below
2C and 1.5C. Environmental Science & Policy, 71, 30-40,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.02.008.
Hoglund-Isaksson, L. et al., 2017: Cost estimates of the Kigali Amendment to
phase-down hydrofluorocarbons. Environmental Science & Policy, 75, 138-147,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.05.006.
Holz, C., S. Kartha, and T. Athanasiou, 2018a: Fairly sharing 1.5: national fair shares
of a 1.5C-compliant global mitigation effort. International Environmental
Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 117-134,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9371-z.
Holz, C., L.S. Siegel, E. Johnston, A.P. Jones, and J. Sterman, 2018b: Ratcheting
ambition to limit warming to 1.5C - trade-offs between emission reductions
and carbon dioxide removal. Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 064028,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac0c1.
Honegger, M. and D. Reiner, 2018: The political economy of negative emissions
technologies: consequences for international policy design. Climate Policy,
18(3), 306-321, doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1413322.
Hong, S., C.J.A. Bradshaw, and B.W. Brook, 2015: Global zero-carbon energy
pathways using viable mixes of nuclear and renewables. Applied Energy, 143,
451-459, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.01.006.
Hope, C., 2006: The Marginal Impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: An Integrated
Assessment Model Incorporating the IPCC's Five Reasons for Concern. The
Integrated Assessment Journal, 6(1), 19-56,
http://journals.sfu.ca/int_assess/index.php/iaj/article/viewarticle/227.
Hristov, A.N. et al., 2015: An inhibitor persistently decreased enteric methane
emission from dairy cows with no negative effect on milk production.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(34), 10663-8,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1504124112.
Hsiang, S. et al., 2017: Estimating economic damage from climate change in the
United States. Science, 356(6345), 1362-1369, doi:10.1126/science.aal4369.
Humpenoder, F. et al., 2014: Investigating afforestation and bioenergy CCS as
climate change mitigation strategies. Environmental Research Letters, 9(6),
064029, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/6/064029.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
Humpenoder, F. et al., 2018: Large-scale bioenergy production: how to resolve
sustainability trade-offs? Environmental Research Letters, 13(2), 024011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9e3b.
Huntingford, C. and J. Lowe, 2007: "Overshoot" Scenarios and Climate Change.
Science, 316(5826), 829, doi:10.1126/science.316.5826.829b.
IEA, 2014: Energy Technology Perspectives 2014: Harnessing Electricity's Potential.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 382 pp.
IEA, 2015a: Energy and Climate Change. World Energy Outlook Special Report.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 200 pp.
IEA, 2015b: Energy Technology Perspectives 2015: Mobilising Innovation to
Accelerate Climate Action. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 418 pp.
IEA, 2016a: Energy Technology Perspectives 2016: Towards Sustainable Urban
Energy Systems. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 418 pp.
IEA, 2016b: World Energy Investment 2016. International Energy Agency (IEA),
Paris, France, 177 pp.
IEA, 2017a: Energy Technology Perspectives 2017: Catalyzing Energy Technology
Transformations. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 443 pp.
IEA, 2017b: Renewables Information - Overview (2017 edition). International
Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, 11 pp.
IEA, 2017c: World Energy Investment 2017. International Energy Agency (IEA),
Paris, France, 191 pp.
IEA, 2017d: World Energy Outlook 2017. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,
France, 782 pp.
IEA, 2017e: World Energy Statistics 2017. International Energy Agency (IEA). OECD
Publishing, Paris, France, 847 pp., doi:10.1787/world_energy_stats-2017-en.
IEAGHG, 2006: Near zero emission technology for CO2 capture from power plant.
IEAGHG 2006/13, IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Cheltenham, UK, 114 pp.
Ilyina, T., D. Wolf-Gladrow, G. Munhoven, and C. Heinze, 2013: Assessing the
potential of calcium-based artificial ocean alkalinization to mitigate rising
atmospheric CO2 and ocean acidification. Geophysical Research Letters, 40(22),
5909-5914, doi:10.1002/2013gl057981.
IPCC, 2005: IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. [Metz,
B., O. Davidson, H.C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Prepared
by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, 442 pp.
IPCC, 2013a: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K.
Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp.
IPCC, 2013b: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Working Group
I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen,
J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp.
IPCC, 2014a: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri, and L.A. Meyer
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 151 pp.
IPCC, 2014b: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation
of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R.
Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadne, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum,
S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T.
Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1-30.
IPCC/TEAP, 2005: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System:
Issues Related to Hydrofluorocarbons and Perfluorocarbons. [Metz, B., L.
Kuijpers, S. Solomon, S.O. Andersen, O. Davidson, J. Pons, D. Jager, T. Kestin, M.
Manning, and L. Meyer (eds.)]. A Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) and Technology and Economic Assessment Panel
(TEAP). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 485 pp.
Irlam, L., 2017: Global Costs of Carbon Capture and Storage. Global CCS Institute,
Melbourne, Australia, 14 pp.
IWG, 2016: Technical Support Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost
of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis - Under Executive Order 12866.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases, United States,
35 pp.

Chapter 2

Iyer, G.C. et al., 2015: Improved representation of investment decisions in
assessments of CO2 mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 5(5), 436-440,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2553.
Jackson, R.B. et al., 2017: Warning signs for stabilizing global CO2 emissions.
Environmental Research Letters, 12(11), 110202, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9662.
Jacobson, M.Z., 2002: Control of fossil-fuel particulate black carbon and
organic matter, possibly the most effective method of slowing global
warming. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 107(D19), 4410,
doi:10.1029/2001jd001376.
Jacobson, M.Z., 2010: Short-term effects of controlling fossil-fuel soot, biofuel
soot and gases, and methane on climate, Arctic ice, and air pollution
health. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 115(D14), D14209,
doi:10.1029/2009jd013795.
Jacobson, M.Z., 2017: Roadmaps to Transition Countries to 100% Clean,
Renewable Energy for All Purposes to Curtail Global Warming, Air Pollution, and
Energy Risk. Earth's Future, 5(10), 948-952, doi:10.1002/2017ef000672.
Jacobson, M.Z. et al., 2017: 100% Clean and Renewable Wind, Water, and Sunlight
All-Sector Energy Roadmaps for 139 Countries of the World. Joule, 1(1), 108-
121, doi:10.1016/j.joule.2017.07.005.
Jakob, M. and J.C. Steckel, 2016: Implications of climate change mitigation for
sustainable development. Environmental Research Letters, 11(10), 104010,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/10/104010.
Jakob, M. et al., 2014: Feasible mitigation actions in developing countries. Nature
Climate Change, 4(11), 961-968, doi:10.1038/nclimate2370.
Johnson, N. et al., 2015: Stranded on a low-carbon planet: Implications of climate
policy for the phase-out of coal-based power plants. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 90, 89-102, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2014.02.028.
Jones, A., J.M. Haywood, and C.D. Jones, 2018: Can reducing black carbon and
methane below RCP2.6 levels keep global warming below 1.5C? Atmospheric
Science Letters, 19(6), e821, doi:10.1002/asl.821.
Jones, C.D. et al., 2016: Simulating the Earth system response to negative
emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), 095012,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095012.
Jones, D.G. et al., 2015: Developments since 2005 in understanding potential
environmental impacts of CO2 leakage from geological storage. International
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40, 350-377,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.05.032.
Joshi, V. and S. Kumar, 2015: Meat Analogues: Plant based alternatives to meat
products - A review. International Journal of Food Fermentation and Technology,
5(2), 107-119, doi:10.5958/2277-9396.2016.00001.5.
Kandlikar, M., 1995: The relative role of trace gas emissions in greenhouse
abatement policies. Energy Policy, 23(10), 879-883,
doi:10.1016/0301-4215(95)00108-u.
KC, S. and W. Lutz, 2017: The human core of the shared socioeconomic pathways:
Population scenarios by age, sex and level of education for all countries to 2100.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 181-192,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.06.004.
Kearns, J. et al., 2017: Developing a consistent database for regional geologic CO2
storage capacity worldwide. Energy Procedia, 114, 4697-4709,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.1603.
Keith, D.W. and J.S. Rhodes, 2002: Bury, Burn or Both: A Two-for-One Deal
on Biomass Carbon and Energy. Climatic Change, 54(3), 375-377,
doi:10.1023/a:1016187420442.
Keith, D.W., M. Ha-Duong, and J.K. Stolaroff, 2006: Climate Strategy with CO2
Capture from the Air. Climatic Change, 74(1-3), 17-45,
doi:10.1007/s10584-005-9026-x.
Kheshgi, H.S., 1995: Sequestering atmospheric carbon dioxide by increasing ocean
alkalinity. Energy, 20(9), 915-922, doi:10.1016/0360-5442(95)00035-f.
Kim, S.H., K. Wada, A. Kurosawa, and M. Roberts, 2014: Nuclear energy response
in the EMF27 study. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 443-460,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1098-z.
Klein, D. et al., 2014: The value of bioenergy in low stabilization scenarios: An
assessment using REMIND-MAgPIE. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 705-718,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0940-z.
Klimont, Z. et al., 2017: Global anthropogenic emissions of particulate matter
including black carbon. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 17(14), 8681-
8723, doi:10.5194/acp-17-8681-2017.
Klinsky, S. and H. Winkler, 2018: Building equity in: strategies for integrating equity
into modelling for a 1.5C world. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160461,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0461.

167

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Knutti, R. and J. Rogelj, 2015: The legacy of our CO2 emissions: a clash of scientific
facts, politics and ethics. Climatic Change, 133(3), 361-373,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1340-3.
Knutti, R., M.A.A. Rugenstein, and G.C. Hegerl, 2017: Beyond equilibrium climate
sensitivity. Nature Geoscience, 10(10), 727-736,
doi:10.1038/ngeo3017.
Kolstad, C. et al., 2014: Social, Economic and Ethical Concepts and Methods. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadne, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 207-282.
Krasting, J.P., J.P. Dunne, E. Shevliakova, and R.J. Stouffer, 2014: Trajectory
sensitivity of the transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions.
Geophysical Research Letters, 41(7), 2520-2527, doi:10.1002/(issn)1944-8007.
Krause, A. et al., 2017: Global consequences of afforestation and bioenergy
cultivation on ecosystem service indicators. Biogeosciences, 14(21), 4829-
4850, doi:10.5194/bg-14-4829-2017.
Kraxner, F. et al., 2013: Global bioenergy scenarios - Future forest development,
land-use implications, and trade-offs. Biomass and Bioenergy, 57, 86-96,
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2013.02.003.
Kreidenweis, U. et al., 2016: Afforestation to mitigate climate change: impacts
on food prices under consideration of albedo effects. Environmental Research
Letters, 11(8), 085001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/085001.
Kretzschmar, J. et al., 2017: Comment on "Rethinking the Lower Bound on Aerosol
Radiative Forcing". Journal of Climate, 30(16), 6579-6584,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0668.1.
Krey, V., G. Luderer, L. Clarke, and E. Kriegler, 2014a: Getting from here to there -
energy technology transformation pathways in the EMF27 scenarios. Climatic
Change, 123, 369-382, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0947-5.
Krey, V. et al., 2014b: Annex II: Metrics & Methodology. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1281-1328.
Kriegler, E., O. Edenhofer, L. Reuster, G. Luderer, and D. Klein, 2013a: Is atmospheric
carbon dioxide removal a game changer for climate change mitigation? Climatic
Change, 118(1), 45-57, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0681-4.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2012: The need for and use of socio-economic scenarios for
climate change analysis: A new approach based on shared socio-economic
pathways. Global Environmental Change, 22(4), 807-822,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.05.005.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2013b: What Does the 2C Target Imply for a Global Climate
Agreement in 2020? The Limits Study on Durban Platform Scenarios. Climate
Change Economics, 4(4), 1340008, doi:10.1142/s2010007813400083.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2014a: A new scenario framework for climate change research:
the concept of shared climate policy assumptions. Climatic Change, 122(3),
401-414, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0971-5.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2014b: The role of technology for achieving climate policy
objectives: Overview of the EMF 27 study on global technology and climate
policy strategies. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 353-367,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0953-7.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2015a: Diagnostic indicators for integrated assessment models
of climate policy. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 90(Part A),
45-61, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.020.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2015b: Making or breaking climate targets: The AMPERE study
on staged accession scenarios for climate policy. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 90(Part A), 24-44, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.021.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2016: Will economic growth and fossil fuel scarcity help or
hinder climate stabilization?: Overview of the RoSE multi-model study. Climatic
Change, 136(1), 7-22, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1668-3.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2017: Fossil-fueled development (SSP5): An energy and resource
intensive scenario for the 21st century. Global Environmental Change, 42, 297-
315, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.015.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2018a: Short term policies to keep the door open for Paris climate
goals. Environmental Research Letters, 13(7), 074022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac4f1.

168

Kriegler, E. et al., 2018b: Pathways limiting warming to 1.5C: a tale of turning
around in no time? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160457,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0457.
Kuramochi, T. et al., 2017: Ten key short-term sectoral benchmarks to limit warming
to 1.5C. Climate Policy, 18(3), 1-19,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1397495.
Lamarque, J.-F. et al., 2011: Global and regional evolution of short-lived radiativelyactive gases and aerosols in the Representative Concentration Pathways.
Climatic Change, 109(1-2), 191-212, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0155-0.
Lambin, E.F. and P. Meyfroidt, 2011: Global land use change, economic
globalization, and the looming land scarcity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 108(9), 3465-72, doi:10.1073/pnas.1100480108.
Le Quere, C. et al., 2018: Global Carbon Budget 2017. Earth System Science Data,
10(1), 405-448, doi:10.5194/essd-10-405-2018.
Lehtila, A. and T. Koljonen, 2018: Pathways to Post-fossil Economy in a Well Below
2C World. In: Limiting Global Warming to Well Below 2C: Energy System
Modelling and Policy Development [Giannakidis, G., K. Karlsson, M. Labriet,
and B. Gallachoir (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland,
pp. 33-49, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-74424-7_3.
Leimbach, M., E. Kriegler, N. Roming, and J. Schwanitz, 2017: Future growth
patterns of world regions - A GDP scenario approach. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 215-225, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.02.005.
Lemoine, D. and C. Traeger, 2014: Watch Your Step: Optimal Policy in a Tipping
Climate. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1), 137-166,
doi:10.1257/pol.6.1.137.
Lenton, A., R.J. Matear, D.P. Keller, V. Scott, and N.E. Vaughan, 2018: Assessing
carbon dioxide removal through global and regional ocean alkalinization under
high and low emission pathways. Earth System Dynamics, 9(2), 339-357,
doi:10.5194/esd-9-339-2018.
Lewis, N. and J.A. Curry, 2015: The implications for climate sensitivity of AR5
forcing and heat uptake estimates. Climate Dynamics, 45(3-4), 1009-1023,
doi:10.1007/s00382-014-2342-y.
Lewis, N. and J. Curry, 2018: The impact of recent forcing and ocean heat uptake
data on estimates of climate sensitivity. Journal of Climate, JCLI-D-17-0667.1,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-17-0667.1.
Liu, J., T.W. Hertel, F. Taheripour, T. Zhu, and C. Ringler, 2014: International trade
buffers the impact of future irrigation shortfalls. Global Environmental Change,
29, 22-31, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.07.010.
Liu, J.-Y. et al., 2018: Socioeconomic factors and future challenges of the goal
of limiting the increase in global average temperature to 1.5C. Carbon
Management, 1-11, doi:10.1080/17583004.2018.1477374.
Loffler, K. et al., 2017: Designing a Model for the Global Energy System- GENeSYS -
MOD: An Application of the Open-Source Energy Modeling System (OSeMOSYS).
Energies, 10(10), 1468, doi:10.3390/en10101468.
Lontzek, T.S., Y. Cai, K.L. Judd, and T.M. Lenton, 2015: Stochastic integrated
assessment of climate tipping points indicates the need for strict climate policy.
Nature Climate Change, 5(5), 441-444, doi:10.1038/nclimate2570.
Lowe, J.A. and D. Bernie, 2018: The impact of Earth system feedbacks on carbon
budgets and climate response. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20170263,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0263.
Lowe, J.A. et al., 2009: How difficult is it to recover from dangerous levels of global
warming? Environmental Research Letters, 4(1), 014012,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/1/014012.
Lucon, O. et al., 2014: Buildings. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga,
Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P.
Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel,
and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 671-738.
Luderer, G., C. Bertram, K. Calvin, E. De Cian, and E. Kriegler, 2016a: Implications
of weak near-term climate policies on long-term mitigation pathways. Climatic
Change, 136(1), 127-140, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0899-9.
Luderer, G. et al., 2013: Economic mitigation challenges: how further delay closes
the door for achieving climate targets. Environmental Research Letters, 8(3),
034033, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/034033.
Luderer, G. et al., 2014: The role of renewable energy in climate stabilization:
results from the {EMF}27 scenarios. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 427-441,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0924-z.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
Luderer, G. et al., 2016b: Deep Decarbonisation towards 1.5C - 2C stabilization:
Policy findings from the ADVANCE project. The ADVANCE Consortium, 42 pp.
Luderer, G. et al., 2017: Assessment of wind and solar power in global lowcarbon energy scenarios: An introduction. Energy Economics, 64, 542-551,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2017.03.027.
Luderer, G. et al., 2018: Residual fossil CO2 emissions in 1.5-2C pathways. Nature
Climate Change, 8(7), 626-633, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0198-6.
Lutz, W. and S. KC, 2011: Global Human Capital: Integrating Education and
Population. Science, 333(6042), 587-592, doi:10.1126/science.1206964.
MacDougall, A.H., N.C. Swart, and R. Knutti, 2017: The Uncertainty in the Transient
Climate Response to Cumulative CO 2 Emissions Arising from the Uncertainty in
Physical Climate Parameters. Journal of Climate, 30(2), 813-827,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0205.1.
MacDougall, A.H., K. Zickfeld, R. Knutti, and H.D. Matthews, 2015: Sensitivity
of carbon budgets to permafrost carbon feedbacks and non-CO2 forcings.
Environmental Research Letters, 10(12), 125003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125003.
Madeira, M.S. et al., 2017: Microalgae as feed ingredients for livestock production
and meat quality: A review. Livestock Science, 205, 111-121,
doi:10.1016/j.livsci.2017.09.020.
Mahowald, N.M. et al., 2017: Aerosol Deposition Impacts on Land and Ocean
Carbon Cycles. Current Climate Change Reports, 3(1), 16-31,
doi:10.1007/s40641-017-0056-z.
Malavelle, F.F. et al., 2017: Strong constraints on aerosol-cloud interactions from
volcanic eruptions. Nature, 546(7659), 485-491, doi:10.1038/nature22974.
Marangoni, G. and M. Tavoni, 2014: The Clean Energy R&D Strategy for 2C.
Climate Change Economics, 5(1), 1440003, doi:10.1142/s201000781440003x.
Marangoni, G. et al., 2017: Sensitivity of projected long-term CO2 emissions across
the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Nature Climate Change, 7(1), 113-119,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3199.
Marcucci, A., S. Kypreos, and E. Panos, 2017: The road to achieving the long-term
Paris targets: Energy transition and the role of direct air capture. Climatic
Change, 144(2), 181-193, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2051-8.
Marten, A.L., E.A. Kopits, C.W. Griffiths, S.C. Newbold, and A. Wolverton,
2015: Incremental CH4 and N2O mitigation benefits consistent with the US
Government's SC-CO2 estimates. Climate Policy, 15(2), 272-298,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2014.912981.
Marvel, K., G.A. Schmidt, R.L. Miller, and L.S. Nazarenko, 2016: Implications for
climate sensitivity from the response to individual forcings. Nature Climate
Change, 6(4), 386-389, doi:10.1038/nclimate2888.
Masui, T. et al., 2011: An emission pathway for stabilization at 6 W m-2 radiative
forcing. Climatic Change, 109(1), 59-76, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0150-5.
Matter, J.M. et al., 2016: Rapid carbon mineralization for permanent disposal of
anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. Science, 352(6291), 1312-1314,
doi:10.1126/science.aad8132.
Matthews, H.D. and K. Caldeira, 2008: Stabilizing climate requires near-zero
emissions. Geophysical Research Letters, 35(4), 1-5, doi:10.1029/2007gl032388.
Matthews, H.D. and K. Zickfeld, 2012: Climate response to zeroed emissions
of greenhouse gases and aerosols. Nature Climate Change, 2(5), 338-341,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1424.
Matthews, H.D., N.P. Gillett, P.A. Stott, and K. Zickfeld, 2009: The proportionality of
global warming to cumulative carbon emissions. Nature, 459(7248), 829-832,
doi:10.1038/nature08047.
Matthews, H.D. et al., 2017: Estimating Carbon Budgets for Ambitious Climate Targets.
Current Climate Change Reports, 3, 69-77, doi:10.1007/s40641-017-0055-0.
Mazzotti, M. et al., 2005: Mineral carbonation and industrial uses of carbon
dioxide. In: IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage [Metz,
B., O. Davidson, H.C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Prepared
by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 319-338.
McCollum, D.L., V. Krey, and K. Riahi, 2011: An integrated approach to energy
sustainability. Nature Climate Change, 1(9), 428-429,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1297.
McCollum, D.L. et al., 2013: Energy Investments under Climate Policy: A
Comparison of Global Models. Climate Change Economics, 4(4), 1340010,
doi:10.1142/s2010007813400101.
McCollum, D.L. et al., 2017: Improving the behavioral realism of global
integrated assessment models: An application to consumers' vehicle choices.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 55, 322-342,
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2016.04.003.

Chapter 2

McCollum, D.L. et al., 2018: Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris
Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature Energy,
3(7), 589-599, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0179-z.
McFarland, J.R., A.A. Fawcett, A.C. Morris, J.M. Reilly, and P.J. Wilcoxen, 2018:
Overview of the EMF 32 Study on U.S. Carbon Tax Scenarios. Climate Change
Economics, 9(1), 1840002, doi:10.1142/s201000781840002x.
McLeod, E. et al., 2011: A blueprint for blue carbon: Toward an improved
understanding of the role of vegetated coastal habitats in sequestering CO2.
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 9(10), 552-560, doi:10.1890/110004.
Mehling, M. and E. Tvinnereim, 2018: Carbon Pricing and the 1.5C Target: NearTerm Decarbonisation and the Importance of an Instrument Mix. Carbon &
Climate Law Review, 12(1), 50-61, doi:10.21552/cclr/2018/1/9.
Meinshausen, M., S.C.B. Raper, and T.M.L. Wigley, 2011a: Emulating coupled
atmosphere-ocean and carbon cycle models with a simpler model, MAGICC6 -
Part 1: Model description and calibration. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics,
11(4), 1417-1456, doi:10.5194/acp-11-1417-2011.
Meinshausen, M. et al., 2009: Greenhouse-gas emission targets for limiting global
warming to 2C. Nature, 458(7242), 1158-1162, doi:10.1038/nature08017.
Meinshausen, M. et al., 2011b: The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and
their extensions from 1765 to 2300. Climatic Change, 109(1-2), 213-241,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0156-z.
Mejean, A., C. Guivarch, J. Lefevre, and M. Hamdi-Cherif, 2018: The transition in
energy demand sectors to limit global warming to 1.5C. Energy Efficiency,
1-22, doi:10.1007/s12053-018-9682-0.
Mengis, N., A.- Partanen, J. Jalbert, and H.D. Matthews, 2018: 1.5C carbon budget
dependent on carbon cycle uncertainty and future non-CO2 forcing. Scientific
Reports, 8(1), 5831, doi:10.1038/s41598-018-24241-1.
Michaelowa, A., M. Allen, and F. Sha, 2018: Policy instruments for limiting global
temperature rise to 1.5C - can humanity rise to the challenge? Climate Policy,
18(3), 275-286, doi:10.1080/14693062.2018.1426977.
Millar, R.J. and P. Friedlingstein, 2018: The utility of the historical record for
assessing the transient climate response to cumulative emissions. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 376(2119), 20160449, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0449.
Millar, R.J. et al., 2017: Emission budgets and pathways consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C. Nature Geoscience, 10(10), 741-747,
doi:10.1038/ngeo3031.
Minx, J.C., W.F. Lamb, M.W. Callaghan, L. Bornmann, and S. Fuss, 2017: Fast
growing research on negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters,
12(3), 035007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5ee5.
Minx, J.C. et al., 2018: Negative emissions-Part 1: Research landscape and
synthesis. Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9b.
Moore, F.C. and D.B. Diaz, 2015: Temperature impacts on economic growth
warrant stringent mitigation policy. Nature Climate Change, 5(1), 127-132,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2481.
Mouratiadou, I. et al., 2016: The impact of climate change mitigation on water
demand for energy and food: An integrated analysis based on the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways. Environmental Science & Policy, 64, 48-58,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.06.007.
Muller, A. et al., 2017: Strategies for feeding the world more sustainably with
organic agriculture. Nature Communications, 8(1), 1290,
doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01410-w.
Mundaca, L. and A. Markandya, 2016: Assessing regional progress towards a
Green Energy Economy. Applied Energy, 179, 1372-1394,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.10.098.
Mundaca, L., M. Mansoz, L. Neij, and G. Timilsina, 2013: Transaction costs analysis
of low-carbon technologies. Climate Policy, 13(4), 490-513,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2013.781452.
Mundaca, L., L. Neij, A. Markandya, P. Hennicke, and J. Yan, 2016: Towards a Green
Energy Economy? Assessing policy choices, strategies and transitional pathways.
Applied Energy, 179, 1283-1292, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.08.086.
Myhre, G. et al., 2013: Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels,
Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 659-740.
Myhre, G. et al., 2017: Multi-model simulations of aerosol and ozone radiative forcing
due to anthropogenic emission changes during the period 1990-2015. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 17(4), 2709-2720, doi:10.5194/acp-17-2709-2017.

169

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Narayan, C., P.M. Fernandes, J. van Brusselen, and A. Schuck, 2007: Potential for
CO2 emissions mitigation in Europe through prescribed burning in the context
of the Kyoto Protocol. Forest Ecology and Management, 251(3), 164-173,
doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2007.06.042.
NASEM, 2016: Assessment of Approaches to Updating the Social Cost of Carbon:
Phase 1 Report on a Near-Term Update. National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). The National Academies Press, Washington
DC, USA, 72 pp., doi:10.17226/21898.
NASEM, 2017: Valuing Climate Damages: Updating estimation of the social
costs of carbon dioxide. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine (NASEM), The National Academies Press, Washington DC, USA, 262
pp., doi:10.17226/24651.
Naudts, K. et al., 2016: Europe's forest management did not mitigate climate
warming. Science, 351(6273), 597-600, doi:10.1126/science.aad7270.
Nelson, G.C. et al., 2014: Climate change effects on agriculture: economic
responses to biophysical shocks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(9), 3274-9, doi:10.1073/pnas.1222465110.
Nemet, G.F. et al., 2018: Negative emissions - Part 3: Innovation and upscaling.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabff4.
NETL, 2013: Cost and performance of PC and IGCC plants for a range of carbon
dioxide capture: Revision 1. DOE/NETL-2011/1498, U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL), 500 pp.
NETL, 2015: Carbon Storage Atlas - Fifth Edition (Atlas V). U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL), 114 pp.
Nicol, A. et al., 2013: Induced seismicity; observations, risks and mitigation
measures at CO2 storage sites. Energy Procedia, 37, 4749-4756,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2013.06.384.
Nohara, D. et al., 2015: Examination of a climate stabilization pathway via zeroemissions using Earth system models. Environmental Research Letters, 10(9),
095005, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/9/095005.
Nordhaus, W.D., 2007a: A Review of The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3), 686-702,
www.jstor.org/stable/27646843.
Nordhaus, W.D., 2007b: To Tax or Not to Tax: Alternative Approaches to Slowing
Global Warming. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(1), 26-44,
doi:10.1093/reep/rem008.
Nordhaus, W.D., 2013: The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a
Warming World. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, USA, 392 pp.
Nordhaus, W.D., 2014: Estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon: Concepts and
Results from the DICE-2013R Model and Alternative Approaches. Journal of
the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 1(1-2), 273-312,
doi:10.1086/676035.
Nordhaus, W.D., 2017: Revisiting the social cost of carbon. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(7), 1518-1523, doi:10.1073/pnas.1609244114.
Nordhaus, W.D. and J. Boyer, 2000: Warming the World: Economic Models of
Global Warming. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA and London, UK, 244 pp.
NRC, 2015: Climate Intervention: Carbon Dioxide Removal and Reliable
Sequestration. National Research Council (NRC). The National Academies Press,
Washington DC, USA, 140 pp., doi:10.17226/18805.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research: The
concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 122(3), 387-400,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0905-2.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 169-180, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
Obersteiner, M. et al., 2001: Managing Climate Risk. Science, 294(5543), 786-787,
doi:10.1126/science.294.5543.786b.
Obersteiner, M. et al., 2016: Assessing the land resource-food price nexus of
the Sustainable Development Goals. Science Advances, 2(9), e1501499,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1501499.
Obersteiner, M. et al., 2018: How to spend a dwindling greenhouse gas budget.
Nature Climate Change, 8(1), 7-10, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0045-1.
OECD, 2017: Investing in Climate, Investing in Growth. OECD Publishing, Paris,
France, 314 pp., doi:10.1787/9789264273528-en.
OECD/IEA and IRENA, 2017: Perspectives for the Energy Transition: Investment
Needs for a Low-Carbon Energy System. OECD/IEA and IRENA, 204 pp.
Ogawa, T., S. Nakanishi, T. Shidahara, T. Okumura, and E. Hayashi, 2011: Salineaquifer CO2 sequestration in Japan-methodology of storage capacity
assessment. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 5(2), 318-326,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2010.09.009.

170

Painter, T.H. et al., 2013: End of the Little Ice Age in the Alps forced by industrial
black carbon. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(38),
15216-21, doi:10.1073/pnas.1302570110.
Patt, A., 2017: Beyond the tragedy of the commons: Reframing effective climate
change governance. Energy Research & Social Science, 34, 1-3,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.023.
Patterson, J.J. et al., 2018: Political feasibility of 1.5C societal transformations: the
role of social justice. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 1-9,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.11.002.
Paustian, K. et al., 2016: Climate-smart soils. Nature, 532(7597), 49-57,
doi:10.1038/nature17174.
Pawar, R.J. et al., 2015: Recent advances in risk assessment and risk management
of geologic CO2 storage. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40,
292-311, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.06.014.
Pehl, M. et al., 2017: Understanding future emissions from low-carbon power
systems by integration of life-cycle assessment and integrated energy modelling.
Nature Energy, 2(12), 939-945, doi:10.1038/s41560-017-0032-9.
Peters, G.P., 2016: The `best available science' to inform 1.5C policy choices.
Nature Climate Change, 6(7), 646-649, doi:10.1038/nclimate3000.
Pietzcker, R.C. et al., 2017: System integration of wind and solar power in
integrated assessment models: A cross-model evaluation of new approaches.
Energy Economics, 64, 583-599, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2016.11.018.
Pikaar, I. et al., 2018: Decoupling Livestock from Land Use through Industrial Feed
Production Pathways. Environmental Science & Technology, 52(13), 7351-7359,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.8b00216.
Pindyck, R.S., 2013: Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us? Journal of
Economic Literature, 51(3), 1-23, doi:10.1257/jel.51.3.860.
Pizer, W. et al., 2014: Using and improving the social cost of carbon. Science,
346(6214), 1189-1190, doi:10.1126/science.1259774.
Popp, A., H. Lotze-Campen, and B. Bodirsky, 2010: Food consumption, diet shifts
and associated non-CO2 greenhouse gases from agricultural production. Global
Environmental Change, 20(3), 451-462, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.02.001.
Popp, A. et al., 2014a: Land-use protection for climate change mitigation. Nature
Climate Change, 4(12), 1095-1098, doi:10.1038/nclimate2444.
Popp, A. et al., 2014b: Land-use transition for bioenergy and climate stabilization: Model
comparison of drivers, impacts and interactions with other land use based mitigation
options. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 495-509, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0926-x.
Popp,A. et al., 2017: Land-use futures in the shared socio-economic pathways. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 331-345, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.10.002.
Post, M.J., 2012: Cultured meat from stem cells: Challenges and prospects. Meat
Science, 92(3), 297-301, doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2012.04.008.
Prestele, R. et al., 2016: Hotspots of uncertainty in land-use and land-cover change
projections: a global-scale model comparison. Global Change Biology, 22(12),
3967-3983, doi:10.1111/gcb.13337.
Proistosescu, C. and P.J. Huybers, 2017: Slow climate mode reconciles historical
and model-based estimates of climate sensitivity. Science Advances, 3(7),
e1602821, doi:10.1126/sciadv.1602821.
Psarras, P. et al., 2017: Slicing the pie: how big could carbon dioxide removal
be? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment, 6(5), e253,
doi:10.1002/wene.253.
Purohit, P. and L. Hoglund-Isaksson, 2017: Global emissions of fluorinated
greenhouse gases 2005-2050 with abatement potentials and costs. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 17(4), 2795-2816, doi:10.5194/acp-17-2795-2017.
Rao, S. et al., 2016: A multi-model assessment of the co-benefits of climate
mitigation for global air quality. Environmental Research Letters, 11(12),
124013, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/12/124013.
Rao, S. et al., 2017: Future air pollution in the Shared Socio-economic Pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 346-358,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.012.
Rau, G.H., 2011: CO2 Mitigation via Capture and Chemical Conversion in Seawater.
Environmental Science & Technology, 45(3), 1088-1092,
doi:10.1021/es102671x.
Revesz, R. et al., 2014: Global warming: Improve economic models of climate
change. Nature, 508(7495), 173-175, doi:10.1038/508173a.
Riahi, K. et al., 2011: RCP 8.5 - A scenario of comparatively high greenhouse gas
emissions. Climatic Change, 109(1), 33, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0149-y.
Riahi, K. et al., 2012: Energy Pathways for Sustainable Development. In: Global
Energy Assessment - Toward a Sustainable Future. Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA and the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 1203-1306,
doi:10.1017/cbo9780511793677.023.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
Riahi, K. et al., 2015: Locked into Copenhagen pledges - Implications of shortterm emission targets for the cost and feasibility of long-term climate goals.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 90(Part A), 8-23,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.016.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy,
land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 153-168,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Ricke, K.L., R.J. Millar, and D.G. MacMartin, 2017: Constraints on global
temperature target overshoot. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1-7,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-14503-9.
Riis, F. and E. Halland, 2014: CO2 storage atlas of the Norwegian Continental shelf:
Methods used to evaluate capacity and maturity of the CO2 storage potential.
Energy Procedia, 63, 5258-5265, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2014.11.557.
Rockstrom, J. et al., 2017: A roadmap for rapid decarbonization. Science,
355(6331), 1269-1271, doi:10.1126/science.aah3443.
Roelfsema, M., M. Harmsen, J.J.G. Olivier, A.F. Hof, and D.P. van Vuuren, 2018:
Integrated assessment of international climate mitigation commitments outside
the UNFCCC. Global Environmental Change, 48, 67-75,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.11.001.
Rogelj, J., D.L. McCollum, B.C. O'Neill, and K. Riahi, 2013a: 2020 emissions levels
required to limit warming to below 2 C. Nature Climate Change, 3(4), 405-412,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1758.
Rogelj, J., M. Meinshausen, J. Sedlaek, and R. Knutti, 2014a: Implications
of potentially lower climate sensitivity on climate projections and policy.
Environmental Research Letters, 9(3), 031003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/3/031003.
Rogelj, J., D.L. McCollum, A. Reisinger, M. Meinshausen, and K. Riahi, 2013b:
Probabilistic cost estimates for climate change mitigation. Nature, 493(7430),
79-83, doi:10.1038/nature11787.
Rogelj, J., M. Meinshausen, M. Schaeffer, R. Knutti, and K. Riahi, 2015a: Impact
of short-lived non-CO2 mitigation on carbon budgets for stabilizing global
warming. Environmental Research Letters, 10(7), 075001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/7/075001.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2011: Emission pathways consistent with a 2C global temperature
limit. Nature Climate Change, 1(8), 413-418, doi:10.1038/nclimate1258.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2014b: Disentangling the effects of CO2 and short-lived climate
forcer mitigation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(46),
16325-16330, doi:10.1073/pnas.1415631111.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2015b: Energy system transformations for limiting end-of-century
warming to below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 519-527,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2572.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2015c: Mitigation choices impact carbon budget size compatible
with low temperature goals. Environmental Research Letters, 10(7), 075003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/7/075003.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2015d: Zero emission targets as long-term global goals for climate
protection. Environmental Research Letters, 10(10), 105007,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/10/105007.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2016a: Paris Agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep
warming well below 2C. Nature, 534(7609), 631-639,
doi:10.1038/nature18307.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2016b: Differences between carbon budget estimates unravelled.
Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 245-252, doi:10.1038/nclimate2868.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2017: Understanding the origin of Paris Agreement emission
uncertainties. Nature Communications, 8, 15748, doi:10.1038/ncomms15748.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2018: Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature increase
below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 325-332,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0091-3.
Rose, S.K., 2012: The role of the social cost of carbon in policy. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 3(2), 195-212, doi:10.1002/wcc.163.
Rose, S.K., D.B. Diza, and G.J. Blanford, 2017a: Understanding the Social Cost
of Carbon: A Model diagnostic and Inter-comparison Study. Climate Change
Economics, 8(2), 1750009, doi:10.1142/s2010007817500099.
Rose, S.K., R. Richels, G. Blanford, and T. Rutherford, 2017b: The Paris Agreement
and next steps in limiting global warming. Climatic Change, 142(1-2), 1-16,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1935-y.
Rose, S.K. et al., 2014a: Bioenergy in energy transformation and climate management.
Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 477-493, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0965-3.
Rose, S.K. et al., 2014b: Non-Kyoto radiative forcing in long-run greenhouse gas
emissions and climate change scenarios. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 511-525,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0955-5.

Chapter 2

Rugenstein, M.A.A. et al., 2016: Multiannual Ocean-Atmosphere Adjustments to Radiative
Forcing. Journal of Climate, 29(15), 5643-5659, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0312.1.
Samset, B.H. et al., 2016: Fast and slow precipitation responses to individual
climate forcers: A PDRMIP multimodel study. Geophysical Research Letters,
43(6), 2782-2791, doi:10.1002/2016gl068064.
Samset, B.H. et al., 2018: Climate impacts from a removal of anthropogenic
aerosol emissions. Geophysical Research Letters, 45(2), 1020-1029,
doi:10.1002/2017gl076079.
Sand, M. et al., 2015: Response of Arctic temperature to changes in emissions of
short-lived climate forcers. Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 286-289,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2880.
Sanderson, B.M., B.C. O'Neill, and C. Tebaldi, 2016: What would it take to achieve
the Paris temperature targets? Geophysical Research Letters, 43(13), 7133-7142,
doi:10.1002/2016gl069563.
Sands, R.D., 2018: U.S. Carbon Tax Scenarios and Bioenergy. Climate Change
Economics, 9(1), 1840010, doi:10.1142/s2010007818400109.
Sarofim, M.C., S.T. Waldhoff, and S.C. Anenberg, 2017: Valuing the Ozone-Related
Health Benefits of Methane Emission Controls. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 66(1), 45-63, doi:10.1007/s10640-015-9937-6.
Saunders, H.D., 2015: Recent Evidence for Large Rebound: Elucidating the Drivers
and their Implications for Climate Change Models. The Energy Journal, 36(1),
23-48, doi:10.5547/01956574.36.1.2.
Schadel, C. et al., 2014: Circumpolar assessment of permafrost C quality and its
vulnerability over time using long-term incubation data. Global Change Biology,
20(2), 641-652, doi:10.1111/gcb.12417.
Schadel, C. et al., 2016: Potential carbon emissions dominated by carbon dioxide
from thawed permafrost soils. Nature Climate Change, 6(10), 950-953,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3054.
Schleussner, C.-F. et al., 2016: Science and policy characteristics of the Paris
Agreement temperature goal. Nature Climate Change, 6(7), 827-835,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3096.
Schmidt, M.G.W., H. Held, E. Kriegler, and A. Lorenz, 2013: Climate Policy Under
Uncertain and Heterogeneous Climate Damages. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 54(1), 79-99, doi:10.1007/s10640-012-9582-2.
Schmitz, C. et al., 2012: Trading more food: Implications for land use, greenhouse gas
emissions, and the food system. Global Environmental Change, 22(1), 189-209,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.09.013.
Schneider, T. et al., 2017: Climate goals and computing the future of clouds. Nature
Climate Change, 7(1), 3-5, doi:10.1038/nclimate3190.
Schneider von Deimling, T. et al., 2012: Estimating the near-surface permafrostcarbon feedback on global warming. Biogeosciences, 9(2), 649-665,
doi:10.5194/bg-9-649-2012.
Schneider von Deimling, T. et al., 2015: Observation-based modelling of permafrost
carbon fluxes with accounting for deep carbon deposits and thermokarst
activity. Biogeosciences, 12(11), 3469-3488, doi:10.5194/bg-12-3469-2015.
Schuiling, R.D. and P. Krijgsman, 2006: Enhanced Weathering: An Effective and
Cheap Tool to Sequester CO2. Climatic Change, 74(1-3), 349-354,
doi:10.1007/s10584-005-3485-y.
Schurer, A.P. et al., 2018: Interpretations of the Paris climate target. Nature
Geoscience, 11(4), 220-221, doi:10.1038/s41561-018-0086-8.
Schuur, E.A.G. et al., 2015: Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback.
Nature, 520(7546), 171-179, doi:10.1038/nature14338.
Scott, C.E. et al., 2018: Substantial large-scale feedbacks between natural aerosols
and climate. Nature Geoscience, 11(1), 44-48, doi:10.1038/s41561-017-0020-5.
Scott, V., R.S. Haszeldine, S.F.B. Tett, and A. Oschlies, 2015: Fossil fuels in a trillion
tonne world. Nature Climate Change, 5(5), 419-423, doi:10.1038/nclimate2578.
Searle, S.Y. and C.J. Malins, 2014: Will energy crop yields meet expectations?
Biomass and Bioenergy, 65, 3-12, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2014.01.001.
Seferian, R., M. Rocher, C. Guivarch, and J. Colin, 2018: Constraints on biomass
energy deployment in mitigation pathways: the case of water limitation.
Environmental Research Letters, 1-32, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabcd7.
Seto, K.C. et al., 2016: Carbon Lock-In: Types, Causes, and Policy Implications.
Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 41(1), 425-452,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-085934.
Shah, N., M. Wei, V. Letschert, and A. Phadke, 2015: Benefits of Leapfrogging to
Superefficiency and Low Global Warming Potential Refrigerants in Room Air
Conditioning. LBNL-1003671, Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA, 58 pp.
Shearer, C., N. Mathew-Shah, L. Myllyvirta, A. Yu, and T. Nace, 2018: Boom and
Bust 2018: Tracking the Global Coal Plant Pipeline. CoalSwarm, Greenpeace
USA, and Sierra Club, 16 pp.

171

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

Shell International B.V., 2018: Shell Scenarios: Sky - Meeting the Goals of the Paris
Agreement. Shell International B.V. 36 pp.
Sherwood, S.C., S. Bony, and J.-L. Dufresne, 2014: Spread in model climate
sensitivity traced to atmospheric convective mixing. Nature, 505(7481), 37-42,
doi:10.1038/nature12829.
Shindell, D.T., 2015: The social cost of atmospheric release. Climatic Change,
130(2), 313-326, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1343-0.
Shindell, D.T. and G. Faluvegi, 2010: The net climate impact of coal-fired power
plant emissions. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 10(7), 3247-3260,
doi:10.5194/acp-10-3247-2010.
Shindell, D.T., Y. Lee, and G. Faluvegi, 2016: Climate and health impacts of US
emissions reductions consistent with 2C. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 503-507,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2935.
Shindell, D.T., J.S. Fuglestvedt, and W.J. Collins, 2017a: The social cost of methane:
theory and applications. Faraday Discussions, 200, 429-451,
doi:10.1039/c7fd00009j.
Shindell, D.T., G. Faluvegi, L. Rotstayn, and G. Milly, 2015: Spatial patterns of
radiative forcing and surface temperature response. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres, 120(11), 5385-5403, doi:10.1002/2014jd022752.
Shindell, D.T., G. Faluvegi, K. Seltzer, and C. Shindell, 2018: Quantified, localized
health benefits of accelerated carbon dioxide emissions reductions. Nature
Climate Change, 8(4), 291-295, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0108-y.
Shindell, D.T. et al., 2012: Simultaneously Mitigating Near-Term Climate Change
and Improving Human Health and Food Security. Science, 335(6065), 183-189,
doi:10.1126/science.1210026.
Shindell, D.T. et al., 2017b: A climate policy pathway for near- and long-term
benefits. Science, 356(6337), 493-494, doi:10.1126/science.aak9521.
Shukla, P.R. and V. Chaturvedi, 2012: Low carbon and clean energy scenarios for
India: Analysis of targets approach. Energy Economics, 34(sup3), S487-S495,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2012.05.002.
Siegmeier, J. et al., 2018: The fiscal benefits of stringent climate change mitigation: an
overview. Climate Policy, 18(3), 352-367, doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1400943.
Silva, R.A. et al., 2016: The effect of future ambient air pollution on human premature
mortality to 2100 using output from the ACCMIP model ensemble. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 16(15), 9847-9862, doi:10.5194/acp-16-9847-2016.
Sims, R. et al., 2014: Transport. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga,
Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadne, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P.
Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T. Zwickel, and
J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 599-670.
Smith, C.J. et al., 2018: FAIR v1.3: a simple emissions-based impulse response
and carbon cycle model. Geoscientific Model Development, 11(6), 2273-2297,
doi:10.5194/gmd-11-2273-2018.
Smith, L.J. and M.S. Torn, 2013: Ecological limits to terrestrial biological carbon
dioxide removal. Climatic Change, 118(1), 89-103,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0682-3.
Smith, P., 2016: Soil carbon sequestration and biochar as negative emission
technologies. Global Change Biology, 22(3), 1315-1324,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13178.
Smith, P. and M. Bustamante, 2014: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
(AFOLU). In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution
of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E.
Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B.
Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, pp. 811-922.
Smith, P. et al., 2013: How much land-based greenhouse gas mitigation can be
achieved without compromising food security and environmental goals? Global
Change Biology, 19(8), 2285-2302, doi:10.1111/gcb.12160.
Smith, P. et al., 2015: Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions.
Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 42-50, doi:10.1038/nclimate2870.
Snopkowski, K., M.C. Towner, M.K. Shenk, and H. Colleran, 2016: Pathways from
education to fertility decline: a multi-site comparative study. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371(1692), 20150156,
doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0156.
Socolow, R. et al., 2011: Direct Air Capture of CO2 with Chemicals: A Technology
Assessment for the APS Panel on Public Affairs. American Physical Society (APS),
College Park, MD, USA, 100 pp.

172

Somanthan, E. et al., 2014: National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1141-1206.
Sonnenschein, J., R. Van Buskirk, J.L. Richter, and C. Dalhammar, 2018: Minimum
energy performance standards for the 1.5C target: an effective complement to
carbon pricing. Energy Efficiency, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s12053-018-9669-x.
Spencer, T., R. Pierfederici, H. Waisman, and M. Colombier, 2015: Beyond the
Numbers. Understanding the Transformation Induced by INDCs. Study N05/15,
MILES Project Consortium, Paris, France, 80 pp.
Springmann, M., H.C.J. Godfray, M. Rayner, and P. Scarborough, 2016: Analysis
and valuation of the health and climate change cobenefits of dietary change.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(15), 4146-4151,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1523119113.
Steckel, J.C., O. Edenhofer, and M. Jakob, 2015: Drivers for the renaissance of coal.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(29), E3775-E3781,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1422722112.
Stehfest, E. et al., 2009: Climate benefits of changing diet. Climatic Change, 95(1-2),
83-102, doi:10.1007/s10584-008-9534-6.
Stern, N., 2007: The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 692 pp.,
doi:10.1017/cbo9780511817434.
Stern, N., 2013: The Structure of Economic Modeling of the Potential Impacts of Climate
Change: Grafting Gross Underestimation of Risk onto Already Narrow Science
Models. Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3), 838-859, doi:10.1257/jel.51.3.838.
Stern, N., 2016: Current climate models are grossly misleading. Nature, 530, 407-
409, doi:10.1038/530407a.
Stevanovi, M. et al., 2017: Mitigation Strategies for Greenhouse Gas Emissions
from Agriculture and Land-Use Change: Consequences for Food Prices.
Environmental Science & Technology, 51(1), 365-374,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b04291.
Stiglitz, J.E. et al., 2017: Report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices.
Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition (CPLC), 68 pp.
Stocker, T.F. et al., 2013: Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 33-115.
Stohl, A. et al., 2015: Evaluating the climate and air quality impacts of shortlived pollutants. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 15(18), 10529-10566,
doi:10.5194/acp-15-10529-2015.
Strapasson, A. et al., 2017: On the global limits of bioenergy and land use for
climate change mitigation. GCB Bioenergy, 9(12), 1721-1735,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12456.
Strefler, J., T. Amann, N. Bauer, E. Kriegler, and J. Hartmann, 2018a: Potential and
costs of carbon dioxide removal by enhanced weathering of rocks. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(3), 034010, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa9c4.
Strefler, J. et al., 2018b: Between Scylla and Charybdis: Delayed mitigation narrows
the passage between large-scale CDR and high costs. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(4), 044015, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab2ba.
Su, X. et al., 2017: Emission pathways to achieve 2.0C and 1.5C climate targets.
Earth's Future, 5(6), 592-604, doi:10.1002/2016ef000492.
Subbarao, G. et al., 2013: Potential for biological nitrification inhibition to reduce
nitrification and N2O emissions in pasture crop-livestock systems. Animal,
7(s2), 322-332, doi:10.1017/s1751731113000761.
Subharat, S. et al., 2016: Vaccination of Sheep with a Methanogen Protein
Provides Insight into Levels of Antibody in Saliva Needed to Target Ruminal
Methanogens. PLOS ONE, 11(7), e0159861, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0159861.
Szulczewski, M.L., C.W. MacMinn, and R. Juanes, 2014: Theoretical analysis of how
pressure buildup and CO2 migration can both constrain storage capacity in deep
saline aquifers. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 23, 113-118,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2014.02.006.
Tachiiri, K., T. Hajima, and M. Kawamiya, 2015: Increase of uncertainty in
transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions after stabilization
of atmospheric CO2 concentration. Environmental Research Letters, 10(12),
125018, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125018.

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development
Tan, I., T. Storelvmo, and M.D. Zelinka, 2016: Observational constraints on mixedphase clouds imply higher climate sensitivity. Science, 352(6282), 224-227,
doi:10.1126/science.aad5300.
Tavoni, M. and R.S.J. Tol, 2010: Counting only the hits? The risk of underestimating
the costs of stringent climate policy. Climatic Change, 100(3-4), 769-778,
doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9867-9.
The Royal Society, 2009: Geoengineering the climate: science, governance and
uncertainty. RS Policy document 10/09, The Royal Society, London, UK, 82 pp.
Thomson, A.M. et al., 2011: RCP4.5: a pathway for stabilization of radiative forcing
by 2100. Climatic Change, 109(1-2), 77-94, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0151-4.
Tilman, D. and M. Clark, 2014: Global diets link environmental sustainability and
human health. Nature, 515(7528), 518-522, doi:10.1038/nature13959.
Tokarska, K.B. and N.P. Gillett, 2018: Cumulative carbon emissions budgets
consistent with 1.5C global warming. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 296-299,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0118-9.
Tokarska, K.B., N.P. Gillett, V.K. Arora, W.G. Lee, and K. Zickfeld, 2018: The influence
of non-CO2 forcings on cumulative carbon emissions budgets. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(3), 034039, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaafdd.
Tol, R.S.J., 1999: Spatial and Temporal Efficiency in Climate Policy: Applications
of FUND. Environmental and Resource Economics, 14(1), 33-49,
doi:10.1023/a:1008314205375.
Tol, R.S.J., 2017: The structure of the climate debate. Energy Policy, 104, 431-438,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.01.005.
Tuomisto, H.L. and M.J. Teixeira de Mattos, 2011: Environmental Impacts of Cultured
Meat Production. Environmental Science & Technology, 45(14), 6117-6123,
doi:10.1021/es200130u.
UNEP, 2015: Aligning the Financial System with Sustainable Development:
Pathways to Scale. Inquiry: Design of a Sustainable Financial System and United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Geneva, Switzerland, 25 pp.
UNEP, 2016: The Emissions Gap Report 2016: A UNEP Synthesis Report. United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 85 pp.
UNEP, 2017: The Emissions Gap Report 2017: A UN Environment Synthesis Report.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 116 pp.
UNFCCC, 2016: Aggregate effect of the intended nationally determined
contributions: an update. FCCC/CP/2016/2, The Secretariat of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Bonn, Germany, 75 pp.
Unruh, G.C. and J. Carrillo-Hermosilla, 2006: Globalizing carbon lock-in. Energy
Policy, 34(10), 1185-1197, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2004.10.013.
Unruh, J.D., 2011: Tree-Based Carbon Storage in Developing Countries: Neglect
of the Social Sciences. Society & Natural Resources, 24(2), 185-192,
doi:10.1080/08941920903410136.
US EPA, 2013: Global Mitigation of Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gases: 2010-2030.
Report No. EPA-430-R-13-011. United States Environmental Protection Agency
(US EPA), Washington DC, USA, 410 pp.
Valin, H. et al., 2013: Agricultural productivity and greenhouse gas emissions:
trade-offs or synergies between mitigation and food security? Environmental
Research Letters, 8(3), 035019, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/035019.
van den Bergh, J.C.J.M., 2017: Rebound policy in the Paris Agreement: instrument
comparison and climate-club revenue offsets. Climate Policy, 17(6), 801-813,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1169499.
van Sluisveld, M.A.E., S.H. Martinez, V. Daioglou, and D.P. van Vuuren, 2016:
Exploring the implications of lifestyle change in 2C mitigation scenarios using
the IMAGE integrated assessment model. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 102, 309-319, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2015.08.013.
van Soest, H.L. et al., 2017: Low-emission pathways in 11 major economies:
comparison of cost-optimal pathways and Paris climate proposals. Climatic
Change, 142(3-4), 491-504, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1964-6.
van Vuuren, D.P. and K. Riahi, 2011: The relationship between short-term emissions
and long-term concentration targets. Climatic Change, 104(3), 793-801,
doi:10.1007/s10584-010-0004-6.
van Vuuren, D.P., A.F. Hof, M.A.E. van Sluisveld, and K. Riahi, 2017a: Open
discussion of negative emissions is urgently needed. Nature Energy, 2(12),
902-904, doi:10.1038/s41560-017-0055-2.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2007: Stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations at low
levels: An assessment of reduction strategies and costs. Climatic Change, 81(2),
119-159, doi:10.1007/s10584-006-9172-9.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2011a: The representative concentration pathways: An
overview. Climatic Change, 109(1), 5-31, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0148-z.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2011b: RCP2.6: Exploring the possibility to keep global
mean temperature increase below 2C. Climatic Change, 109(1), 95-116,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0152-3.

Chapter 2

van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2015: Pathways to achieve a set of ambitious global
sustainability objectives by 2050: Explorations using the IMAGE integrated
assessment model. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 98, 303-323,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2015.03.005.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2016: Carbon budgets and energy transition pathways.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(7), 075002, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/075002.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2017b: Energy, land-use and greenhouse gas emissions
trajectories under a green growth paradigm. Global Environmental Change, 42,
237-250, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.008.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2018: Alternative pathways to the 1.5C target reduce the
need for negative emission technologies. Nature Climate Change, 8(5), 391-
397, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0119-8.
Vangkilde-Pedersen, T. et al., 2009: Assessing European capacity for geological
storage of carbon dioxide-the EU GeoCapacity project. Energy Procedia, 1(1),
2663-2670, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2009.02.034.
Veland, S. et al., 2018: Narrative matters for sustainability: the transformative
role of storytelling in realizing 1.5C futures. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 31, 41-47, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.005.
Velders, G.J.M., D.W. Fahey, J.S. Daniel, S.O. Andersen, and M. McFarland, 2015:
Future atmospheric abundances and climate forcings from scenarios of global
and regional hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions. Atmospheric Environment,
123, 200-209, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.10.071.
Vogt-Schilb, A. and S. Hallegatte, 2017: Climate policies and nationally determined
contributions: reconciling the needed ambition with the political economy. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment, 6(6), 1-23, doi:10.1002/wene.256.
Voigt, C. et al., 2017a: Warming of subarctic tundra increases emissions of all three
important greenhouse gases - carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide.
Global Change Biology, 23(8), 3121-3138, doi:10.1111/gcb.13563.
Voigt, C. et al., 2017b: Increased nitrous oxide emissions from Arctic peatlands
after permafrost thaw. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
114(24), 6238-6243, doi:10.1073/pnas.1702902114.
von Stechow, C. et al., 2015: Integrating Global Climate Change Mitigation Goals
with Other Sustainability Objectives: A Synthesis. Annual Review of Environment
and Resources, 40(1), 363-394, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-021113-095626.
von Stechow, C. et al., 2016: 2C and SDGs: united they stand, divided they fall?
Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034022.
Vrontisi, Z. et al., 2018: Enhancing global climate policy ambition towards a 1.5C
stabilization: a short-term multi-model assessment. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(4), 044039, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab53e.
Wachsmuth, J. and V. Duscha, 2018: Achievability of the Paris targets in the EU-the
role of demand-side-driven mitigation in different types of scenarios. Energy
Efficiency, 1-19, doi:10.1007/s12053-018-9670-4.
Walsh, M.J. et al., 2016: Algal food and fuel coproduction can mitigate greenhouse
gas emissions while improving land and water-use efficiency. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(11), 114006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/11/114006.
Wang, X. et al., 2016: Taking account of governance: Implications for land-use
dynamics, food prices, and trade patterns. Ecological Economics, 122, 12-24,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.11.018.
Warwick, P.D., M.K. Verma, P.A. Freeman, M.D. Corum, and S.H. Hickman, 2014: U.S.
geological survey carbon sequestration - geologic research and assessments.
Energy Procedia, 63, 5305-5309, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2014.11.561.
Wedlock, D.N., P.H. Janssen, S.C. Leahy, D. Shu, and B.M. Buddle, 2013: Progress
in the development of vaccines against rumen methanogens. Animal, 7(s2),
244-252, doi:10.1017/s1751731113000682.
Wei, N. et al., 2013: A preliminary sub-basin scale evaluation framework of site
suitability for onshore aquifer-based CO2 storage in China. International Journal
of Greenhouse Gas Control, 12, 231-246, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2012.10.012.
Weindl, I. et al., 2015: Livestock in a changing climate: production system
transitions as an adaptation strategy for agriculture. Environmental Research
Letters, 10(9), 094021, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/9/094021.
Weindl, I. et al., 2017: Livestock and human use of land: Productivity trends and
dietary choices as drivers of future land and carbon dynamics. Global and
Planetary Change, 159, 1-10, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2017.10.002.
Weitzman, M.L., 2014: Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to Internalize
the Global Warming Externality? Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists, 1(1/2), 29-49, doi:10.1086/676039.
Werner, C., H.-P. Schmidt, D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and C. Kammann, 2018:
Biogeochemical potential of biomass pyrolysis systems for limiting global
warming to 1.5C. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 044036,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabb0e.

173

2

Chapter 2

2

Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5C in the Context of Sustainable Development

West, J.J. et al., 2013: Co-benefits of mitigating global greenhouse gas emissions
for future air quality and human health. Nature Climate Change, 3(10), 885-
889, doi:10.1038/nclimate2009.
Weyant, J., 2017: Some Contributions of Integrated Assessment Models of Global
Climate Change. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 11(1), 115-
137, doi:10.1093/reep/rew018.
Weyant, J.P., F.C. Chesnaye, and G.J. Blanford, 2006: Overview of EMF-21: Multigas
Mitigation and Climate Policy. The Energy Journal, 27, 1-32,
doi:10.5547/issn0195-6574-ej-volsi2006-nosi3-1.
Wiebe, K. et al., 2015: Climate change impacts on agriculture in 2050 under a
range of plausible socioeconomic and emissions scenarios. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(8), 085010, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/085010.
Wigley, T.M.L., R. Richels, and J. Edmonds, 2007: Overshoot Pathways to CO2
stabilization in a multi-gas context. In: Human Induced Climate Change: An
Interdisciplinary Perspective [Schlesinger, M.E., H.S. Kheshgi, J. Smith, F.C. de
la Chesnaye, J.M. Reilly, T. Wilson, and C. Kolstad (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 84-92, doi:10.1017/cbo9780511619472.009.
Williams, P.J. and L.M.L. Laurens, 2010: Microalgae as biodiesel & biomass
feedstocks: Review & analysis of the biochemistry, energetics & economics.
Energy & Environmental Science, 3(5), 554-590, doi:10.1039/b924978h.
Williamson, P., 2016: Emissions reduction: Scrutinize CO2 removal methods.
Nature, 530(153), 153-155, doi:10.1038/530153a.
Williamson, P. and R. Bodle, 2016: Update on Climate Geoengineering in Relation
to the Convention on Biological Diversity: Potential Impacts and Regulatory
Framework. CBD Technical Series No. 84, Secretariat of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, Montreal, QC, Canada, 158 pp.
Wise, M., K. Calvin, P. Kyle, P. Luckow, and J. Edmonds, 2014: Economic and
physical modeling of land use in GCAM 3.0 and an application to agricultural
productivity, land, and terrestrial carbon. Climate Change Economics, 5(2),
1450003, doi:10.1142/s2010007814500031.
Woolf, D., J.E. Amonette, F.A. Street-Perrott, J. Lehmann, and S. Joseph, 2010:
Sustainable biochar to mitigate global climate change. Nature Communications,
1(5), 1-9, doi:10.1038/ncomms1053.
Xiao, X.-J. and K. Jiang, 2018: China's nuclear power under the global 1.5C
target: Preliminary feasibility study and prospects. Advances in Climate Change
Research, 9(2), 138-143, doi:10.1016/j.accre.2018.05.002.
Xu, Y. and V. Ramanathan, 2017: Well below 2C: Mitigation strategies for avoiding
dangerous to catastrophic climate changes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(39), 10315-10323, doi:10.1073/pnas.1618481114.
Yeh, S. et al., 2016: Detailed assessment of global transport-energy models'
structures and projections. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, 55, 294-309, doi:10.1016/j.trd.2016.11.001.
Zeman, F.S. and K. Lackner, 2004: Capturing Carbon Dioxide directly from the
Atmosphere. World Resource Review, 16(2), 157-172.
Zeman, F.S. and D.W. Keith, 2008: Carbon Neutral Hydrocarbons. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 366(1882), 3901-3918, doi:10.1098/rsta.2008.0143.
Zhai, C., J.H. Jiang, and H. Su, 2015: Long-term cloud change imprinted in seasonal
cloud variation: More evidence of high climate sensitivity. Geophysical Research
Letters, 42(20), 8729-8737, doi:10.1002/2015gl065911.
Zhang, R., S. Fujimori, and T. Hanaoka, 2018: The contribution of transport policies
to the mitigation potential and cost of 2C and 1.5C goals. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(5), 054008, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabb0d.
Zickfeld, K. and T. Herrington, 2015: The time lag between a carbon dioxide emission
and maximum warming increases with the size of the emission. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(3), 031001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/3/031001.
Zickfeld, K., A.H. MacDougall, and H.D. Matthews, 2016: On the proportionality
between global temperature change and cumulative CO2 emissions during
periods of net negative CO2 emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(5),
055006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/055006.
Zickfeld, K., M. Eby, H.D. Matthews, and A.J. Weaver, 2009: Setting cumulative
emissions targets to reduce the risk of dangerous climate change. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(38), 16129-16134,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0805800106.
Zomer, R.J., D.A. Bossio, R. Sommer, and L.V. Verchot, 2017: Global Sequestration
Potential of Increased Organic Carbon in Cropland Soils. Scientific Reports, 7(1),
15554, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-15794-8.
Zomer, R.J. et al., 2016: Global Tree Cover and Biomass Carbon on Agricultural
Land: The contribution of agroforestry to global and national carbon budgets.
Scientific Reports, 6, 29987, doi:10.1038/srep29987.

174

3

Impacts of 1.5C
of Global Warming on
Natural and Human Systems
Coordinating Lead Authors:

Ove Hoegh-Guldberg (Australia), Daniela Jacob (Germany), Michael Taylor (Jamaica)

Lead Authors:

Marco Bindi (Italy), Sally Brown (UK), Ines Camilloni (Argentina), Arona Diedhiou (Ivory Coast/Senegal),
Riyanti Djalante (Japan/Indonesia), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Francois Engelbrecht (South Africa), Joel Guiot
(France), Yasuaki Hijioka (Japan), Shagun Mehrotra (USA/India), Antony Payne (UK), Sonia I. Seneviratne
(Switzerland), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas), Rachel Warren (UK), Guangsheng Zhou (China)

Contributing Authors:

Sharina Abdul Halim (Malaysia), Michelle Achlatis (Australia/Greece), Lisa V. Alexander (Australia),
Myles R. Allen (UK), Peter Berry (Canada), Christopher Boyer (USA), Lorenzo Brilli (Italy), Marcos
Buckeridge (Brazil), Edward Byers (Austria/Brazil), William Cheung (Canada), Marlies Craig (South Africa),
Neville Ellis (Australia), Jason Evans (Australia), Hubertus Fischer (Switzerland), Klaus Fraedrich (Germany),
Sabine Fuss (Germany), Anjani Ganase (Australia/Trinidad and Tobago), Jean-Pierre Gattuso (France), Peter
Greve (Austria/Germany), Tania Guillen Bolanos (Germany/Nicaragua), Naota Hanasaki (Japan), Tomoko
Hasegawa (Japan), Katie Hayes (Canada), Annette Hirsch (Switzerland/Australia), Chris Jones (UK),
Thomas Jung (Germany), Markku Kanninen (Finland), Gerhard Krinner (France), David Lawrence (USA), Tim
Lenton (UK), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Diana Liverman (USA), Natalie Mahowald (USA), Kathleen
McInnes (Australia), Katrin J. Meissner (Australia), Richard Millar (UK), Katja Mintenbeck (Germany), Dann
Mitchell (UK), Alan C. Mix (US), Dirk Notz (Germany), Leonard Nurse (Barbados), Andrew Okem (Nigeria),
Lennart Olsson (Sweden), Michael Oppenheimer (USA), Shlomit Paz (Israel), Juliane Petersen (Germany),
Jan Petzold (Germany), Swantje Preuschmann (Germany), Mohammad Feisal Rahman (Bangladesh), Joeri
Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Hanna Scheuffele (Germany), Carl-Friedrich Schleussner (Germany), Daniel
Scott (Canada), Roland Seferian (France), Jana Sillmann (Germany/Norway), Chandni Singh (India),
Raphael Slade (UK), Kimberly Stephenson (Jamaica), Tannecia Stephenson (Jamaica), Mouhamadou B.
Sylla (Senegal), Mark Tebboth (UK), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria), Robert Vautard (France), Richard
Wartenburger (Switzerland/Germany), Michael Wehner (USA), Nora M. Weyer (Germany), Felicia Whyte
(Jamaica), Gary Yohe (USA), Xuebin Zhang (Canada), Robert B. Zougmore (Burkina Faso/Mali)

Review Editors:

Jose Antonio Marengo (Brazil/Peru), Joy Pereira (Malaysia), Boris Sherstyukov (Russian Federation)

Chapter Scientist:

Tania Guillen Bolanos (Germany/Nicaragua)
This chapter should be cited as:
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., D. Jacob, M. Taylor, M. Bindi, S. Brown, I. Camilloni, A. Diedhiou, R. Djalante, K.L. Ebi, F. Engelbrecht,
J. Guiot, Y. Hijioka, S. Mehrotra, A. Payne, S.I. Seneviratne, A. Thomas, R. Warren, and G. Zhou, 2018: Impacts of 1.5C Global
Warming on Natural and Human Systems. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty
[Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock,
S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

175

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Table of Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................177
3.1

About the Chapter........................................................182

3.2



How are Risks at 1.5C and Higher Levels
of Global Warming Assessed in
this Chapter?...................................................................183

3.2.1
How are Changes in Climate and Weather

at 1.5C versus Higher Levels of Warming
 Assessed?...................................................................183
3.2.2



3.3


Global and Regional Climate
Changes and Associated Hazards.............................186

3.4.7

Human Health.............................................................240

3.4.8

Urban Areas................................................................241

3.4.9

Key Economic Sectors and Services.............................242

3.4.10


Livelihoods and Poverty, and the Changing
Structure of Communities............................................244

3.4.11

Interacting and Cascading Risks..................................245

3.4.12


Summary of Projected Risks at 1.5C and 2C
of Global Warming......................................................245

3.4.13

Synthesis of Key Elements of Risk...............................251

3.5



Avoided Impacts and Reduced Risks
at 1.5C Compared with 2C of
Global Warming.............................................................253

Global Changes in Climate..........................................186

3.5.1

Introduction................................................................253

3.3.2
Regional Temperatures on Land, Including
 Extremes.....................................................................189

3.5.2


Aggregated Avoided Impacts and Reduced
Risks at 1.5C versus 2C of Global Warming.............253

3.3.3


Regional Precipitation, Including Heavy
Precipitation and Monsoons........................................191

3.5.3


Regional Economic Benefit Analysis for
the 1.5C versus 2C Global Goals..............................258

3.3.4

Drought and Dryness...................................................196

3.5.4


Reducing Hotspots of Change for 1.5C
and 2C of Global Warming........................................258

3.5.5


Avoiding Regional Tipping Points by Achieving
More Ambitious Global Temperature Goals.................262

3.3.1

3

How are Potential Impacts on Ecosystems
Assessed at 1.5C versus Higher Levels
of Warming?...............................................................185

Cross-Chapter Box 6: Food Security.......................................238

Box 3.1: Sub-Saharan Africa: Changes in Temperature
and Precipitation Extremes.....................................................197
Box 3.2: Droughts in the Mediterranean Basin and
the Middle East.........................................................................200

Box 3.6: Economic Damages from Climate Change.............264

3.3.5

Runoff and Fluvial Flooding........................................201

3.3.6

Tropical Cyclones and Extratropical Storms.................203

3.3.7

Ocean Circulation and Temperature............................204

3.6.1

Gradual versus Overshoot in 1.5C Scenarios.............265

3.3.8

Sea Ice.........................................................................205

3.3.9

Sea Level.....................................................................206

3.6.2


Non-CO2 Implications and Projected Risks of
Mitigation Pathways...................................................265

Box 3.3: Lessons from Past Warm Climate Episodes............208
3.3.10

Ocean Chemistry.........................................................209

3.3.11

Global Synthesis..........................................................210

3.4


Observed Impacts and Projected Risks
in Natural and Human Systems.................................212

3.4.1

Introduction................................................................212

3.4.2

Freshwater Resources (Quantity and Quality)..............213

3.4.3

Terrestrial and Wetland Ecosystems............................216

3.4.4

Ocean Ecosystems.......................................................221

Box 3.4: Warm-Water (Tropical) Coral Reefs in a 1.5C
Warmer World...........................................................................229
3.4.5

176

Cross-Chapter Box 7: Land-Based Carbon Dioxide
Removal in Relation to 1.5C of Global Warming................268
3.6.3

3.7

Implications Beyond the End of the Century...............270

Knowledge Gaps............................................................272

3.7.1

Gaps in Methods and Tools.........................................272

3.7.2

Gaps in Understanding................................................272

Cross-Chapter Box 8: 1.5C Warmer Worlds..........................274

Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 3.1 What are the Impacts of 1.5C and 2C
of Warming?........................................................................282

Coastal and Low-Lying Areas, and Sea Level Rise........231

Box 3.5: Small Island Developing States (SIDS)...................234
3.4.6


3.6
Implications of Different 1.5C and 2C
 Pathways..........................................................................265

Food, Nutrition Security and Food Production
Systems (Including Fisheries and Aquaculture)............236

References ....................................................................................284

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Executive Summary
This chapter builds on findings of AR5 and assesses new scientific
evidence of changes in the climate system and the associated impacts
on natural and human systems, with a specific focus on the magnitude
and pattern of risks linked for global warming of 1.5C above
temperatures in the pre-industrial period. Chapter 3 explores observed
impacts and projected risks to a range of natural and human systems,
with a focus on how risk levels change from 1.5C to 2C of global
warming. The chapter also revisits major categories of risk (Reasons for
Concern, RFC) based on the assessment of new knowledge that has
become available since AR5.

1.5C and 2C Warmer Worlds
The global climate has changed relative to the pre-industrial
period, and there are multiple lines of evidence that these
changes have had impacts on organisms and ecosystems, as
well as on human systems and well-being (high confidence). The
increase in global mean surface temperature (GMST), which reached
0.87C in 2006-2015 relative to 1850-1900, has increased the
frequency and magnitude of impacts (high confidence), strengthening
evidence of how an increase in GMST of 1.5C or more could impact
natural and human systems (1.5C versus 2C). {3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6,
Cross-Chapter Boxes 6, 7 and 8 in this chapter}
Human-induced global warming has already caused multiple
observed changes in the climate system (high confidence).
Changes include increases in both land and ocean temperatures, as well
as more frequent heatwaves in most land regions (high confidence).
There is also high confidence that global warming has resulted in an
increase in the frequency and duration of marine heatwaves. Further,
there is substantial evidence that human-induced global warming has
led to an increase in the frequency, intensity and/or amount of heavy
precipitation events at the global scale (medium confidence), as well
as an increased risk of drought in the Mediterranean region (medium
confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, Box 3.4}
Trends in intensity and frequency of some climate and weather
extremes have been detected over time spans during which
about 0.5C of global warming occurred (medium confidence).
This assessment is based on several lines of evidence, including
attribution studies for changes in extremes since 1950. {3.2, 3.3.1,
3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4}
Several regional changes in climate are assessed to occur with
global warming up to 1.5C as compared to pre-industrial
levels, including warming of extreme temperatures in many
regions (high confidence), increases in frequency, intensity and/or
amount of heavy precipitation in several regions (high confidence),
and an increase in intensity or frequency of droughts in some regions
(medium confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, Table 3.2}

Chapter 3

There is no single `1.5C warmer world' (high confidence). In
addition to the overall increase in GMST, it is important to consider the
size and duration of potential overshoots in temperature. Furthermore,
there are questions on how the stabilization of an increase in GMST of
1.5C can be achieved, and how policies might be able to influence the
resilience of human and natural systems, and the nature of regional
and subregional risks. Overshooting poses large risks for natural and
human systems, especially if the temperature at peak warming is
high, because some risks may be long-lasting and irreversible, such
as the loss of some ecosystems (high confidence). The rate of change
for several types of risks may also have relevance, with potentially
large risks in the case of a rapid rise to overshooting temperatures,
even if a decrease to 1.5C can be achieved at the end of the 21st
century or later (medium confidence). If overshoot is to be minimized,
the remaining equivalent CO2 budget available for emissions is very
small, which implies that large, immediate and unprecedented global
efforts to mitigate greenhouse gases are required (high confidence).
{3.2, 3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter}
Robust1 global differences in temperature means and extremes
are expected if global warming reaches 1.5C versus 2C above
the pre-industrial levels (high confidence). For oceans, regional
surface temperature means and extremes are projected to be higher
at 2C compared to 1.5C of global warming (high confidence).
Temperature means and extremes are also projected to be higher at
2C compared to 1.5C in most land regions, with increases being
2-3 times greater than the increase in GMST projected for some
regions (high confidence). Robust increases in temperature means and
extremes are also projected at 1.5C compared to present-day values
(high confidence) {3.3.1, 3.3.2}. There are decreases in the occurrence
of cold extremes, but substantial increases in their temperature, in
particular in regions with snow or ice cover (high confidence) {3.3.1}.
Climate models project robust1 differences in regional climate
between present-day and global warming up to 1.5C2, and
between 1.5C and 2C2 (high confidence), depending on the
variable and region in question (high confidence). Large, robust
and widespread differences are expected for temperature
extremes (high confidence). Regarding hot extremes, the strongest
warming is expected to occur at mid-latitudes in the warm season (with
increases of up to 3C for 1.5C of global warming, i.e., a factor of two)
and at high latitudes in the cold season (with increases of up to 4.5C
at 1.5C of global warming, i.e., a factor of three) (high confidence).
The strongest warming of hot extremes is projected to occur in
central and eastern North America, central and southern Europe, the
Mediterranean region (including southern Europe, northern Africa and
the Near East), western and central Asia, and southern Africa (medium
confidence). The number of exceptionally hot days are expected to
increase the most in the tropics, where interannual temperature
variability is lowest; extreme heatwaves are thus projected to emerge
earliest in these regions, and they are expected to already become
widespread there at 1.5C global warming (high confidence). Limiting
global warming to 1.5C instead of 2C could result in around 420

1

Robust is used here to mean that at least two thirds of climate models show the same sign of changes at the grid point scale, and that differences in large regions are
statistically significant.

2

Projected changes in impacts between different levels of global warming are determined with respect to changes in global mean near-surface air temperature.

177

3

Chapter 3

million fewer people being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves,
and about 65 million fewer people being exposed to exceptional
heatwaves, assuming constant vulnerability (medium confidence).
{3.3.1, 3.3.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter}
Limiting global warming to 1.5C would limit risks of increases
in heavy precipitation events on a global scale and in several
regions compared to conditions at 2C global warming
(medium confidence). The regions with the largest increases in heavy
precipitation events for 1.5C to 2C global warming include: several
high-latitude regions (e.g. Alaska/western Canada, eastern Canada/
Greenland/Iceland, northern Europe and northern Asia); mountainous
regions (e.g., Tibetan Plateau); eastern Asia (including China and Japan);
and eastern North America (medium confidence). Tropical cyclones are
projected to decrease in frequency but with an increase in the number
of very intense cyclones (limited evidence, low confidence). Heavy
precipitation associated with tropical cyclones is projected to be higher
at 2C compared to 1.5C of global warming (medium confidence).
Heavy precipitation, when aggregated at a global scale, is projected to
be higher at 2C than at 1.5C of global warming (medium confidence)
{3.3.3, 3.3.6}

3

Limiting global warming to 1.5C is expected to substantially
reduce the probability of extreme drought, precipitation deficits,
and risks associated with water availability (i.e., water stress) in
some regions (medium confidence). In particular, risks associated
with increases in drought frequency and magnitude are projected to be
substantially larger at 2C than at 1.5C in the Mediterranean region
(including southern Europe, northern Africa and the Near East) and
southern Africa (medium confidence). {3.3.3, 3.3.4, Box 3.1, Box 3.2}
Risks to natural and human systems are expected to be lower
at 1.5C than at 2C of global warming (high confidence). This
difference is due to the smaller rates and magnitudes of climate
change associated with a 1.5C temperature increase, including lower
frequencies and intensities of temperature-related extremes. Lower
rates of change enhance the ability of natural and human systems
to adapt, with substantial benefits for a wide range of terrestrial,
freshwater, wetland, coastal and ocean ecosystems (including coral
reefs) (high confidence), as well as food production systems, human
health, and tourism (medium confidence), together with energy
systems and transportation (low confidence). {3.3.1, 3.4}
Exposure to multiple and compound climate-related risks is
projected to increase between 1.5C and 2C of global warming
with greater proportions of people both exposed and susceptible to
poverty in Africa and Asia (high confidence). For global warming from
1.5C to 2C, risks across energy, food, and water sectors could overlap
spatially and temporally, creating new - and exacerbating current -
hazards, exposures, and vulnerabilities that could affect increasing
numbers of people and regions (medium confidence). Small island
states and economically disadvantaged populations are particularly at
risk (high confidence). {3.3.1, 3.4.5.3, 3.4.5.6, 3.4.11, 3.5.4.9, Box 3.5}

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Global warming of 2C would lead to an expansion of areas with
significant increases in runoff, as well as those affected by flood
hazard, compared to conditions at 1.5C (medium confidence).
Global warming of 1.5C would also lead to an expansion of the global
land area with significant increases in runoff (medium confidence) and
an increase in flood hazard in some regions (medium confidence)
compared to present-day conditions. {3.3.5}
The probability of a sea-ice-free Arctic Ocean3 during summer
is substantially higher at 2C compared to 1.5C of global
warming (medium confidence). Model simulations suggest that
at least one sea-ice-free Arctic summer is expected every 10 years
for global warming of 2C, with the frequency decreasing to one
sea-ice-free Arctic summer every 100 years under 1.5C (medium
confidence). An intermediate temperature overshoot will have no longterm consequences for Arctic sea ice coverage, and hysteresis is not
expected (high confidence). {3.3.8, 3.4.4.7}
Global mean sea level rise (GMSLR) is projected to be around
0.1 m (0.04 - 0.16 m) less by the end of the 21st century in a
1.5C warmer world compared to a 2C warmer world (medium
confidence). Projected GMSLR for 1.5C of global warming has an
indicative range of 0.26 - 0.77m, relative to 1986-2005, (medium
confidence). A smaller sea level rise could mean that up to 10.4 million
fewer people (based on the 2010 global population and assuming no
adaptation) would be exposed to the impacts of sea level rise globally
in 2100 at 1.5C compared to at 2C. A slower rate of sea level rise
enables greater opportunities for adaptation (medium confidence).
There is high confidence that sea level rise will continue beyond 2100.
Instabilities exist for both the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, which
could result in multi-meter rises in sea level on time scales of century
to millennia. There is medium confidence that these instabilities could
be triggered at around 1.5C to 2C of global warming. {3.3.9, 3.4.5,
3.6.3}
The ocean has absorbed about 30% of the anthropogenic
carbon dioxide, resulting in ocean acidification and changes to
carbonate chemistry that are unprecedented for at least the
last 65 million years (high confidence). Risks have been identified
for the survival, calcification, growth, development and abundance of
a broad range of marine taxonomic groups, ranging from algae to fish,
with substantial evidence of predictable trait-based sensitivities (high
confidence). There are multiple lines of evidence that ocean warming
and acidification corresponding to 1.5C of global warming would
impact a wide range of marine organisms and ecosystems, as well as
sectors such as aquaculture and fisheries (high confidence). {3.3.10,
3.4.4}
Larger risks are expected for many regions and systems for
global warming at 1.5C, as compared to today, with adaptation
required now and up to 1.5C. However, risks would be larger at 2C of
warming and an even greater effort would be needed for adaptation to
a temperature increase of that magnitude (high confidence). {3.4, Box
3.4, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter}

Ice free is defined for the Special Report as when the sea ice extent is less than 106 km2. Ice coverage less than this is considered to be equivalent to an ice-free Arctic Ocean
for practical purposes in all recent studies.

178

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Future risks at 1.5C of global warming will depend on the
mitigation pathway and on the possible occurrence of a
transient overshoot (high confidence). The impacts on natural
and human systems would be greater if mitigation pathways
temporarily overshoot 1.5C and return to 1.5C later in the century,
as compared to pathways that stabilize at 1.5C without an overshoot
(high confidence). The size and duration of an overshoot would also
affect future impacts (e.g., irreversible loss of some ecosystems) (high
confidence). Changes in land use resulting from mitigation choices
could have impacts on food production and ecosystem diversity. {3.6.1,
3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Boxes 7 and 8 in this chapter}

Climate Change Risks for Natural and Human systems
Terrestrial and Wetland Ecosystems

Chapter 3

Ocean Ecosystems
Ocean ecosystems are already experiencing large-scale
changes, and critical thresholds are expected to be reached at
1.5C and higher levels of global warming (high confidence).
In the transition to 1.5C of warming, changes to water temperatures
are expected to drive some species (e.g., plankton, fish) to relocate
to higher latitudes and cause novel ecosystems to assemble (high
confidence). Other ecosystems (e.g., kelp forests, coral reefs) are
relatively less able to move, however, and are projected to experience
high rates of mortality and loss (very high confidence). For example,
multiple lines of evidence indicate that the majority (70-90%) of
warm water (tropical) coral reefs that exist today will disappear even
if global warming is constrained to 1.5C (very high confidence).
{3.4.4, Box 3.4}

Risks of local species losses and, consequently, risks of
extinction are much less in a 1.5C versus a 2C warmer world
(high confidence). The number of species projected to lose over
half of their climatically determined geographic range at 2C global
warming (18% of insects, 16% of plants, 8% of vertebrates) is
projected to be reduced to 6% of insects, 8% of plants and 4% of
vertebrates at 1.5C warming (medium confidence). Risks associated
with other biodiversity-related factors, such as forest fires, extreme
weather events, and the spread of invasive species, pests and
diseases, would also be lower at 1.5C than at 2C of warming (high
confidence), supporting a greater persistence of ecosystem services.
{3.4.3, 3.5.2}

Current ecosystem services from the ocean are expected to be
reduced at 1.5C of global warming, with losses being even
greater at 2C of global warming (high confidence). The risks
of declining ocean productivity, shifts of species to higher latitudes,
damage to ecosystems (e.g., coral reefs, and mangroves, seagrass
and other wetland ecosystems), loss of fisheries productivity (at
low latitudes), and changes to ocean chemistry (e.g., acidification,
hypoxia and dead zones) are projected to be substantially lower
when global warming is limited to 1.5C (high confidence). {3.4.4,
Box 3.4}

Constraining global warming to 1.5C, rather than to 2C
and higher, is projected to have many benefits for terrestrial
and wetland ecosystems and for the preservation of their
services to humans (high confidence). Risks for natural and
managed ecosystems are higher on drylands compared to humid
lands. The global terrestrial land area projected to be affected by
ecosystem transformations (13%, interquartile range 8-20%) at 2C
is approximately halved at 1.5C global warming to 4% (interquartile
range 2-7%) (medium confidence). Above 1.5C, an expansion of
desert terrain and vegetation would occur in the Mediterranean
biome (medium confidence), causing changes unparalleled in the last
10,000 years (medium confidence). {3.3.2.2, 3.4.3.2, 3.4.3.5, 3.4.6.1,
3.5.5.10, Box 4.2}

The projected frequency and magnitude of floods and droughts
in some regions are smaller under 1.5C than under 2C of
warming (medium confidence). Human exposure to increased
flooding is projected to be substantially lower at 1.5C compared to
2C of global warming, although projected changes create regionally
differentiated risks (medium confidence). The differences in the risks
among regions are strongly influenced by local socio-economic
conditions (medium confidence). {3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.4.2}

Many impacts are projected to be larger at higher latitudes,
owing to mean and cold-season warming rates above the
global average (medium confidence). High-latitude tundra and
boreal forest are particularly at risk, and woody shrubs are already
encroaching into tundra (high confidence) and will proceed with
further warming. Constraining warming to 1.5C would prevent the
thawing of an estimated permafrost area of 1.5 to 2.5 million km2
over centuries compared to thawing under 2C (medium confidence).
{3.3.2, 3.4.3, 3.4.4}

Water Resources

Risks of water scarcity are projected to be greater at 2C than at
1.5C of global warming in some regions (medium confidence).
Depending on future socio-economic conditions, limiting global
warming to 1.5C, compared to 2C, may reduce the proportion of
the world population exposed to a climate change-induced increase
in water stress by up to 50%, although there is considerable variability
between regions (medium confidence). Regions with particularly
large benefits could include the Mediterranean and the Caribbean
(medium confidence). Socio-economic drivers, however, are expected
to have a greater influence on these risks than the changes in climate
(medium confidence). {3.3.5, 3.4.2, Box 3.5}
Land Use, Food Security and Food Production Systems
Limiting global warming to 1.5C, compared with 2C, is
projected to result in smaller net reductions in yields of maize,
rice, wheat, and potentially other cereal crops, particularly in

179

3

Chapter 3

sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and Central and South America;
and in the CO2-dependent nutritional quality of rice and wheat
(high confidence). A loss of 7-10% of rangeland livestock globally
is projected for approximately 2C of warming, with considerable
economic consequences for many communities and regions (medium
confidence). {3.4.6, 3.6, Box 3.1, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter}
Reductions in projected food availability are larger at 2C
than at 1.5C of global warming in the Sahel, southern Africa,
the Mediterranean, central Europe and the Amazon (medium
confidence). This suggests a transition from medium to high risk of
regionally differentiated impacts on food security between 1.5C and
2C (medium confidence). Future economic and trade environments
and their response to changing food availability (medium confidence)
are important potential adaptation options for reducing hunger risk
in low- and middle-income countries. {Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this
chapter}

3

Fisheries and aquaculture are important to global food security
but are already facing increasing risks from ocean warming
and acidification (medium confidence). These risks are
projected to increase at 1.5C of global warming and impact
key organisms such as fin fish and bivalves (e.g., oysters),
especially at low latitudes (medium confidence). Small-scale
fisheries in tropical regions, which are very dependent on habitat
provided by coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs, mangroves,
seagrass and kelp forests, are expected to face growing risks at 1.5C
of warming because of loss of habitat (medium confidence). Risks
of impacts and decreasing food security are projected to become
greater as global warming reaches beyond 1.5C and both ocean
warming and acidification increase, with substantial losses likely for
coastal livelihoods and industries (e.g., fisheries and aquaculture)
(medium to high confidence). {3.4.4, 3.4.5, 3.4.6, Box 3.1, Box 3.4,
Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter}
Land use and land-use change emerge as critical features of
virtually all mitigation pathways that seek to limit global
warming to 1.5C (high confidence). Most least-cost mitigation
pathways to limit peak or end-of-century warming to 1.5C make
use of carbon dioxide removal (CDR), predominantly employing
significant levels of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage
(BECCS) and/or afforestation and reforestation (AR) in their portfolio
of mitigation measures (high confidence). {Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
this chapter}
Large-scale deployment of BECCS and/or AR would have
a far-reaching land and water footprint (high confidence).
Whether this footprint would result in adverse impacts, for example
on biodiversity or food production, depends on the existence and
effectiveness of measures to conserve land carbon stocks, measures
to limit agricultural expansion in order to protect natural ecosystems,
and the potential to increase agricultural productivity (medium
agreement). In addition, BECCS and/or AR would have substantial
direct effects on regional climate through biophysical feedbacks,
which are generally not included in Integrated Assessments Models
(high confidence). {3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Boxes 7 and 8 in this chapter}

180

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

The impacts of large-scale CDR deployment could be greatly
reduced if a wider portfolio of CDR options were deployed, if a
holistic policy for sustainable land management were adopted,
and if increased mitigation efforts were employed to strongly
limit the demand for land, energy and material resources,
including through lifestyle and dietary changes (medium
confidence). In particular, reforestation could be associated with
significant co-benefits if implemented in a manner than helps restore
natural ecosystems (high confidence). {Cross-Chapter Box 7 in this
chapter}
Human Health, Well-Being, Cities and Poverty
Any increase in global temperature (e.g., +0.5C) is projected
to affect human health, with primarily negative consequences
(high confidence). Lower risks are projected at 1.5C than at 2C
for heat-related morbidity and mortality (very high confidence), and
for ozone-related mortality if emissions needed for ozone formation
remain high (high confidence). Urban heat islands often amplify the
impacts of heatwaves in cities (high confidence). Risks for some
vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and dengue fever are projected
to increase with warming from 1.5C to 2C, including potential
shifts in their geographic range (high confidence). Overall for vectorborne diseases, whether projections are positive or negative depends
on the disease, region and extent of change (high confidence). Lower
risks of undernutrition are projected at 1.5C than at 2C (medium
confidence). Incorporating estimates of adaptation into projections
reduces the magnitude of risks (high confidence). {3.4.7, 3.4.7.1,
3.4.8, 3.5.5.8}
Global warming of 2C is expected to pose greater risks to urban
areas than global warming of 1.5C (medium confidence). The
extent of risk depends on human vulnerability and the effectiveness
of adaptation for regions (coastal and non-coastal), informal
settlements and infrastructure sectors (such as energy, water and
transport) (high confidence). {3.4.5, 3.4.8}
Poverty and disadvantage have increased with recent warming
(about 1C) and are expected to increase for many populations
as average global temperatures increase from 1C to 1.5C
and higher (medium confidence). Outmigration in agriculturaldependent communities is positively and statistically significantly
associated with global temperature (medium confidence). Our
understanding of the links of 1.5C and 2C of global warming to
human migration are limited and represent an important knowledge
gap. {3.4.10, 3.4.11, 5.2.2, Table 3.5}
Key Economic Sectors and Services
Risks to global aggregated economic growth due to climate
change impacts are projected to be lower at 1.5C than at 2C
by the end of this century (medium confidence). {3.5.2, 3.5.3}
The largest reductions in economic growth at 2C compared
to 1.5C of warming are projected for low- and middle-income
countries and regions (the African continent, Southeast Asia,
India, Brazil and Mexico) (low to medium confidence). Countries

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

in the tropics and Southern Hemisphere subtropics are projected to
experience the largest impacts on economic growth due to climate
change should global warming increase from 1.5C to 2C (medium
confidence). {3.5}
Global warming has already affected tourism, with increased
risks projected under 1.5C of warming in specific geographic
regions and for seasonal tourism including sun, beach and
snow sports destinations (very high confidence). Risks will be
lower for tourism markets that are less climate sensitive, such as
gaming and large hotel-based activities (high confidence). Risks for
coastal tourism, particularly in subtropical and tropical regions, will
increase with temperature-related degradation (e.g., heat extremes,
storms) or loss of beach and coral reef assets (high confidence).
{3.3.6, 3.4.4.12, 3.4.9.1, Box 3.4}

Chapter 3

Increased Reasons for Concern
There are multiple lines of evidence that since AR5 the assessed
levels of risk increased for four of the five Reasons for Concern
(RFCs) for global warming levels of up to 2C (high confidence).
The risk transitions by degrees of global warming are now: from high
to very high between 1.5C and 2C for RFC1 (Unique and threatened
systems) (high confidence); from moderate to high risk between 1C and
1.5C for RFC2 (Extreme weather events) (medium confidence); from
moderate to high risk between 1.5C and 2C for RFC3 (Distribution of
impacts) (high confidence); from moderate to high risk between 1.5C
and 2.5C for RFC4 (Global aggregate impacts) (medium confidence);
and from moderate to high risk between 1C and 2.5C for RFC5
(Large-scale singular events) (medium confidence). {3.5.2}
1.

The category `Unique and threatened systems' (RFC1)
display a transition from high to very high risk which is
now located between 1.5C and 2C of global warming as
opposed to at 2.6C of global warming in AR5, owing to new and
multiple lines of evidence for changing risks for coral reefs, the
Arctic and biodiversity in general (high confidence). {3.5.2.1}

2.

In `Extreme weather events' (RFC2), the transition from
moderate to high risk is now located between 1.0C and
1.5C of global warming, which is very similar to the AR5
assessment but is projected with greater confidence (medium
confidence). The impact literature contains little information
about the potential for human society to adapt to extreme
weather events, and hence it has not been possible to locate
the transition from `high' to `very high' risk within the context of
assessing impacts at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming. There
is thus low confidence in the level at which global warming could
lead to very high risks associated with extreme weather events in
the context of this report. {3.5}

3.

With respect to the `Distribution of impacts' (RFC3) a
transition from moderate to high risk is now located
between 1.5C and 2C of global warming, compared with
between 1.6C and 2.6C global warming in AR5, owing to new
evidence about regionally differentiated risks to food security,
water resources, drought, heat exposure and coastal submergence
(high confidence). {3.5}

4.

In `global aggregate impacts' (RFC4) a transition from
moderate to high levels of risk is now located between
1.5C and 2.5C of global warming, as opposed to at 3.6C of
warming in AR5, owing to new evidence about global aggregate
economic impacts and risks to Earth's biodiversity (medium
confidence). {3.5}

5.

Finally, `large-scale singular events' (RFC5), moderate risk
is now located at 1C of global warming and high risk is
located at 2.5C of global warming, as opposed to at 1.6C
(moderate risk) and around 4C (high risk) in AR5, because of new
observations and models of the West Antarctic ice sheet (medium
confidence). {3.3.9, 3.5.2, 3.6.3}

Small Islands, and Coastal and Low-lying areas
Small islands are projected to experience multiple interrelated risks at 1.5C of global warming that will increase with
warming of 2C and higher levels (high confidence). Climate
hazards at 1.5C are projected to be lower compared to those at 2C
(high confidence). Long-term risks of coastal flooding and impacts on
populations, infrastructures and assets (high confidence), freshwater
stress (medium confidence), and risks across marine ecosystems (high
confidence) and critical sectors (medium confidence) are projected to
increase at 1.5C compared to present-day levels and increase further
at 2C, limiting adaptation opportunities and increasing loss and
damage (medium confidence). Migration in small islands (internally
and internationally) occurs for multiple reasons and purposes, mostly
for better livelihood opportunities (high confidence) and increasingly
owing to sea level rise (medium confidence). {3.3.2.2, 3.3.6-9,
3.4.3.2, 3.4.4.2, 3.4.4.5, 3.4.4.12, 3.4.5.3, 3.4.7.1, 3.4.9.1, 3.5.4.9,
Box 3.4, Box 3.5}
Impacts associated with sea level rise and changes to the
salinity of coastal groundwater, increased flooding and
damage to infrastructure, are projected to be critically
important in vulnerable environments, such as small islands,
low-lying coasts and deltas, at global warming of 1.5C and
2C (high confidence). Localized subsidence and changes to river
discharge can potentially exacerbate these effects. Adaptation is
already happening (high confidence) and will remain important over
multi-centennial time scales. {3.4.5.3, 3.4.5.4, 3.4.5.7, 5.4.5.4, Box
3.5}
Existing and restored natural coastal ecosystems may be
effective in reducing the adverse impacts of rising sea levels
and intensifying storms by protecting coastal and deltaic
regions (medium confidence). Natural sedimentation rates are
expected to be able to offset the effect of rising sea levels, given
the slower rates of sea level rise associated with 1.5C of warming
(medium confidence). Other feedbacks, such as landward migration
of wetlands and the adaptation of infrastructure, remain important
(medium confidence). {3.4.4.12, 3.4.5.4, 3.4.5.7}

181

3

Chapter 3

About the Chapter

Chapter 3 uses relevant definitions of a potential 1.5C warmer world
from Chapters 1 and 2 and builds directly on their assessment of gradual
versus overshoot scenarios. It interacts with information presented in
Chapter 2 via the provision of specific details relating to the mitigation
pathways (e.g., land-use changes) and their implications for impacts.
Chapter 3 also includes information needed for the assessment and
implementation of adaptation options (presented in Chapter 4), as
well as the context for considering the interactions of climate change
with sustainable development and for the assessment of impacts on
sustainability, poverty and inequalities at the household to subregional
level (presented in Chapter 5).

This chapter is necessarily transdisciplinary in its coverage of the
climate system, natural and managed ecosystems, and human
systems and responses, owing to the integrated nature of the natural
and human experience. While climate change is acknowledged as a
centrally important driver, it is not the only driver of risks to human and
natural systems, and in many cases, it is the interaction between these
two broad categories of risk that is important (Chapter 1).
The flow of the chapter, linkages between sections, a list of chapterand cross-chapter boxes, and a content guide for reading according
to focus or interest are given in Figure 3.1. Key definitions used in the
chapter are collected in the Glossary. Confidence language is used
throughout this chapter and likelihood statements (e.g., likely, very
likely) are provided when there is high confidence in the assessment.

Section 3.1
Introduction

Section 3.2
Assessing 1.5C

3

Global and Regional Temperature
3.3.1 | 3.3.2 | 3.3.4 | Box 3.3 | 3.3.11

Drought
3.3.4 | Box 3.2 | 3.4.2 | 3.3.11

Floods
3.3.5 | 3.4.2 | 3.4.5 | 3.3.11

Extreme Weather
3.3.2 | 3.3.3 | 3.3.4 | 3.3.6 | 3.3.11 |
3.4.4 | 3.5.2

Snow, Permafrost and Sea Ice
3.3.8 | 3.4.4 | 3.5.4 | 3.5.5 | 3.6.3 |
3.3.11

Section 3.4
Observed Impacts and
Projected Risks in Natural
and Human Systems

Section 3.3
Global and Regional
Climate Changes and
Associated Hazards

Quick Guide

Chapter Structure

Sea Level
3.3.9 | 3.4.4 | 3.4.5 | 3.4.12 | 3.5.2 |
3.6.3

Section 3.5
Avoided Impacts and
Reduced Risks

Section 3.6
Implications of Different
1.5C and 2C Pathways

Ecosystems
3.4.3 | 3.4.4 | 3.4.5 | 3.4.12 | Box
3.4 | 3.5.2 | 3.5.5

Food Security
3.4.6 | 3.4.12 | 3.5.5 | 3.6.2 | X-Box 6 |
X-Box 7

Freshwater
3.4.2 | 3.4.12

Oceans
3.3.7 | 3.3.10 | 3.3.11 | 3.4.4 | 3.4.12

Regional Outlooks
3.3.2 | 3.3.3 | 3.4.3 | Box 3.1 | Box
3.2 | 3.4.5 | Box 3.5 | 3.5.4 | 3.5.5 |
3.3.11

Coastal and Low Lying Areas
3.3.5 | 3.4.5 | Box 3.5 | 3.5.4 | 3.4.12

Cities
3.4.5 | 3.4.8 | 3.4.9

Section 3.7
Knowledge Gaps

Chapter
Boxes

Global and Reg
Regional
Precipitation
3.3.1 | 3.3.3 | 3.3.4 | 3.3.11

Health
3.4.7 | 3.4.12 | 3.5.5

Key Economic Sectors and Services
3.4.9 | 3.4.12

Livelihoods
s and
d Poverty
3.4.6 | 3.4.10

RFCs, Hot Spots and Tipping Points
3.4.12 | 3.4.13 | 3.5.2 | 3.5.4 | 3.5.5

Box 3.1

Box 3.2

Box 3.3

Box 3.4

Box 3.5

Box 3.6

SubSaharan
Africa

Droughts in the
Mediterranean
Basin and the
Middle East

Lessons from
Past Warm
Climate
Episodes

Warm Water
Coral Reefs in
a 1.5C
Warmer World

Small Island
Developing
States (SIDS)

Economic
Damage from
Climate Change

Cross Chapter
Boxes

3.1

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

X-Box 6

X-Box 7

X-Box 8

Food
Security

Land-Based Carbon
Dioxide Removal in
Relation to 1.5C of
Global Warming

1.5C
Warmer
Worlds

Figure 3.1 | Chapter 3 structure and quick guide.

The underlying literature assessed in Chapter 3 is broad and includes a
large number of recent publications specific to assessments for 1.5C
of warming. The chapter also utilizes information covered in prior
IPCC special reports, for example the Special Report on Managing the
Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change
Adaptation (SREX; IPCC, 2012), and many chapters from the IPCC
WGII Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) that assess impacts on natural
and managed ecosystems and humans, as well as adaptation options
(IPCC, 2014b). For this reason, the chapter provides information based
182

on a broad range of assessment methods. Details about the approaches
used are presented in Section 3.2.
Section 3.3 gives a general overview of recent literature on observed
climate change impacts as the context for projected future risks. With
a few exceptions, the focus here is the analysis of transient responses
at 1.5C and 2C of global warming, with simulations of short-term
stabilization scenarios (Section 3.2) also assessed in some cases. In
general, long-term equilibrium stabilization responses could not be

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

assessed owing to a lack of data and analysis. A detailed analysis of
detection and attribution is not provided but will be the focus of the next
IPCC assessment report (AR6). Furthermore, possible interventions in
the climate system through radiation modification measures, which are
not tied to reductions of greenhouse gas emissions or concentrations,
are not assessed in this chapter.
Understanding the observed impacts and projected risks of climate
change is crucial to comprehending how the world is likely to change
under global warming of 1.5C above temperatures in the pre-industrial
period (with reference to 2C). Section 3.4 explores the new literature
and updates the assessment of impacts and projected risks for a large
number of natural and human systems. By also exploring adaptation
opportunities, where the literature allows, the section prepares the
reader for discussions in subsequent chapters about opportunities to
tackle both mitigation and adaptation. The section is mostly globally
focused because of limited research on regional risks and adaptation
options at 1.5C and 2C. For example, the risks of 1.5C and 2C of
warming in urban areas, as well as the risks of health outcomes under
these two warming scenarios (e.g. climate-related diseases, air quality
impacts and mental health problems), were not considered because
of a lack of projections of how these risks might change in a 1.5C or
2C warmer world. In addition, the complexity of many interactions
of climate change with drivers of poverty, along with a paucity of
relevant studies, meant it was not possible to detect and attribute
many dimensions of poverty and disadvantage to climate change. Even
though there is increasing documentation of climate-related impacts on
places where indigenous people live and where subsistence-oriented
communities are found, relevant projections of the risks associated
with warming of 1.5C and 2C are necessarily limited.
To explore avoided impacts and reduced risks at 1.5C compared with
at 2C of global warming, the chapter adopts the AR5 `Reasons for
Concern' aggregated projected risk framework (Section 3.5). Updates
in terms of the aggregation of risks are informed by the most recent
literature and the assessments offered in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, with
a focus on the impacts at 2C of warming that could potentially be
avoided if warming were constrained to 1.5C. Economic benefits that
would be obtained (Section 3.5.3), climate change `hotspots' that could
be avoided or reduced (Section 3.5.4 as guided by the assessments of
Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5), and tipping points that could be circumvented
(Section 3.5.5) at 1.5C compared to higher degrees of global warming
are all examined. The latter assessments are, however, constrained to
regional analyses, and hence this particular section does not include an
assessment of specific losses and damages.
Section 3.6 provides an overview on specific aspects of the mitigation
pathways considered compatible with 1.5C of global warming,
including some scenarios involving temperature overshoot above
1.5C global warming during the 21st century. Non-CO2 implications
and projected risks of mitigation pathways, such as changes to land
use and atmospheric compounds, are presented and explored. Finally,
implications for sea ice, sea level and permafrost beyond the end of the
century are assessed.
The exhaustive assessment of literature specific to global warming
of 1.5C above the pre-industrial period, presented across all the

Chapter 3

sections in Chapter 3, highlights knowledge gaps resulting from the
heterogeneous information available across systems, regions and
sectors. Some of these gaps are described in Section 3.7.

3.2

How are Risks at 1.5C and
Higher Levels of Global Warming
Assessed in this Chapter?

The methods that are applied for assessing observed and projected
changes in climate and weather are presented in Section 3.2.1, while
those used for assessing the observed impacts on and projected risks to
natural and managed systems, and to human settlements, are described
in Section 3.2.2. Given that changes in climate associated with 1.5C
of global warming were not the focus of past IPCC reports, dedicated
approaches based on recent literature that are specific to the present
report are also described. Background on specific methodological
aspects (climate model simulations available for assessments at 1.5C
global warming, attribution of observed changes in climate and their
relevance for assessing projected changes at 1.5C and 2C global
warming, and the propagation of uncertainties from climate forcing
to impacts on ecosystems) are provided in the Supplementary Material
3.SM.

3.2.1

How are Changes in Climate and Weather at 1.5C
versus Higher Levels of Warming Assessed?

Evidence for the assessment of changes to climate at 1.5C versus
2C can be drawn both from observations and model projections.
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) anomalies were about
+0.87C (0.10C likely range) above pre-industrial industrial (1850-
1900) values in the 2006--2015 decade, with a recent warming
of about 0.2C (0.10C) per decade (Chapter 1). Human-induced
global warming reached approximately 1C (0.2C likely range) in
2017 (Chapter 1). While some of the observed trends may be due
to internal climate variability, methods of detection and attribution
can be applied to assess which part of the observed changes may be
attributed to anthropogenic forcing (Bindoff et al., 2013b). Hence,
evidence from attribution studies can be used to assess changes
in the climate system that are already detectable at lower levels of
global warming and would thus continue to change with a further
0.5C or 1C of global warming (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.1
and Sections 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4 and 3.3.11). A recent study
identified significant changes in extremes for a 0.5C difference in
global warming based on the historical record (Schleussner et al.,
2017). It should also be noted that attributed changes in extremes
since 1950 that were reported in the IPCC AR5 report (IPCC, 2013)
generally correspond to changes in global warming of about 0.5C
(see 3.SM.1)
Climate model simulations are necessary for the investigation of
the response of the climate system to various forcings, in particular
to forcings associated with higher levels of greenhouse gas
concentrations. Model simulations include experiments with global
and regional climate models, as well as impact models - driven with
output from climate models - to evaluate the risk related to climate
183

3

Chapter 3

change for natural and human systems (Supplementary Material
3.SM.1). Climate model simulations were generally used in the context
of particular `climate scenarios' from previous IPCC reports (e.g.,
IPCC, 2007, 2013). This means that emissions scenarios (IPCC, 2000)
were used to drive climate models, providing different projections
for given emissions pathways. The results were consequently used in
a `storyline' framework, which presents the development of climate
in the course of the 21st century and beyond for a given emissions
pathway. Results were assessed for different time slices within the
model projections such as 2016-2035 (`near term', which is slightly
below a global warming of 1.5C according to most scenarios, Kirtman
et al., 2013), 2046-2065 (mid-21st century, Collins et al., 2013), and
2081-2100 (end of 21st century, Collins et al., 2013). Given that this
report focuses on climate change for a given mean global temperature
response (1.5C or 2C), methods of analysis had to be developed and/
or adapted from previous studies in order to provide assessments for
the specific purposes here.

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

C.

Most of the `1.5C scenarios', and some of the `2C emissions
scenarios' presented in Chapter 2 include a temperature
overshoot during the course of the 21st century. This means that
median temperature projections under these scenarios exceed
the target warming levels over the course of the century (typically
0.5C-1C higher than the respective target levels at most),
before warming returns to below 1.5C or 2C by 2100. During
the overshoot phase, impacts would therefore correspond to
higher transient temperature increases than 1.5C or 2C. For this
reason, impacts of transient responses at these higher warming
levels are also partly addressed in Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this
chapter (on a 1.5C warmer world), and some analyses for
changes in extremes are also presented for higher levels of
warming in Section 3.3 (Figures 3.5, 3.6, 3.9, 3.10, 3.12 and 3.13).
Most importantly, different overshoot scenarios may have very
distinct impacts depending on (i) the peak temperature of
the overshoot, (ii) the length of the overshoot period, and (iii) the
associated rate of change in global temperature over the
time period of the overshoot. While some of these issues are
briefly addressed in Sections 3.3 and 3.6, and in the Cross-Chapter
Box 8, the definition of overshoot and related questions will need
to be more comprehensively addressed in the IPCC AR6 report.

D.

The levels of global warming that are the focus of this report
(1.5C and 2C) are measured relative to the pre-industrial period.
This definition requires an agreement on the exact reference time
period (for 0C of warming) and the time frame over which the
global warming is assessed, typically 20 to 30 years in length. As
discussed in Chapter 1, a climate with 1.5C global warming is
one in which temperatures averaged over a multi-decade time
scale are 1.5C above those in the pre-industrial reference period.
Greater detail is provided in Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter.
Inherent to this is the observation that the mean temperature of
a `1.5C warmer world' can be regionally and temporally much
higher (e.g., with regional annual temperature extremes involving
warming of more than 6C; see Section 3.3 and Cross-Chapter
Box 8 in this chapter).

E.

The interference of factors unrelated to greenhouse gases with
mitigation pathways can strongly affect regional climate. For
example, biophysical feedbacks from changes in land use and
irrigation (e.g., Hirsch et al., 2017; Thiery et al., 2017), or projected
changes in short-lived pollutants (e.g., Z. Wang et al., 2017), can
have large influences on local temperatures and climate
conditions. While these effects are not explicitly integrated into the
scenarios developed in Chapter 2, they may affect projected
changes in climate under 1.5C of global warming. These issues
are addressed in more detail in Section 3.6.2.2.

A major challenge in assessing climate change under 1.5C, or 2C
(and higher levels), of global warming pertains to the definition of
a `1.5C or 2C climate projection' (see also Cross-Chapter Box
8 in this chapter). Resolving this challenge includes the following
considerations:
A. The need to distinguish between (i) transient climate responses
(i.e., those that `pass through' 1.5C or 2C of global warming),
(ii) short-term stabilization responses (i.e., scenarios for the late
21st century that result in stabilization at a mean global warming
of 1.5C or 2C by 2100), and (iii) long-term equilibrium
stabilization responses (i.e., those occurring after several
millennia once climate (temperature) equilibrium at 1.5C or 2C
is reached). These responses can be very different in terms of
climate variables and the inertia associated with a given climate
forcing. A striking example is sea level rise (SLR). In this case,
projected increases within the 21st century are minimally
dependent on the scenario considered, yet they stabilize at very
different levels for a long-term warming of 1.5C versus 2C
(Section 3.3.9).
B.

184

The `1.5C or 2C emissions scenarios' presented in Chapter
2 are targeted to hold warming below 1.5C or 2C with a certain
probability (generally two-thirds) over the course, or at the
end, of the 21st century. These scenarios should be seen as the
operationalization of 1.5C or 2C warmer worlds. However,
when these emission scenarios are used to drive climate models,
some of the resulting simulations lead to warming above these
respective thresholds (typically with a probability of one-third, see
Chapter 2 and Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter). This is due
both to discrepancies between models and to internal climate
variability. For this reason, the climate outcome for any of these
scenarios, even those excluding an overshoot (see next point, C.),
include some probability of reaching a global climate warming
of more than 1.5C or 2C. Hence, a comprehensive assessment
of climate risks associated with `1.5C or 2C climate scenarios'
needs to include consideration of higher levels of warming (e.g.,
up to 2.5C to 3C, see Chapter 2 and Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this
chapter).

The assessment presented in the current chapter largely focuses on
the analysis of transient responses in climate at 1.5C versus 2C
and higher levels of global warming (see point A. above and Section
3.3). It generally uses the empirical scaling relationship (ESR) approach
(Seneviratne et al., 2018c), also termed the `time sampling' approach
(James et al., 2017), which consists of sampling the response at 1.5C
and other levels of global warming from all available global climate
model scenarios for the 21st century (e.g., Schleussner et al., 2016b;

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Seneviratne et al., 2016; Wartenburger et al., 2017). The ESR approach
focuses more on the derivation of a continuous relationship, while
the term `time sampling' is more commonly used when comparing a
limited number of warming levels (e.g., 1.5C versus 2C). A similar
approach in the case of regional climate model (RCM) simulations
consists of sampling the RCM model output corresponding to the
time frame at which the driving general circulation model (GCM)
reaches the considered temperature level, for example, as done within
IMPACT2C (Jacob and Solman, 2017), see description in Vautard et
al. (2014). As an alternative to the ESR or time sampling approach,
pattern scaling may be used. Pattern scaling is a statistical approach
that describes relationships of specific climate responses as a function
of global temperature change. Some assessments presented in this
chapter are based on this method. The disadvantage of pattern scaling,
however, is that the relationship may not perfectly emulate the models'
responses at each location and for each global temperature level
(James et al., 2017). Expert judgement is a third methodology that can
be used to assess probable changes at 1.5C or 2C of global warming
by combining changes that have been attributed to the observed time
period (corresponding to warming of 1C or less if assessed over a
shorter period) with known projected changes at 3C or 4C above
pre-industrial temperatures (Supplementary Material 3.SM.1). In order
to assess effects induced by a 0.5C difference in global warming,
the historical record can be used at first approximation as a proxy,
meaning that conditions are compared for two periods that have a
0.5C difference in GMST warming (such as 1991-2010 and 1960-
1979, e.g., Schleussner et al., 2017). This in particular also applies to
attributed changes in extremes since 1950 that were reported in the
IPCC AR5 report (IPCC, 2013; see also 3.SM.1). Using observations,
however, it is not possible to account for potential non-linear changes
that could occur above 1C of global warming or as 1.5C of warming
is reached.
In some cases, assessments of short-term stabilization responses
are also presented, derived using a subset of model simulations that
reach a given temperature limit by 2100, or driven by sea surface
temperature (SST) values consistent with such scenarios. This includes
new results from the `Half a degree additional warming, prognosis and
projected impacts' (HAPPI) project (Section 1.5.2; Mitchell et al., 2017).
Notably, there is evidence that for some variables (e.g., temperature
and precipitation extremes), responses after short-term stabilization
(i.e., approximately equivalent to the RCP2.6 scenario) are very similar
to the transient response of higher-emissions scenarios (Seneviratne et
al., 2016, 2018c; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Tebaldi and Knutti, 2018).
This is, however, less the case for mean precipitation (e.g., Pendergrass
et al., 2015), for which other aspects of the emissions scenarios appear
relevant.
For the assessment of long-term equilibrium stabilization responses,
this chapter uses results from existing simulations where available
(e.g., for sea level rise), although the available data for this type of
projection is limited for many variables and scenarios and will need to
be addressed in more depth in the IPCC AR6 report.
Supplementary Material 3.SM.1 of this chapter includes further details
of the climate models and associated simulations that were used to
support the present assessment, as well as a background on detection

Chapter 3

and attribution approaches of relevance to assessing changes in
climate at 1.5C of global warming.

3.2.2

How are Potential Impacts on Ecosystems Assessed
at 1.5C versus Higher Levels of Warming?

Considering that the impacts observed so far are for a global warming
lower than 1.5C (generally up to the 2006-2015 decade, i.e., for a
global warming of 0.87C or less; see above), direct information on
the impacts of a global warming of 1.5C is not yet available. The
global distribution of observed impacts shown in AR5 (Cramer et al.,
2014), however, demonstrates that methodologies now exist which
are capable of detecting impacts on systems strongly influenced by
factors (e.g., urbanization and human pressure in general) or where
climate may play only a secondary role in driving impacts. Attribution
of observed impacts to greenhouse gas forcing is more rarely
performed, but a recent study (Hansen and Stone, 2016) shows that
most of the detected temperature-related impacts that were reported
in AR5 (Cramer et al., 2014) can be attributed to anthropogenic climate
change, while the signals for precipitation-induced responses are more
ambiguous.
One simple approach for assessing possible impacts on natural and
managed systems at 1.5C versus 2C consists of identifying impacts of
a global 0.5C of warming in the observational record (e.g., Schleussner
et al., 2017) assuming that the impacts would scale linearly for higher
levels of warming (although this may not be appropriate). Another
approach is to use conclusions from analyses of past climates combined
with modelling of the relationships between climate drivers and natural
systems (Box 3.3). A more complex approach relies on laboratory or
field experiments (Dove et al., 2013; Bonal et al., 2016), which provide
useful information on the causal effect of a few factors, which can be
as diverse as climate, greenhouse gases (GHG), management practices,
and biological and ecological variables, on specific natural systems that
may have unusual physical and chemical characteristics (e.g., Fabricius
et al., 2011; Allen et al., 2017). This last approach can be important
in helping to develop and calibrate impact mechanisms and models
through empirical experimentation and observation.
Risks for natural and human systems are often assessed with
impact models where climate inputs are provided by representative
concentration pathway (RCP)-based climate projections. The number
of studies projecting impacts at 1.5C or 2C of global warming
has increased in recent times (see Section 3.4), even if the four RCP
scenarios used in AR5 are not strictly associated with these levels
of global warming. Several approaches have been used to extract
the required climate scenarios, as described in Section 3.2.1. As an
example, Schleussner et al. (2016b) applied a time sampling (or ESR)
approach, described in Section 3.2.1, to estimate the differential effect
of 1.5C and 2C of global warming on water availability and impacts
on agriculture using an ensemble of simulations under the RCP8.5
scenario. As a further example using a different approach, Iizumi et al.
(2017) derived a 1.5C scenario from simulations with a crop model
using an interpolation between the no-change (approximately 2010)
conditions and the RCP2.6 scenario (with a global warming of 1.8C in
2100), and they derived the corresponding 2C scenario from RCP2.6
and RCP4.5 simulations in 2100. The Inter-Sectoral Impact Model
185

3

Chapter 3

Integration and Intercomparison Project Phase 2 (ISIMIP2; Frieler et
al., 2017) extended this approach to investigate a number of sectoral
impacts on terrestrial and marine ecosystems. In most cases, risks are
assessed by impact models coupled offline to climate models after bias
correction, which may modify long-term trends (Grillakis et al., 2017).
Assessment of local impacts of climate change necessarily involves
a change in scale, such as from the global scale to that of natural
or human systems (Frieler et al., 2017; Reyer et al., 2017d; Jacob et
al., 2018). An appropriate method of downscaling (Supplementary
Material 3.SM.1) is crucial for translating perspectives on 1.5C and
2C of global warming to scales and impacts relevant to humans and
ecosystems. A major challenge associated with this requirement is
the correct reproduction of the variance of local to regional changes,
as well as the frequency and amplitude of extreme events (Vautard
et al., 2014). In addition, maintaining physical consistency between
downscaled variables is important but challenging (Frost et al., 2011).

3

Another major challenge relates to the propagation of the uncertainties
at each step of the methodology, from the global forcings to the global
climate and from regional climate to impacts at the ecosystem level,
considering local disturbances and local policy effects. The risks for
natural and human systems are the result of complex combinations of
global and local drivers, which makes quantitative uncertainty analysis
difficult. Such analyses are partly done using multimodel approaches,
such as multi-climate and multi-impact models (Warszawski et al.,
2013, 2014; Frieler et al., 2017). In the case of crop projections, for
example, the majority of the uncertainty is caused by variation among
crop models rather than by downscaling outputs of the climate models
used (Asseng et al., 2013). Error propagation is an important issue
for coupled models. Dealing correctly with uncertainties in a robust
probabilistic model is particularly important when considering the
potential for relatively small changes to affect the already small signal
associated with 0.5C of global warming (Supplementary Material
3.SM.1). The computation of an impact per unit of climatic change,
based either on models or on data, is a simple way to present the
probabilistic ecosystem response while taking into account the various
sources of uncertainties (Fronzek et al., 2011).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

However, impacts can only be partly inferred from these types of
observations, given the strong possibility of non-linear changes, as well
as lag effects for some climate variables (e.g., sea level rise, snow and
ice melt). For the impact models, three challenges are noted about the
coupling procedure: (i) the bias correction of the climate model, which
may modify the simulated response of the ecosystem, (ii) the necessity
to downscale the climate model outputs to reach a pertinent scale for
the ecosystem without losing physical consistency of the downscaled
climate fields, and (iii) the necessity to develop an integrated study of
the uncertainties.

3.3

This section provides the assessment of changes in climate at
1.5C of global warming relative to changes at higher global mean
temperatures. Section 3.3.1 provides a brief overview of changes to
global climate. Sections 3.3.2-3.3.11 provide assessments for specific
aspects of the climate system, including regional assessments for
temperature (Section 3.3.2) and precipitation (Section 3.3.3) means
and extremes. Analyses of regional changes are based on the set of
regions displayed in Figure 3.2. A synthesis of the main conclusions
of this section is provided in Section 3.3.11. The section builds upon
assessments from the IPCC AR5 WGI report (Bindoff et al., 2013a;
Christensen et al., 2013; Collins et al., 2013; Hartmann et al., 2013;
IPCC, 2013) and Chapter 3 of the IPCC Special Report on Managing
the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change
Adaptation (SREX; Seneviratne et al., 2012), as well as a substantial
body of new literature related to projections of climate at 1.5C and 2C
of warming above the pre-industrial period (e.g., Vautard et al., 2014;
Fischer and Knutti, 2015; Schleussner et al., 2016b, 2017; Seneviratne
et al., 2016, 2018c; Deque et al., 2017; Maule et al., 2017; Mitchell et
al., 2017, 2018a; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Zaman et al., 2017; Betts et
al., 2018; Jacob et al., 2018; Kharin et al., 2018; Wehner et al., 2018b).
The main assessment methods are as already detailed in Section 3.2.

3.3.1
In summary, in order to assess risks at 1.5C and higher levels of
global warming, several things need to be considered. Projected
climates under 1.5C of global warming differ depending on temporal
aspects and emission pathways. Considerations include whether global
temperature is (i) temporarily at this level (i.e., is a transient phase on its
way to higher levels of warming), (ii) arrives at 1.5C, with or without
overshoot, after stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations, or (iii)
is at this level as part of long-term climate equilibrium (complete only
after several millennia). Assessments of impacts of 1.5C of warming
are generally based on climate simulations for these different possible
pathways. Most existing data and analyses focus on transient impacts
(i). Fewer data are available for dedicated climate model simulations
that are able to assess pathways consistent with (ii), and very few data
are available for the assessment of changes at climate equilibrium (iii).
In some cases, inferences regarding the impacts of further warming of
0.5C above present-day temperatures (i.e., 1.5C of global warming)
can also be drawn from observations of similar sized changes (0.5C)
that have occurred in the past, such as during the last 50 years.
186

Global and Regional Climate
Changes and Associated Hazards

Global Changes in Climate

There is high confidence that the increase in global mean surface
temperature (GMST) has reached 0.87C (0.10C likely range)
above pre-industrial values in the 2006-2015 decade (Chapter 1).
AR5 assessed that the globally averaged temperature (combined
over land and ocean) displayed a warming of about 0.85C [0.65C
to 1.06C] during the period 1880-2012, with a large fraction of the
detected global warming being attributed to anthropogenic forcing
(Bindoff et al., 2013a; Hartmann et al., 2013; Stocker et al., 2013).
While new evidence has highlighted that sampling biases and the
choice of approaches used to estimate GMST (e.g., using water
versus air temperature over oceans and using model simulations
versus observations-based estimates) can affect estimates of GMST
increase (Richardson et al., 2016; see also Supplementary Material
3.SM.2), the present assessment is consistent with that of AR5
regarding a detectable and dominant effect of anthropogenic forcing
on observed trends in global temperature (also confirmed in Ribes
et al., 2017). As highlighted in Chapter 1, human-induced warming

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

ARC*
ALA

NEU

CGI
WNA

NAS

CEU
CNA

ENA

AMZ
MZ

TIB

EAS

WAS

SAH

CAR*

CAM

CAS

MED

SAS

WAF

NTP*
SEA

EAF

ETP*

WIO*

NEB

WSA

STP*

NAU

SAF
SSA
SA

SAU

ANT*

Abbreviation

Name

Abbreviation

Name

Abbreviation

Name

Abbreviation

Name

ALA

Alaska/N.W. Canada

CNA

Central North America

NEU

North Europe

TIB

Tibetan Plateau

AMZ

Amazon

EAF

East Africa

NTP*

Pacific Islands region[2]

WAF

West Africa

ANT*

Antarctica

EAS

East Asia

SAF

Southern Africa

WAS

West Asia

ARC*

Arctic

ENA

East North America

SAH

Sahara

WIO*

West Indian Ocean

CAM

Central America/Mexico

ETP*

Pacific Islands region[3]

SAS

South Asia

WNA

West North America

CAR*

small islands regions Caribbean

MED

South Europe/Mediterranean

SAU

South Australia/New Zealand

WSA

West Coast South America

CAS

Central Asia

NAS

North Asia

SEA

Southeast Asia

CEU

Central Europe

NAU

North Australia

SSA

Southeastern South America

CGI

Canada/Greenland/Iceland

NEB

North-East Brazil

STP*

Southern Topical Pacific

3

Figure 3.2 | Regions used for regional analyses provided in Section 3.3. The choice of regions is based on the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5, Chapter 14, Christensen
et al., 2013 and Annex 1: Atlas) and the Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SREX, Chapter 3,
Seneviratne et al., 2012), with seven additional regions in the Arctic, Antarctic and islands not included in the IPCC SREX report (indicated with asterisks). Analyses for regions
with asterisks are provided in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2

reached approximately 1C (0.2C likely range) in 2017. More
background on recent observed trends in global climate is provided
in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2.
A global warming of 1.5C implies higher mean temperatures
compared to during pre-industrial times in almost all locations, both
on land and in oceans (high confidence) (Figure 3.3). In addition,
a global warming of 2C versus 1.5C results in robust differences
in the mean temperatures in almost all locations, both on land and
in the ocean (high confidence). The land-sea contrast in warming
is important and implies particularly large changes in temperature
over land, with mean warming of more than 1.5C in most land
regions (high confidence; see Section 3.3.2 for more details). The
largest increase in mean temperature is found in the high latitudes
of the Northern Hemisphere (high confidence; Figure 3.3, see Section
3.3.2 for more details). Projections for precipitation are more
uncertain, but they highlight robust increases in mean precipitation
in the Northern Hemisphere high latitudes at 1.5C global warming

versus pre-industrial conditions, as well as at 2C global warming
versus pre-industrial conditions (high confidence) (Figure 3.3). There
are consistent but less robust signals when comparing changes in
mean precipitation at 2C versus 1.5C of global warming. Hence,
it is assessed that there is medium confidence in an increase of
mean precipitation in high-latitudes at 2C versus 1.5C of global
warming (Figure 3.3). For droughts, changes in evapotranspiration
and precipitation timing are also relevant (see Section 3.3.4). Figure
3.4 displays changes in temperature extremes (the hottest daytime
temperature of the year, TXx, and the coldest night-time temperature
of the year, TNn) and heavy precipitation (the annual maximum
5-day precipitation, Rx5day). These analyses reveal distinct patterns
of changes, with the largest changes in TXx occurring on mid-latitude
land and the largest changes in TNn occurring at high latitudes
(both on land and in oceans). Differences in TXx and TNn compared
to pre-industrial climate are robust at both global warming levels.
Differences in TXx and TNn at 2C versus 1.5C of global warming
are robust across most of the globe. Changes in heavy precipitation
187

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Mean temperature change
at 1.5C GMST warming

Mean temperature change
at 2.0C GMST warming

Temperature (C)
Mean precipitation change
at 1.5C GMST warming

Temperature (C)
Mean precipitation change
at 2.0C GMST warming

Precipitation (%)

3

Difference in mean temperature
change (2.0C - 1.5C)

Difference in mean precipitation
change (2.0C - 1.5C)

Precipitation (%)

Figure 3.3 | Projected changes in mean temperature (top) and mean precipitation (bottom) at 1.5C (left) and 2C (middle) of global warming compared to the pre-industrial
period (1861-1880), and the difference between 1.5C and 2C of global warming (right). Cross-hatching highlights areas where at least two-thirds of the models agree on
the sign of change as a measure of robustness (18 or more out of 26). Values were assessed from the transient response over a 10-year period at a given warming level, based
on Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)8.5 Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) model simulations (adapted from Seneviratne et al., 2016 and
Wartenburger et al., 2017, see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 for more details). Note that the responses at 1.5C of global warming are similar for RCP2.6 simulations (see
Supplementary Material 3.SM.2). Differences compared to 1C of global warming are provided in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2.

are less robust, but particularly strong increases are apparent at high
latitudes as well as in the tropics at both 1.5C and 2C of global
warming compared to pre-industrial conditions. The differences in
heavy precipitation at 2C versus 1.5C global warming are generally
not robust at grid-cell scale, but they display consistent increases in
most locations (Figure 3.4). However, as addressed in Section 3.3.3,
statistically significant differences are found in several large regions and
when aggregated over the global land area. We thus assess that there
is high confidence regarding global-scale differences in temperature
means and extremes at 2C versus 1.5C global warming, and medium
confidence regarding global-scale differences in precipitation means
and extremes. Further analyses, including differences at 1.5C and 2C
global warming versus 1C (i.e., present-day) conditions are provided
in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2.
These projected changes at 1.5C and 2C of global warming are
consistent with the attribution of observed historical global trends
in temperature and precipitation means and extremes (Bindoff et al.,
2013a), as well as with some observed changes under the recent
global warming of 0.5C (Schleussner et al., 2017). These comparisons
are addressed in more detail in Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3. Attribution
studies have shown that there is high confidence that anthropogenic
forcing has had a detectable influence on trends in global warming
(virtually certain since the mid-20th century), in land warming on
all continents except Antarctica (likely since the mid-20th century),
in ocean warming since 1970 (very likely), and in increases in hot
extremes and decreases in cold extremes since the mid-20th century
188

(very likely) (Bindoff et al., 2013a). In addition, there is medium
confidence that anthropogenic forcing has contributed to increases
in mean precipitation at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere
since the mid-20th century and to global-scale increases in heavy
precipitation in land regions with sufficient observations over the
same period (Bindoff et al., 2013a). Schleussner et al. (2017) showed,
through analyses of recent observed tendencies, that changes in
temperature extremes and heavy precipitation indices are detectable
in observations for the 1991-2010 period compared with those
for 1960-1979, with a global warming of approximately 0.5C
occurring between these two periods (high confidence). The observed
tendencies over that time frame are thus consistent with attributed
changes since the mid-20th century (high confidence).
The next sections assess changes in several different types of climaterelated hazards. It should be noted that the different types of hazards
are considered in isolation but some regions are projected to be
affected by collocated and/or concomitant changes in several types
of hazards (high confidence). Two examples are sea level rise and
heavy precipitation in some regions, possibly leading together to more
flooding, and droughts and heatwaves, which can together increase
the risk of fire occurrence. Such events, also called compound events,
may substantially increase risks in some regions (e.g., AghaKouchak et
al., 2014; Van Den Hurk et al., 2015; Martius et al., 2016; Zscheischler
et al., 2018). A detailed assessment of physically-defined compound
events was not possible as part of this report, but aspects related to
overlapping multi-sector risks are highlighted in Sections 3.4 and 3.5.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Change in temperature of hottest
days (TXx) at 1.5C GMST warming

Change in temperature of hottest
days (TXx) at 2.0C GMST warming

Difference in temperature of hottest
days (TXx) (2.0C - 1.5C)

Change in temperature of coldest
nights (TNn) at 1.5C GMST warming

Change in temperature of coldest
nights (TNn) at 2.0C GMST warming

Difference in temperature of coldest
nights (TNn) (2.0C - 1.5C)

Temperature (C)

Temperature (C)
Change in extreme precipitation
(Rx5day) at 1.5C GMST warming

Change in extreme precipitation
(Rx5day) at 2.0C GMST warming

Difference in change in extreme
precipitation (Rx5day) (2.0C - 1.5C)

3

Precipitation (%)

Precipitation (%)

Figure 3.4 | Projected changes in extremes at 1.5C (left) and 2C (middle) of global warming compared to the pre-industrial period (1861-1880), and the difference between
1.5C and 2C of global warming (right). Cross-hatching highlights areas where at least two-thirds of the models agree on the sign of change as a measure of robustness
(18 or more out of 26): temperature of annual hottest day (maximum temperature), TXx (top), and temperature of annual coldest night (minimum temperature), TNn (middle),
and annual maximum 5-day precipitation, Rx5day (bottom). The underlying methodology and data basis are the same as for Figure 3.3 (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2
for more details). Note that the responses at 1.5C of global warming are similar for Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)2.6 simulations (see Supplementary Material
3.SM.2). Differences compared to 1C of global warming are provided in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2.

3.3.2

Regional Temperatures on Land, Including Extremes

3.3.2.1 Observed and attributed changes in regional
temperature means and extremes
While the quality of temperature measurements obtained through
ground observational networks tends to be high compared to that of
measurements for other climate variables (Seneviratne et al., 2012),
it should be noted that some regions are undersampled. Cowtan and
Way (2014) highlighted issues regarding undersampling, which is
most problematic at the poles and over Africa, and which may lead
to biases in estimated changes in GMST (see also Supplementary
Material 3.SM.2 and Chapter 1). This undersampling also affects the
confidence of assessments regarding regional observed and projected
changes in both mean and extreme temperature. Despite this partly
limited coverage, the attribution chapter of AR5 (Bindoff et al., 2013a)
and recent papers (e.g., Sun et al., 2016; Wan et al., 2018) assessed
that, over every continental region and in many sub-continental

regions, anthropogenic influence has made a substantial contribution
to surface temperature increases since the mid-20th century.
Based on the AR5 and SREX, as well as recent literature (see
Supplementary Material 3.SM), there is high confidence (very likely)
that there has been an overall decrease in the number of cold days
and nights and an overall increase in the number of warm days and
nights at the global scale on land. There is also high confidence (likely)
that consistent changes are detectable on the continental scale in
North America, Europe and Australia. There is high confidence that
these observed changes in temperature extremes can be attributed to
anthropogenic forcing (Bindoff et al., 2013a). As highlighted in Section
3.2, the observational record can be used to assess past changes
associated with a global warming of 0.5C. Schleussner et al. (2017)
used this approach to assess observed changes in extreme indices for
the 1991-2010 versus the 1960-1979 period, which corresponds to
just about a 0.5C GMST difference in the observed record (based on
the Goddard Institute for Space Studies Surface Temperature Analysis
189

Chapter 3

(GISTEMP) dataset, Hansen et al., 2010). They found that substantial
changes due to 0.5C of warming are apparent for indices related to
hot and cold extremes, as well as for the Warm Spell Duration Indicator
(WSDI). In particular, they identified that one-quarter of the land has
experienced an intensification of hot extremes (maximum temperature
on the hottest day of the year, TXx) by more than 1C and a reduction in
the intensity of cold extremes by at least 2.5C (minimum temperature
on the coldest night of the year, TNn). In addition, the same study
showed that half of the global land mass has experienced changes
in WSDI of more than six days, as well as an emergence of extremes
outside the range of natural variability (Schleussner et al., 2017).
Analyses from Schleussner et al. (2017) for temperature extremes are
provided in the Supplementary Material 3.SM, Figure 3.SM.6. It should
be noted that assessments of attributed changes in the IPCC SREX and
AR5 reports were generally provided since 1950, for time frames also
approximately corresponding to a 0.5C global warming (3.SM).

3.3.2.2 Projected changes in regional temperature means and
extremes at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming

3

There are several lines of evidence available for providing a regional
assessment of projected changes in temperature means and extremes
at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming (see Section 3.2). These include:
analyses of changes in extremes as a function of global warming based
on existing climate simulations using the empirical scaling relationship
(ESR) and variations thereof (e.g., Schleussner et al., 2017; Dosio and
Fischer, 2018; Seneviratne et al., 2018c; see Section 3.2 for details about
the methodology); dedicated simulations of 1.5C versus 2C of global
warming, for instance based on the Half a degree additional warming,
prognosis and projected impacts (HAPPI) experiment (Mitchell et al.,
2017) or other model simulations (e.g., Dosio et al., 2018; Kjellstrom et
al., 2018); and analyses based on statistical pattern scaling approaches
(e.g., Kharin et al., 2018). These different lines of evidence lead to
qualitatively consistent results regarding changes in temperature
means and extremes at 1.5C of global warming compared to the preindustrial climate and 2C of global warming.
There are statistically significant differences in temperature means and
extremes at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming, both in the global
average (Schleussner et al., 2016b; Dosio et al., 2018; Kharin et al.,
2018), as well as in most land regions (high confidence) (Wartenburger
et al., 2017; Seneviratne et al., 2018c; Wehner et al., 2018b). Projected
temperatures over oceans display significant increases in means and
extremes between 1.5C and 2C of global warming (Figures 3.3 and
3.4). A general background on the available evidence on regional
changes in temperature means and extremes at 1.5C versus 2C of
global warming is provided in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2. As
an example, Figure 3.5 shows regionally-based analyses for the IPCC
SREX regions (see Figure 3.2) of changes in the temperature of hot
extremes as a function of global warming (corresponding analyses
for changes in the temperature of cold extremes are provided in the
Supplementary Material 3.SM.2). As demonstrated in these analyses,
the mean response of the intensity of temperature extremes in climate
models to changes in the global mean temperature is approximately
linear and independent of the considered emissions scenario
(Seneviratne et al., 2016; Wartenburger et al., 2017). Nonetheless, in
the case of changes in the number of days exceeding a given threshold,
190

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

changes are approximately exponential, with higher increases for rare
events (Fischer and Knutti, 2015; Kharin et al., 2018); see also Figure
3.6. This behaviour is consistent with a linear increase in absolute
temperature for extreme threshold exceedances (Whan et al., 2015).
As mentioned in Section 3.3.1, there is an important land-sea warming
contrast, with stronger warming on land (see also Christensen et al.,
2013; Collins et al., 2013; Seneviratne et al., 2016), which implies that
regional warming on land is generally more than 1.5C even when
mean global warming is at 1.5C. As highlighted in Seneviratne et al.
(2016), this feature is generally stronger for temperature extremes
(Figures 3.4 and 3.5; Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 ). For differences
in regional temperature extremes at a mean global warming of 1.5C
versus 2C, that is, a difference of 0.5C in global warming, this implies
differences of as much as 1C-1.5C in some locations, which are two
to three times larger than the differences in global mean temperature.
For hot extremes, the strongest warming is found in central and eastern
North America, central and southern Europe, the Mediterranean,
western and central Asia, and southern Africa (Figures 3.4 and 3.5)
(medium confidence). These regions are all characterized by a strong
soil-moisture-temperature coupling and projected increased dryness
(Vogel et al., 2017), which leads to a reduction in evaporative cooling
in the projections. Some of these regions also show a wide range of
responses to temperature extremes, in particular central Europe and
central North America, owing to discrepancies in the representation of
the underlying processes in current climate models (Vogel et al., 2017).
For mean temperature and cold extremes, the strongest warming is
found in the northern high-latitude regions (high confidence). This is
due to substantial ice-snow-albedo-temperature feedbacks (Figure
3.3 and Figure 3.4, middle) related to the known `polar amplification'
mechanism (e.g., IPCC, 2013; Masson-Delmotte et al., 2013).
Figure 3.7 displays maps of changes in the number of hot days
(NHD) at 1.5C and 2C of GMST increase. Maps of changes in the
number of frost days (FD) can be found in Supplementary Material
3.SM.2. These analyses reveal clear patterns of changes between the
two warming levels, which are consistent with analysed changes in
heatwave occurrence (e.g., Dosio et al., 2018). For the NHD, the largest
differences are found in the tropics (high confidence), owing to the
low interannual temperature variability there (Mahlstein et al., 2011),
although absolute changes in hot temperature extremes tended to
be largest at mid-latitudes (high confidence) (Figures 3.4 and 3.5).
Extreme heatwaves are thus projected to emerge earliest in the tropics
and to become widespread in these regions already at 1.5C of global
warming (high confidence). These results are consistent with other
recent assessments. Coumou and Robinson (2013) found that 20%
of the global land area, centred in low-latitude regions, is projected
to experience highly unusual monthly temperatures during Northern
Hemisphere summers at 1.5C of global warming, with this number
nearly doubling at 2C of global warming.
Figure 3.8 features an objective identification of `hotspots' / key
risks in temperature indices subdivided by region, based on the ESR
approach applied to Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase
5 (CMIP5) simulations (Wartenburger et al., 2017). Note that results
based on the HAPPI multimodel experiment (Mitchell et al., 2017)
are similar (Seneviratne et al., 2018c). The considered regions follow

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

the classification used in Figure 3.2 and also include the global land
areas. Based on these analyses, the following can be stated: significant
changes in responses are found in all regions for most temperature
indices, with the exception of i) the diurnal temperature range (DTR) in
most regions, ii) ice days (ID), frost days (FD) and growing season length
(GSL) (mostly in regions where differences are zero, because, e.g., there
are no ice or frost days), iii) the minimum yearly value of the maximum
daily temperature (TXn) in very few regions. In terms of the sign of
the changes, warm extremes display an increase in intensity, frequency
and duration (e.g., an increase in the temperature of the hottest day of
the year (TXx) in all regions, an increase in the proportion of days with
a maximum temperature above the 90th percentile of Tmax (TX90p)
in all regions, and an increase in the length of the WSDI in all regions),
while cold extremes display a decrease in intensity, frequency and
duration (e.g., an increase in the temperature of the coldest night of
the year (TNn) in all regions, a decrease in the proportion of days with
a minimum temperature below the 10th percentile of Tmin (TN10p),
and a decrease in the cold spell duration index (CSDI) in all regions).
Hence, while warm extremes are intensified, cold extremes become
less intense in affected regions.
Overall, large increases in hot extremes occur in many densely
inhabited regions (Figure 3.5), for both warming scenarios compared
to pre-industrial and present-day climate, as well as for 2C versus
1.5C GMST warming. For instance, Dosio et al. (2018) concluded,
based on a modelling study, that 13.8% of the world population would
be exposed to `severe heatwaves' at least once every 5 years under
1.5C of global warming, with a threefold increase (36.9%) under 2C
of GMST warming, corresponding to a difference of about 1.7 billion
people between the two global warming levels. They also concluded
that limiting global warming to 1.5C would result in about 420
million fewer people being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves,
and about 65 million fewer people being exposed to `exceptional
heatwaves' compared to conditions at 2C GMST warming. However,
changes in vulnerability were not considered in their study. For this
reason, we assess that there is medium confidence in their conclusions.
In summary, there is high confidence that there are robust and
statistically significant differences in the projected temperature means
and extremes at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming, both in the global
average and in nearly all land regions4 (likely). Further, the observational
record reveals that substantial changes due to a 0.5C GMST warming
are apparent for indices related to hot and cold extremes, as well as for
the WSDI (likely). A global warming of 2C versus 1.5C would lead to
more frequent and more intense hot extremes in all land regions4, as
well as longer warm spells, affecting many densely inhabited regions
(very likely). The strongest increases in the frequency of hot extremes
are projected for the rarest events (very likely). On the other hand, cold
extremes would become less intense and less frequent, and cold spells
would be shorter (very likely). Temperature extremes on land would
generally increase more than the global average temperature (very
likely). Temperature increases of extreme hot days in mid-latitudes are
projected to be up to two times the increase in GMST, that is, 3C at
1.5C GMST warming (high confidence). The highest levels of warming
for extreme hot days are expected to occur in central and eastern North
4

Using the SREX definition of regions (Figure 3.2)

Chapter 3

America, central and southern Europe, the Mediterranean, western and
central Asia, and southern Africa (medium confidence). These regions
have a strong soil-moisture-temperature coupling in common as well
as increased dryness and, consequently, a reduction in evaporative
cooling. However, there is a substantial range in the representation
of these processes in models, in particular in central Europe and
central North America (medium confidence). The coldest nights in high
latitudes warm by as much as 1.5C for a 0.5C increase in GMST,
corresponding to a threefold stronger warming (high confidence). NHD
shows the largest differences between 1.5C and 2C in the tropics,
because of the low interannual temperature variability there (high
confidence); extreme heatwaves are thus projected to emerge earliest
in these regions, and they are expected to become widespread already
at 1.5C of global warming (high confidence). Limiting global warming
to 1.5C instead of 2C could result in around 420 million fewer people
being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves, and about 65 million
fewer people being exposed to exceptional heatwaves, assuming
constant vulnerability (medium confidence).

3.3.3

Regional Precipitation, Including Heavy
Precipitation and Monsoons

This section addresses regional changes in precipitation on land, with
a focus on heavy precipitation and consideration of changes to the key
features of monsoons.

3.3.3.1 Observed and attributed changes in regional
precipitation
Observed global changes in the water cycle, including precipitation,
are more uncertain than observed changes in temperature (Hartmann
et al., 2013; Stocker et al., 2013). There is high confidence that
mean precipitation over the mid-latitude land areas of the Northern
Hemisphere has increased since 1951 (Hartmann et al., 2013). For
other latitudinal zones, area-averaged long-term positive or negative
trends have low confidence because of poor data quality, incomplete
data or disagreement amongst available estimates (Hartmann et al.,
2013). There is, in particular, low confidence regarding observed trends
in precipitation in monsoon regions, according to the SREX report
(Seneviratne et al., 2012) and AR5 (Hartmann et al., 2013), as well as
more recent publications (Singh et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2017; Bichet
and Diedhiou, 2018; see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2).
For heavy precipitation, AR5 (Hartmann et al., 2013) assessed that
observed trends displayed more areas with increases than decreases in
the frequency, intensity and/or amount of heavy precipitation (likely).
In addition, for land regions where observational coverage is sufficient
for evaluation, it was assessed that there is medium confidence that
anthropogenic forcing has contributed to a global-scale intensification
of heavy precipitation over the second half of the 20th century (Bindoff
et al., 2013a).
Regarding changes in precipitation associated with global warming
of 0.5C, the observed record suggests that increases in precipitation
extremes can be identified for annual maximum 1-day precipitation
Continued page 194 >

191

3

Chapter 3
Alaska/N.W. Canada
(ALA)

1

S.E. South America
(SSA)

10

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Canada/Greenl./Icel.
(CGI)

2

11

W. North America
(WNA)

C. North America
(CNA)

3

E. North America
(ENA)

4

5

15

Amazon
(AMZ)

7

2

1
4

11

7

8

9

20 21

19

14

W. Coast South America
(WSA)

C. Europe
(CEU)

S. Europe/Mediterranean
(MED)

9

13

22

23

15

N.E. Brazil
(NEB)

18

12
13

5

W. Africa
(WAF)

8

12

6
14

6

N. Europe
(NEU)

3

Sahara
(SAH)

Central America/Mexico
(CAM)

24

16

16

E. Africa
(EAF)

17

S. Africa
(SAF)

25

17
10

26
 TXx (2C - 1.5C) (C)

18

3

N. Asia
(NAS)

19

W. Asia
(WAS)

Global Land

0.2

0.3

Tibetan Plateau
(TIB)

21

0.4

0.5
22

0.6

E. Asia
(EAS)

0.7

0.8

0.9
23

Global Ocean#

 TXx reg (C)

Global Land + Ocean#

20

C. Asia
(CAS)

0.1

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

1

S. Asia
(SAS)

1.1

Legend

24

S.E. Asia
(SEA)

25

N. Australia
(NAU)

S. Australia/New Zealand
(SAU)

26

CMIP5 (ESR)
historical
RCP 8.5
HAPPI
1.5C - pre-industrial

0 1 2 3
 T glob (C)

2.0C - pre-industrial

Figure 3.5 | Projected changes in annual maximum daytime temperature (TXx) as a function of global warming for IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risk of Extreme Events
and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SREX) regions (see Figure 3.2), based on an empirical scaling relationship applied to Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) data (adapted from Seneviratne et al., 2016 and Wartenburger et al., 2017) together with projected changes from the Half a degree additional warming,
prognosis and projected impacts (HAPPI) multimodel experiment (Mitchell et al., 2017; based on analyses in Seneviratne et al., 2018c) (bar plots on regional analyses and central
plot, respectively). For analyses for other regions from Figure 3.2 (with asterisks), see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2. (The stippling indicates significance of the differences in
changes between 1.5C and 2C of global warming based on all model simulations, using a two-sided paired Wilcoxon test (P = 0.01, after controlling the false discovery rate
according to Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). See Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 for details.

Figure 3.6 | Probability ratio (PR) of exceeding extreme temperature thresholds. (a) PR of exceeding the 99th (blue) and 99.9th (red) percentile of pre-industrial daily
temperatures at a given warming level, averaged across land (from Fischer and Knutti, 2015). (b) PR for the hottest daytime temperature of the year (TXx). (c) PR for the coldest
night of the year (TNn) for different event probabilities (with RV indicating return values) in the current climate (1C of global warming). Shading shows the interquartile
(25-75%) range (from Kharin et al., 2018).

192

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Figure 3.7 | Projected changes in the number of hot days (NHD; 10% warmest days) at 1.5C (left) and at 2C (middle) of global warming compared to the pre-industrial
period (1861-1880), and the difference between 1.5C and 2C of warming (right). Cross-hatching highlights areas where at least two-thirds of the models agree on the sign of
change as a measure of robustness (18 or more out of 26). The underlying methodology and the data basis are the same as for Figure 3.2 (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2
for more details). Differences compared to 1C global warming are provided in the Supplementary Material 3.SM.2.

3

Figure 3.8 | Significance of differences in regional mean temperature and range of temperature indices between the 1.5C and 2C global mean temperature targets (rows).
Definitions of indices: T: mean temperature; CSDI: cold spell duration index; DTR: diurnal temperature range; FD: frost days; GSL: growing season length; ID: ice days; SU: summer
days; TN10p: proportion of days with a minimum temperature (TN) lower than the 10th percentile of TN; TN90p: proportion of days with TN higher than the 90th percentile of
TN; TNn: minimum yearly value of TN; TNx: maximum yearly value of TN; TR: tropical nights; TX10p: proportion of days with a maximum temperature (TX) lower than the 10th
percentile of TX; TX90p: proportion of days with TX higher than the 90th percentile of TX; TXn: minimum yearly value of TX; TXx: maximum yearly value of TX; WSDI: warm spell
duration index. Columns indicate analysed regions and global land (see Figure 3.2 for definitions). Significant differences are shown in red shading, with increases indicated
with + and decreases indicated with -, while non-significant differences are shown in grey shading. White shading indicates when an index is the same at the two global
warming levels (i.e., zero changes). Note that decreases in CSDI, FD, ID, TN10p and TX10p are linked to increased temperatures on cold days or nights. Significance was tested
using a two-sided paired Wilcoxon test (P=0.01, after controlling the false discovery rate according to Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) (adapted from Wartenburger et al., 2017).

193

Chapter 3
3.3.3.1 (continued)

(RX1day) and consecutive 5-day precipitation (RX5day) for GMST
changes of this magnitude (Supplementary Material 3.SM.2, Figure
3.SM.7; Schleussner et al., 2017). It should be noted that assessments
of attributed changes in the IPCC SREX and AR5 reports were generally
provided since 1950, for time frames also approximately corresponding
to a 0.5C global warming (3.SM).

3.3.3.2 Projected changes in regional precipitation at 1.5C
versus 2C of global warming

3

Figure 3.3 in Section 3.3.1 summarizes the projected changes in mean
precipitation at 1.5C and 2C of global warming. Both warming
levels display robust differences in mean precipitation compared to
the pre-industrial period. Regarding differences at 2C vs 1.5C global
warming, some regions are projected to display changes in mean
precipitation at 2C compared with that at 1.5C of global warming in
the CMIP5 multimodel average, such as decreases in the Mediterranean
area, including southern Europe, the Arabian Peninsula and Egypt, or
increases in high latitudes. The results, however, are less robust across
models than for mean temperature. For instance, Deque et al. (2017)
investigated the impact of 2C of global warming on precipitation over
tropical Africa and found that average precipitation does not show a
significant response, owing to two phenomena: (i) the number of days
with rain decreases whereas the precipitation intensity increases, and
(ii) the rainy season occurs later during the year, with less precipitation
in early summer and more precipitation in late summer. The results
from Deque et al. (2017) regarding insignificant differences between
1.5C and 2C scenarios for tropical Africa are consistent with the
results presented in Figure 3.3. For Europe, recent studies (Vautard et
al., 2014; Jacob et al., 2018; Kjellstrom et al., 2018) have shown that
2C of global warming was associated with a robust increase in mean
precipitation over central and northern Europe in winter but only over
northern Europe in summer, and with decreases in mean precipitation
in central/southern Europe in summer. Precipitation changes reaching
20% have been projected for the 2C scenario (Vautard et al., 2014)
and are overall more pronounced than with 1.5C of global warming
(Jacob et al., 2018; Kjellstrom et al., 2018).
Regarding changes in heavy precipitation, Figure 3.9 displays projected
changes in the 5-day maximum precipitation (Rx5day) as a function
of global temperature increase, using a similar approach as in Figure
3.5. Further analyses are available in Supplementary Material 3.SM.2.
These analyses show that projected changes in heavy precipitation are
more uncertain than those for temperature extremes. However, the
mean response of model simulations is generally robust and linear
(see also Fischer et al., 2014; Seneviratne et al., 2016). As observed for
temperature extremes, this response is also mostly independent of the
considered emissions scenario (e.g., RCP2.6 versus RCP8.5; see also
Section 3.2). This feature appears to be specific to heavy precipitation,
possibly due to a stronger coupling with temperature, as the scaling of
projections of mean precipitation changes with global warming shows
some scenario dependency (Pendergrass et al., 2015).
Robust changes in heavy precipitation compared to pre-industrial
conditions are found at both 1.5C and 2C global warming (Figure
3.4). This is also consistent with results for, for example, the European
194

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

continent, although different indices for heavy precipitation changes
have been analysed. Based on regional climate simulations, Vautard
et al. (2014) found a robust increase in heavy precipitation everywhere
in Europe and in all seasons, except southern Europe in summer at 2C
versus 1971-2000. Their findings are consistent with those of Jacob
et al. (2014), who used more recent downscaled climate scenarios
(EURO-CORDEX) and a higher resolution (12 km), but the change
is not so pronounced in Teichmann et al. (2018). There is consistent
agreement in the direction of change in heavy precipitation at 1.5C
of global warming over much of Europe, compared to 1971-2000
(Jacob et al., 2018).
Differences in heavy precipitation are generally projected to be
small between 1.5C and 2C GMST warming (Figure 3.4 and 3.9
and Supplementary Material 3.SM.2, Figure 3.SM.10). Some regions
display substantial increases, for instance southern Asia, but generally
in less than two-thirds of the CMIP5 models (Figure 3.4, Supplementary
Material 3.SM.2, Figure 3.SM.10). Wartenburger et al. (2017) suggested
that there are substantial differences in heavy precipitation in eastern
Asia at 1.5C versus 2C. Overall, while there is variation among
regions, the global tendency is for heavy precipitation to increase at
2C compared with at 1.5C (see e.g., Fischer and Knutti, 2015 and
Kharin et al., 2018, as illustrated in Figure 3.10 from this chapter; see
also Betts et al., 2018).
AR5 assessed that the global monsoon, aggregated over all monsoon
systems, is likely to strengthen, with increases in its area and intensity,
while the monsoon circulation weakens (Christensen et al., 2013). A
few publications provide more recent evaluations of projections of
changes in monsoons for high-emission scenarios (e.g., Jiang and Tian,
2013; Jones and Carvalho, 2013; Sylla et al., 2015, 2016; Supplementary
Material 3.SM.2 ). However, scenarios at 1.5C or 2C global warming
would involve a substantially smaller radiative forcing than those
assessed in AR5 and these more recent studies, and there appears
to be no specific assessment of changes in monsoon precipitation at
1.5C versus 2C of global warming in the literature. Consequently, the
current assessment is that there is low confidence regarding changes
in monsoons at these lower global warming levels, as well as regarding
differences in monsoon responses at 1.5C versus 2C.
Similar to Figure 3.8, Figure 3.11 features an objective identification of
`hotspots' / key risks outlined in heavy precipitation indices subdivided
by region, based on the approach by Wartenburger et al. (2017). The
considered regions follow the classification used in Figure 3.2 and also
include global land areas. Hotspots displaying statistically significant
changes in heavy precipitation at 1.5C versus 2C global warming
are located in high-latitude (Alaska/western Canada, eastern Canada/
Greenland/Iceland, northern Europe, northern Asia) and high-elevation
(e.g., Tibetan Plateau) regions, as well as in eastern Asia (including
China and Japan) and in eastern North America. Results are less
consistent for other regions. Note that analyses for meteorological
drought (lack of precipitation) are provided in Section 3.3.4.
In summary, observations and projections for mean and heavy
precipitation are less robust than for temperature means and extremes
(high confidence). Observations show that there are more areas with
increases than decreases in the frequency, intensity and/or amount of

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Alaska/N.W. Canada
(ALA)

1

S.E. South America
(SSA)

10

Canada/Greenl./Icel.
(CGI)

2

11

W. North America
(WNA)

C. North America
(CNA)

3

E. North America
(ENA)

4

2

1

15

6

Amazon
(AMZ)

7

4

5

7

8

9

20 21

19

23
16

15

N.E. Brazil
(NEB)

W. Coast South America
(WSA)

C. Europe
(CEU)

S. Europe/Mediterranean
(MED)

9

13

18

14

W. Africa
(WAF)

8

12

11
12
13

6
14

Central America/Mexico
(CAM)

5

N. Europe
(NEU)

3

Sahara
(SAH)

Chapter 3

22
24
16

25

17

10

E. Africa
(EAF)

17

S. Africa
(SAF)

26

 Rx5day (2C - 1.5C) (mm)

18

N. Asia
(NAS)

19

W. Asia
(WAS)

20

C. Asia
(CAS)

-4

-2

Tibetan Plateau
(TIB)

21

-1

0
22

1

E. Asia
(EAS)

2

4

6
23

10

S. Asia
(SAS)

24

S.E. Asia
(SEA)

25

N. Australia
(NAU)

S. Australia/New Zealand
(SAU)

26

3
Global Land

Global Ocean#

Legend
 Rx5dayreg (mm)

Global Land + Ocean#

100
80
60
40
20
0

CMIP5 (ESR)
historical
RCP 8.5
HAPPI
1.5C - pre-industrial

0 1 2 3
 T glob (C)

2.0C - pre-industrial

Figure 3.9 | Projected changes in annual 5-day maximum precipitation (Rx5day) as a function of global warming for IPCC Special Report on the Risk of Extreme Events and
Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SREX) regions (see Figure 3.2), based on an empirical scaling relationship applied to Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
Phase 5 (CMIP5) data together with projected changes from the HAPPI multimodel experiment (bar plots on regional analyses and central plot). The underlying methodology
and data basis are the same as for Figure 3.5 (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 for more details).

Figure 3.10 | Probability ratio (PR) of exceeding (heavy precipitation) thresholds. (a) PR of exceeding the 99th (blue) and 99.9th (red) percentile of pre-industrial daily
precipitation at a given warming level, averaged across land (from Fischer and Knutti, 2015). (b) PR for precipitation extremes (RX1day) for different event probabilities (with RV
indicating return values) in the current climate (1C of global warming). Shading shows the interquartile (25-75%) range (from Kharin et al., 2018).

195

Chapter 3
3.3.3.2 (continued)

heavy precipitation (high confidence). Several large regions display
statistically significant differences in heavy precipitation at 1.5C
versus 2C GMST warming, with stronger increases at 2C global
warming, and there is a global tendency towards increases in heavy
precipitation on land at 2C compared with 1.5C warming (high
confidence). Overall, regions that display statistically significant

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

changes in heavy precipitation between 1.5C and 2C of global
warming are located in high latitudes (Alaska/western Canada, eastern
Canada/Greenland/Iceland, northern Europe, northern Asia) and high
elevation (e.g., Tibetan Plateau), as well as in eastern Asia (including
China and Japan) and in eastern North America (medium confidence).
There is low confidence in projected changes in heavy precipitation in
other regions.

3

Figure 3.11 | Significance of differences in regional mean precipitation and range of precipitation indices between the 1.5C and 2C global mean temperature targets
(rows). Definition of indices: PRCPTOT: mean precipitation; CWD: consecutive wet days; R10mm: number of days with precipitation >10 mm; R1mm: number of days with
precipitation >1 mm; R20mm: number of days with precipitation >20 mm; R95ptot: proportion of rain falling as 95th percentile or higher; R99ptot: proportion of rain falling as
99th percentile or higher; RX1day: intensity of maximum yearly 1-day precipitation; RX5day: intensity of maximum yearly 5-day precipitation; SDII: Simple Daily Intensity Index.
Columns indicate analysed regions and global land (see Figure 3.2 for definitions). Significant differences are shown in light blue (wetting tendency) or brown (drying tendency)
shading, with increases indicated with `+' and decreases indicated with `-', while non-significant differences are shown in grey shading. The underlying methodology and the
data basis are the same as in Figure 3.8 (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 for more details).

3.3.4

Drought and Dryness

3.3.4.1 Observed and attributed changes
The IPCC AR5 assessed that there was low confidence in the sign of
drought trends since 1950 at the global scale, but that there was high
confidence in observed trends in some regions of the world, including
drought increases in the Mediterranean and West Africa and drought
decreases in central North America and northwest Australia (Hartmann
et al., 2013; Stocker et al., 2013). AR5 assessed that there was low
confidence in the attribution of global changes in droughts and did
not provide assessments for the attribution of regional changes in
droughts (Bindoff et al., 2013a).
The recent literature does not suggest that the SREX and AR5
assessment of drought trends should be revised, except in the
Mediterranean region. Recent publications based on observational and
modelling evidence suggest that human emissions have substantially
increased the probability of drought years in the Mediterranean region
(Gudmundsson and Seneviratne, 2016; Gudmundsson et al., 2017).
Based on this evidence, there is medium confidence that enhanced
196

greenhouse forcing has contributed to increased drying in the
Mediterranean region (including southern Europe, northern Africa and
the Near East) and that this tendency will continue to increase under
higher levels of global warming.

3.3.4.2 Projected changes in drought and dryness at 1.5C
versus 2C
There is medium confidence in projections of changes in drought
and dryness. This is partly consistent with AR5, which assessed these
projections as being `likely (medium confidence)' (Collins et al., 2013;
Stocker et al., 2013). However, given this medium confidence, the
current assessment does not include a likelihood statement, thereby
maintaining consistency with the IPCC uncertainty guidance document
(Mastrandrea et al., 2010) and the assessment of the IPCC SREX report
(Seneviratne et al., 2012). The technical summary of AR5 (Stocker et
al., 2013) assessed that soil moisture drying in the Mediterranean,
southwestern USA and southern African regions was consistent with
projected changes in the Hadley circulation and increased surface
temperatures, and it concluded that there was high confidence
in likely surface drying in these regions by the end of this century

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Box 3.1 | Sub-Saharan Africa: Changes in Temperature and Precipitation Extremes
Sub-Saharan Africa has experienced the dramatic consequences of climate extremes becoming more frequent and more intense over the
past decades (Paeth et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2017). In order to join international efforts to reduce climate change, all African countries
signed the Paris Agreement. In particular, through their nationally determined contributions (NDCs), they committed to contribute to the
global effort to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions with the aim to constrain global temperature increases to `well below 2C'
and to pursue efforts to limit warming to `1.5C above pre-industrial levels'. The target of limiting global warming to 1.5C above preindustrial levels is useful for conveying the urgency of the situation. However, it focuses the climate change debate on a temperature
threshold (Section 3.3.2), while the potential impacts of these global warming levels on key sectors at local to regional scales, such as
agriculture, energy and health, remain uncertain in most regions and countries of Africa (Sections 3.3.3, 3.3.4, 3.3.5 and 3.3.6).
Weber et al. (2018) found that at regional scales, temperature increases in sub-Saharan Africa are projected to be higher than the global
mean temperature increase (at global warming of 1.5C and at 2C; see Section 3.3.2 for further background and analyses of climate
model projections). Even if the mean global temperature anomaly is kept below 1.5C, regions between 15S and 15N are projected to
experience an increase in hot nights, as well as longer and more frequent heatwaves (e.g., Kharin et al., 2018). Increases would be even
larger if the global mean temperature were to reach 2C of global warming, with significant changes in the occurrence and intensity of
temperature extremes in all sub-Saharan regions (Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2; Figures 3.4, 3.5 and 3.8).
West and Central Africa are projected to display particularly large increases in the number of hot days, both at 1.5C and 2C of global
warming (Section 3.3.2). This is due to the relatively small interannual present-day variability in this region, which implies that climatechange signals can be detected earlier there (Section 3.3.2; Mahlstein et al., 2011). Projected changes in total precipitation exhibit
uncertainties, mainly in the Sahel (Section 3.3.3 and Figure 3.8; Diedhiou et al., 2018). In the Guinea Coast and Central Africa, only a
small change in total precipitation is projected, although most models (70%) indicate a decrease in the length of wet periods and a
slight increase in heavy rainfall. Western Sahel is projected by most models (80%) to experience the strongest drying, with a significant
increase in the maximum length of dry spells (Diedhiou et al., 2018). Above 2C, this region could become more vulnerable to drought
and could face serious food security issues (Cross-Chapter Box 6 and Section 3.4.6 in this chapter; Salem et al., 2017; Parkes et al.,
2018). West Africa has thus been identified as a climate-change hotspot with negative impacts from climate change on crop yields and
production (Cross-Chapter Box 6 and Section 3.4.6; Sultan and Gaetani, 2016; Palazzo et al., 2017). Despite uncertainty in projections
for precipitation in West Africa, which is essential for rain-fed agriculture, robust evidence of yield loss might emerge. This yield loss
is expected to be mainly driven by increased mean temperature, while potential wetter or drier conditions - as well as elevated CO2
concentrations - could modulate this effect (Roudier et al., 2011; see also Cross-Chapter Box 6 and Section 3.4.6). Using Representative
Concentration Pathway (RCP)8.5 Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX) scenarios from 25 regional climate
models (RCMs) forced with different general circulation models (GCMs), Klutse et al. (2018) noted a decrease in mean rainfall over
West Africa in models with stronger warming for this region at 1.5C of global warming (Section 3.3.4). Mba et al. (2018) used a similar
approach and found a lack of consensus in the changes in precipitation over Central Africa (Figure 3.8 and Section 3.3.4), although there
was a tendency towards a decrease in the maximum number of consecutive wet days (CWD) and a significant increase in the maximum
number of consecutive dry days (CDD).

3

Over southern Africa, models agree on a positive sign of change for temperature, with temperature rising faster at 2C (1.5C-2.5C) as
compared to 1.5C (0.5C-1.5C) of global warming. Areas in the south-western region, especially in South Africa and parts of Namibia
and Botswana, are expected to experience the largest increases in temperature (Section 3.3.2; Engelbrecht et al., 2015; Maure et al.,
2018). The western part of southern Africa is projected to become drier with increasing drought frequency and number of heatwaves
towards the end of the 21st century (Section 3.3.4; Engelbrecht et al., 2015; Dosio, 2017; Maure et al., 2018). At 1.5C, a robust signal
of precipitation reduction is found over the Limpopo basin and smaller areas of the Zambezi basin in Zambia, as well as over parts of
Western Cape in South Africa, while an increase is projected over central and western South Africa, as well as in southern Namibia
(Section 3.3.4). At 2C, the region is projected to face robust precipitation decreases of about 10-20% and increases in the number of
CDD, with longer dry spells projected over Namibia, Botswana, northern Zimbabwe and southern Zambia. Conversely, the number of
CWD is projected to decrease, with robust signals over Western Cape (Maure et al., 2018). Projected reductions in stream flow of 5-10%
in the Zambezi River basin have been associated with increased evaporation and transpiration rates resulting from a rise in temperature
( Section 3.3.5; Kling et al., 2014), with issues for hydroelectric power across the region of southern Africa.
For Eastern Africa, Osima et al. (2018) found that annual rainfall projections show a robust increase in precipitation over Somalia and
a less robust decrease over central and northern Ethiopia (Section 3.3.3). The number of CDD and CWD are projected to increase and
decrease, respectively (Section 3.3.4). These projected changes could impact the agricultural and water sectors in the region (CrossChapter Box 6 in this chapter and Section 3.4.6).

197

Chapter 3

under the RCP8.5 scenario. However, more recent assessments have
highlighted uncertainties in dryness projections due to a range of
factors, including variations between the drought and dryness indices
considered, and the effects of enhanced CO2 concentrations on plant
water-use efficiency (Orlowsky and Seneviratne, 2013; Roderick et
al., 2015). Overall, projections of changes in drought and dryness for
high-emissions scenarios (e.g., RCP8.5, corresponding to about 4C of
global warming) are uncertain in many regions, although a few regions
display consistent drying in most assessments (e.g., Seneviratne et al.,
2012; Orlowsky and Seneviratne, 2013). Uncertainty is expected to be
even larger for conditions with a smaller signal-to-noise ratio, such as
for global warming levels of 1.5C and 2C.

3

Some published literature is now available on the evaluation of
differences in drought and dryness occurrence at 1.5C and 2C of global
warming for (i) precipitation minus evapotranspiration (P-E, a general
measure of water availability; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Greve et al.,
2018), (ii) soil moisture anomalies (Lehner et al., 2017; Wartenburger
et al., 2017), (iii) consecutive dry days (CDD) (Schleussner et al., 2016b;
Wartenburger et al., 2017), (iv) the 12-month standardized precipitation
index (Wartenburger et al., 2017), (v) the Palmer drought severity index
(Lehner et al., 2017), and (vi) annual mean runoff (Schleussner et al.,
2016b, see also next section). These analyses have produced consistent
findings overall, despite the known sensitivity of drought assessments to
chosen drought indices (see above paragraph). These analyses suggest
that increases in drought, dryness or precipitation deficits are projected
at 1.5C or 2C global warming in some regions compared to the pre-

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

industrial or present-day conditions, as well as between these two
global warming levels, although there is substantial variability in signals
depending on the considered indices or climate models (Lehner et al.,
2017; Schleussner et al., 2017; Greve et al., 2018) (medium confidence).
Generally, the clearest signals are found for the Mediterranean region
(medium confidence).
Greve et al. (2018, Figure 3.12) derives the sensitivity of regional
changes in precipitation minus evapotranspiration to global
temperature changes. The simulations analysed span the full range of
available emission scenarios, and the sensitivities are derived using
a modified pattern scaling approach. The applied approach assumes
linear dependencies on global temperature changes while thoroughly
addressing associated uncertainties via resampling methods. Northern
high-latitude regions display robust responses tending towards
increased wetness, while subtropical regions display a tendency
towards drying but with a large range of responses. While the internal
variability and the scenario choice play an important role in the overall
spread of the simulations, the uncertainty stemming from the climate
model choice usually dominates, accounting for about half of the total
uncertainty in most regions (Wartenburger et al., 2017; Greve et al.,
2018). The sign of projections, that is, whether there might be increases
or decreases in water availability under higher global warming levels,
is particularly uncertain in tropical and mid-latitude regions. An
assessment of the implications of limiting the global mean temperature
increase to values below (i) 1.5C or (ii) 2C shows that constraining
global warming to the 1.5C target might slightly influence the mean

Figure 3.12 | Summary of the likelihood of increases/decreases in precipitation minus evapotranspiration (P-E) in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5)
simulations considering all scenarios and a representative subset of 14 climate models (one from each modelling centre). Panel plots show the uncertainty distribution of the
sensitivity of P-E to global temperature change, averaged for most IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risk of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change
Adaptation (SREX) regions (see Figure 3.2) outlined in the map (from Greve et al., 2018).

198

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

specific assessment of changes in the tails of the drought and dryness
distribution. The conclusions of Lehner et al. (2017) are that (i) `risks of
consecutive drought years show little change in the US Southwest and
Central Plains, but robust increases in Europe and the Mediterranean',
and that (ii) `limiting warming to 1.5C may have benefits for future
drought risk, but such benefits are regional, and in some cases highly
uncertain'.

response but could substantially reduce the risk of experiencing
extreme changes in regional water availability (Greve et al., 2018).
The findings from the analysis for the mean response by Greve et al.
(2018) are qualitatively consistent with results from Wartenburger et
al. (2017), who used an ESR (Section 3.2) rather than a pattern scaling
approach for a range of drought and dryness indices. They are also
consistent with a study by Lehner et al. (2017), who assessed changes
in droughts based on soil moisture changes and the Palmer-Drought
Severity Index. Notably, these two publications do not provide a
Alaska/N.W. Canada
(ALA)

1

S.E. South America
(SSA)

10

Canada/Greenl./Icel.
(CGI)

2

11

W. North America
(WNA)

C. North America
(CNA)

3

E. North America
(ENA)

4

15

6

Amazon
(AMZ)

7

8

2

1
4

11

W. Coast South America
(WSA)

C. Europe
(CEU)

S. Europe/Mediterranean
(MED)

19

14
7
9

20 21

13

22

23

15

8

9

18

12
13

5

W. Africa
(WAF)

N.E. Brazil
(NEB)

12

6
14

Central America/Mexico
(CAM)

5

N. Europe
(NEU)

3

Sahara
(SAH)

Figure 3.13 features projected changes in CDD as a function of global
temperature increase, using a similar approach as for Figures 3.5 (based

24

16

E. Africa
(EAF)

16

17

3

S. Africa
(SAF)

25

17
10

26

 CD D (2C - 1.5C) (days)
18

N. Asia
(NAS)

19

W. Asia
(WAS)

20

-2

-1

Tibetan Plateau
(TIB)

-0.5

21

Global Land

22

0

0.5

E. Asia
(EAS)

1

2
23

4

S. Asia
(SAS)

Global Ocean#

6

S.E. Asia
(SEA)

24

Legend
 CDD reg (days)

Global Land + Ocean#

-4

C. Asia
(CAS)

N. Australia
(NAU)

S. Australia/New Zealand
(SAU)

26

CMIP5 (ESR)
historical

50

RCP 8.5

25

HAPPI

0
-25

25

1.5C - pre-industrial
2.0C - pre-industrial

0 1 2 3
 T glob (C)

Figure 3.13 | Projected changes in consecutive dry days (CDD) as a function of global warming for IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risk of Extreme Events and Disasters
to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SREX) regions, based on an empirical scaling relationship applied to Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) data
together with projected changes from the HAPPI multimodel experiment (bar plots on regional analyses and central plot, respectively). The underlying methodology and the
data basis are the same as for Figure 3.5 (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 for more details).
Global
ALA AMZ CAM CAS CEU CGI CNA EAF EAS ENA MED NAS NAU NEB NEU SAF SAH SAS SAU SEA
Land

SSA

T IB WAF WAS WNA WSA

CDD

+

-

+

+

+

+

-

+

+

-

-

+

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

-

+

-

+

+

-

+

P- E

+

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

-

-

+

-

-

+

-

-

+

-

+

+

-

+

-

+

-

SMA

-

+

-

-

-

-

-

+

+

-

-

-

-

-

-

+

-

-

-

-

-

+

+

-

-

+

-

SPI 12

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

+

-

+

+

-

+

-

-

+

-

-

-

-

+

-

+

-

-

+

+

Figure 3.14 | Significance of differences in regional drought and dryness indices between the 1.5C and 2C global mean temperature targets (rows). Definition of indices:
CDD: consecutive dry days; P-E: precipitation minus evapotranspiration; SMA: soil moisture anomalies; SPI12: 12-month Standarized Precipitation Index. Columns indicate
analysed regions and global land (see Figure 3.2 for definitions). Significant differences are shown in light blue/brown shading (increases indicated with +, decreases indicated
with -; light blue shading indicates decreases in dryness (decreases in CDD, or increases in P-E, SMA or SPI12) and light brown shading indicates increases in dryness (increases
in CDD, or decreases in P-E, SMA or SPI12). Non-significant differences are shown in grey shading. The underlying methodology and the data basis are the same as for Figure
3.7 (see Supplementary Material 3.SM.2 for more details).

199

Chapter 3

on Wartenburger et al., 2017). The figure also include results from the
HAPPI experiment (Mitchell et al., 2017). Again, the CMIP5-based ESR
estimates and the results of the HAPPI experiment agree well. Note
that the responses vary widely among the considered regions.
Similar to Figures 3.8 and 3.11, Figure 3.14 features an objective
identification of `hotspots' / key risks in dryness indices subdivided
by region, based on the approach by Wartenburger et al. (2017). This
analysis reveals the following hotspots of drying (i.e. increases in CDD
and/or decreases in P-E, soil moisture anomalies (SMA) and 12-month
Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI12), with at least one of the
indices displaying statistically significant drying): the Mediterranean
region (MED; including southern Europe, northern Africa, and the Near
East), northeastern Brazil (NEB) and southern Africa.

3

Consistent with this analysis, the available literature particularly
supports robust increases in dryness and decreases in water availability
in southern Europe and the Mediterranean with a shift from 1.5C to
2C of global warming (medium confidence) (Figure 3.13; Schleussner
et al., 2016b; Lehner et al., 2017; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Greve et
al., 2018; Samaniego et al., 2018). This region is already displaying
substantial drying in the observational record (Seneviratne et al., 2012;
Sheffield et al., 2012; Greve et al., 2014; Gudmundsson and Seneviratne,
2016; Gudmundsson et al., 2017), which provides additional evidence
supporting this tendency and suggests that it will be a hotspot of
dryness change at global warming levels beyond 1.5C (see also Box
3.2). The other identified hotspots, southern Africa and northeastern

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Brazil, also consistently display drying trends under higher levels of
forcing in other publications (e.g., Orlowsky and Seneviratne, 2013),
although no published studies could be found reporting observed
drying trends in these regions. There are substantial increases in
the risk of increased dryness (medium confidence) in both the
Mediterranean region and Southern Africa at 2C versus 1.5C of
global warming because these regions display significant changes
in two dryness indicators (CDD and SMA) between these two global
warming levels (Figure 3.14); the strongest effects are expected for
extreme droughts (medium confidence) (Figure 3.12). There is low
confidence elsewhere, owing to a lack of consistency in analyses
with different models or different dryness indicators. However, in
many regions there is medium confidence that most extreme risks of
changes in dryness are avoided if global warming is constrained at
1.5C instead of 2C (Figure 3.12).
In summary, in terms of drought and dryness, limiting global warming
to 1.5C is expected to substantially reduce the probability of extreme
changes in water availability in some regions compared to changes
under 2C of global warming (medium confidence). For shift from 1.5C
to 2C of GMST warming, the available studies and analyses suggest
strong increases in the probability of dryness and reduced water
availability in the Mediterranean region (including southern Europe,
northern Africa and the Near East) and in southern Africa (medium
confidence). Based on observations and modelling experiments, a
drying trend is already detectable in the Mediterranean region, that is,
at global warming of less than 1C (medium confidence).

Box 3.2 | Droughts in the Mediterranean Basin and the Middle East
Human society has developed in tandem with the natural environment of the Mediterranean basin over several millennia, laying
the groundwork for diverse and culturally rich communities. Even if advances in technology may offer some protection from climatic
hazards, the consequences of climatic change for inhabitants of this region continue to depend on the long-term interplay between an
array of societal and environmental factors (Holmgren et al., 2016). As a result, the Mediterranean is an example of a region with high
vulnerability where various adaptation responses have emerged. Previous IPCC assessments and recent publications project regional
changes in climate under increased temperatures, including consistent climate model projections of increased precipitation deficit
amplified by strong regional warming (Section 3.3.3; Seneviratne et al., 2012; Christensen et al., 2013; Collins et al., 2013; Greve and
Seneviratne, 2015).
The long history of resilience to climatic change is especially apparent in the eastern Mediterranean region, which has experienced a
strong negative trend in precipitation since 1960 (Mathbout et al., 2017) and an intense and prolonged drought episode between 2007
and 2010 (Kelley et al., 2015). This drought was the longest and most intense in the last 900 years (Cook et al., 2016). Some authors
(e.g., Trigo et al., 2010; Kelley et al., 2015) assert that very low precipitation levels have driven a steep decline in agricultural productivity
in the Euphrates and Tigris catchment basins, and displaced hundreds of thousands of people, mainly in Syria. Impacts on the water
resources (Yazdanpanah et al., 2016) and crop performance in Iran have also been reported (Saeidi et al., 2017). Many historical periods
of turmoil have coincided with severe droughts, for example the drought which occurred at the end of the Bronze Age approximately
3200 years ago (Kaniewski et al., 2015). In this instance, a number of flourishing eastern Mediterranean civilizations collapsed, and rural
settlements re-emerged with agro-pastoral activities and limited long-distance trade. This illustrates how some vulnerable regions are
forced to pursue drastic adaptive responses, including migration and societal structure changes.
The potential evolution of drought conditions under 1.5C or 2C of global warming (Section 3.3.4) can be analysed by comparing the
2008 drought (high temperature, low precipitation) with the 1960 drought (low temperature, low precipitation) (Kelley et al., 2015).
Though the precipitation deficits were comparable, the 2008 drought was amplified by increased evapotranspiration induced by much
higher temperatures (a mean increase of 1C compared with the 1931-2008 period in Syria) and a large population increase (from

200

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Box 3.2 (continued)

5 million in 1960 to 22 million in 2008). Koutroulis et al. (2016) reported that only 6% out of the total 18% decrease in water availability
projected for Crete under 2C of global warming at the end of the 21st century would be due to decreased precipitation, with the
remaining 12% due to an increase in evapotranspiration. This study and others like it confirm an important risk of extreme drought
conditions for the Middle East under 1.5C of global warming (Jacob et al., 2018), with risks being even higher in continental locations
than on islands; these projections are consistent with current observed changes (Section 3.3.4; Greve et al., 2014). Risks of drying in the
Mediterranean region could be substantially reduced if global warming is limited to 1.5C compared to 2C or higher levels of warming
(Section 3.4.3; Guiot and Cramer, 2016). Higher warming levels may induce high levels of vulnerability exacerbated by large changes
in demography.

3.3.5

Runoff and Fluvial Flooding

3.3.5.1 Observed and attributed changes in runoff and river
flooding
There has been progress since AR5 in identifying historical changes
in streamflow and continental runoff. Using the available streamflow
data, Dai (2016) showed that longterm (1948-2012) flow trends
are statistically significant only for 27.5% of the world's 200 major
rivers, with negative trends outnumbering the positive ones. Although
streamflow trends are mostly not statistically significant, they are
consistent with observed regional precipitation changes. From 1950 to
2012, precipitation and runoff have increased over southeastern South
America, central and northern Australia, the central and northeastern
United States, central and northern Europe, and most of Russia, and
they have decreased over most of Africa, East and South Asia, eastern
coastal Australia, the southeastern and northwestern United States,
western and eastern Canada, the Mediterranean region and some
regions of Brazil (Dai, 2016).
A large part of the observed regional trends in streamflow and runoff
might have resulted from internal multi-decadal and multi-year climate
variations, especially the Pacific decadal variability (PDV), the Atlantic
Multi-Decadal Oscillation (AMO) and the El Nino-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO), although the effect of anthropogenic greenhouse gases
and aerosols could also be important (Hidalgo et al., 2009; Gu and
Adler, 2013, 2015; Chiew et al., 2014; Luo et al., 2016; Gudmundsson
et al., 2017). Additionally, other human activities can influence the
hydrological cycle, such as land-use/land-cover change, modifications
in river morphology and water table depth, construction and
operation of hydropower plants, dikes and weirs, wetland drainage,
and agricultural practices such as water withdrawal for irrigation. All
of these activities can also have a large impact on runoff at the river
basin scale, although there is less agreement over their influence on
global mean runoff (Gerten et al., 2008; Sterling et al., 2012; Hall et al.,
2014; Betts et al., 2015; Arheimer et al., 2017). Some studies suggest
that increases in global runoff resulting from changes in land cover
or land use (predominantly deforestation) are counterbalanced by
decreases resulting from irrigation (Gerten et al., 2008; Sterling et al.,
2012). Likewise, forest and grassland fires can modify the hydrological
response at the watershed scale when the burned area is significant
(Versini et al., 2013; Springer et al., 2015; Wine and Cadol, 2016).
Few studies have explored observed changes in extreme streamflow
and river flooding since the IPCC AR5. Mallakpour and Villarini (2015)

analysed changes of flood magnitude and frequency in the central
United States by considering stream gauge daily records with at least
50 years of data ending no earlier than 2011. They showed that flood
frequency has increased, whereas there was limited evidence of a
decrease in flood magnitude in this region. Stevens et al. (2016) found
a rise in the number of reported floods in the United Kingdom during
the period 1884-2013, with flood events appearing more frequently
towards the end of the 20th century. A peak was identified in 2012,
when annual rainfall was the second highest in over 100 years. Do et al.
(2017) computed the trends in annual maximum daily streamflow data
across the globe over the 1966-2005 period. They found decreasing
trends for a large number of stations in western North America and
Australia, and increasing trends in parts of Europe, eastern North
America, parts of South America, and southern Africa.
In summary, streamflow trends since 1950 are not statistically
significant in most of the world's largest rivers (high confidence),
while flood frequency and extreme streamflow have increased in some
regions (high confidence).

3.3.5.2 Projected changes in runoff and river flooding at 1.5C
versus 2C of global warming
Global-scale assessments of projected changes in freshwater systems
generally suggest that areas with either positive or negative changes
in mean annual streamflow are smaller for 1.5C than for 2C of
global warming (Betts et al., 2018; Doll et al., 2018). Doll et al. (2018)
found that only 11% of the global land area (excluding Greenland and
Antarctica) shows a statistically significantly larger hazard at 2C than
at 1.5C. Significant decreases are found for 13% of the global land
area for both global warming levels, while significant increases are
projected to occur for 21% of the global land area at 1.5C, and rise
to between 26% (Doll et al., 2018) and approximately 50% (Betts et
al., 2018) at 2C.
At the regional scale, projected runoff changes generally follow the
spatial extent of projected changes in precipitation (see Section 3.3.3).
Emerging literature includes runoff projections for different warming
levels. For 2C of global warming, an increase in runoff is projected
for much of the high northern latitudes, Southeast Asia, East Africa,
northeastern Europe, India, and parts of, Austria, China, Hungary,
Norway, Sweden, the northwest Balkans and Sahel (Schleussner et
al., 2016b; Donnelly et al., 2017; Doll et al., 2018; Zhai et al., 2018).
Additionally, decreases are projected in the Mediterranean region,
southern Australia, Central America, and central and southern South
201

3

Chapter 3

America (Schleussner et al., 2016b; Donnelly et al., 2017; Doll et al.,
2018). Differences between 1.5C and 2C would be most prominent
in the Mediterranean, where the median reduction in annual runoff
is expected to be about 9% (likely range 4.5-15.5%) at 1.5C,
while at 2C of warming runoff could decrease by 17% (likely range
8-25%) (Schleussner et al., 2016b). Consistent with these projections,
Doll et al. (2018) found that statistically insignificant changes in the
mean annual streamflow around the Mediterranean region became
significant when the global warming scenario was changed from 1.5C
to 2C, with decreases of 10-30% between these two warming levels.
Donnelly et al. (2017) found an intense decrease in runoff along both
the Iberian and Balkan coasts with an increase in warming level.
Basin-scale projections of river runoff at different warming levels
are available for many regions. Betts et al. (2018) assessed runoff
changes in 21 of the world's major river basins at 1.5C and 2C of
global warming (Figure 3.15). They found a general tendency towards
increased runoff, except in the Amazon, Orange, Danube and Guadiana
basins where the range of projections indicate decreased mean flows
(Figure 3.13). In the case of the Amazon, mean flows are projected
to decline by up to 25% at 2C global warming (Betts et al., 2018).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Gosling et al. (2017) analysed the impact of global warming of 1C, 2C
and 3C above pre-industrial levels on river runoff at the catchment
scale, focusing on eight major rivers in different continents: Upper
Amazon, Darling, Ganges, Lena, Upper Mississippi, Upper Niger, Rhine
and Tagus. Their results show that the sign and magnitude of change
with global warming for the Upper Amazon, Darling, Ganges, Upper
Niger and Upper Mississippi is unclear, while the Rhine and Tagus may
experience decreases in projected runoff and the Lena may experience
increases. Donnelly et al. (2017) analysed the mean flow response to
different warming levels for six major European rivers: Glomma, Wisla,
Lule, Ebro, Rhine and Danube. Consistent with the increases in mean
runoff projected for large parts of northern Europe, the Glomma, Wisla
and Lule rivers could experience increased discharges with global
warming while discharges from the Ebro could decrease, in part due
to a decrease in runoff in southern Europe. In the case of the Rhine
and Danube rivers, Donnelly et al. (2017) did not find clear results.
Mean annual runoff of the Yiluo River catchment in northern China
is projected to decrease by 22% at 1.5C and by 21% at 2C, while
the mean annual runoff for the Beijiang River catchment in southern
China is projected to increase by less than 1% at 1.5C and 3% at
2C in comparison to the studied baseline period (L. Liu et al., 2017).

3

Figure 3.15 | Runoff changes in twenty-one of the world's major river basins at 1.5C (blue) and 2C (orange) of global warming, simulated by the Joint UK Land Environment
Simulator (JULES) ecosystem-hydrology model under the ensemble of six climate projections. Boxes show the 25th and 75th percentile changes, whiskers show the range, circles
show the four projections that do not define the ends of the range, and crosses show the ensemble means. Numbers in square brackets show the ensemble-mean flow in the
baseline (millimetres of rain equivalent) (Source: Betts et al., 2018).

202

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chen et al. (2017) assessed the future changes in water resources in
the Upper Yangtze River basin for the same warming levels and found
a slight decrease in the annual discharge at 1.5C but a slight increase
at 2C. Montroull et al. (2018) studied the hydrological impacts of the
main rivers (Paraguay, Parana, Iguazu and Uruguay) in La Plata basin
in South America under 1.5C and 2C of global warming and for two
emissions scenarios. The Uruguay basin shows increases in streamflow
for all scenarios/warming targets except for the combination of
RCP8.5/1.5C of warming. The increase is approximately 15% above
the 1981-2000 reference period for 2C of global warming and the
RCP4.5 scenario. For the other three rivers the sign of the change in
mean streamflow depends strongly on the RCP and GCM used.
Marx et al. (2018) analysed how hydrological low flows in Europe are
affected under different global warming levels (1.5C, 2C and 3C).
The Alpine region showed the strongest low flow increase, from 22%
at 1.5C to 30% at 2C, because of the relatively large snow melt
contribution, while in the Mediterranean low flows are expected to
decrease because of the decreases in annual precipitation projected
for that region. Doll et al. (2018) found that extreme low flows in the
tropical Amazon, Congo and Indonesian basins could decrease by 10%
at 1.5C, whereas they could increase by 30% in the southwestern part
of Russia under the same warming level. At 2C, projected increases in
extreme low flows are exacerbated in the higher northern latitudes and
in eastern Africa, India and Southeast Asia, while projected decreases
intensify in the Amazon basin, western United States, central Canada,
and southern and western Europe, although not in the Congo basin or
Indonesia, where models show less agreement.
Recent analyses of projections in river flooding and extreme runoff and
flows are available for different global warming levels. At the global
scale, Alfieri et al. (2017) assessed the frequency and magnitude of river
floods and their impacts under 1.5C, 2C and 4C global warming
scenarios. They found that flood events with an occurrence interval
longer than the return period of present-day flood protections are
projected to increase in all continents under all considered warming
levels, leading to a widespread increment in the flood hazard. Doll et al.
(2018) found that high flows are projected to increase significantly on
11% and 21% of the global land area at 1.5C and 2C, respectively.
Significantly increased high flows are expected to occur in South and
Southeast Asia and Central Africa at 1.5C, with this effect intensifying
and including parts of South America at 2C.
Regarding the continental scale, Donnelly et al. (2017) and Thober et
al. (2018) explored climate change impacts on European high flows
and/or floods under 1.5C, 2C and 3C of global warming. Thober et
al. (2018) identified the Mediterranean region as a hotspot of change,
with significant decreases in high flows of -11% and -13% at 1.5C
and 2C, respectively, mainly resulting from reduced precipitation (Box
3.2). In northern regions, high flows are projected to rise by 1% and
5% at 1.5C and 2C, respectively, owing to increasing precipitation,
although floods could decrease by 6% in both scenarios because of
less snowmelt. Donnelly et al. (2017) found that high runoff levels
could rise in intensity, robustness and spatial extent over large parts
of continental Europe with an increasing warming level. At 2C, flood
magnitudes are expected to increase significantly in Europe south of
60N, except for some regions (Bulgaria, Poland and southern Spain);

Chapter 3

in contrast, they are projected to decrease at higher latitudes (e.g.,
in most of Finland, northwestern Russia and northern Sweden), with
the exception of southern Sweden and some coastal areas in Norway
where flood magnitudes may increase (Roudier et al., 2016). At the
basin scale, Mohammed et al. (2017) found that floods are projected to
be more frequent and flood magnitudes greater at 2C than at 1.5C
in the Brahmaputra River in Bangladesh. In coastal regions, increases
in heavy precipitation associated with tropical cyclones (Section
3.3.6) combined with increased sea levels (Section 3.3.9) may lead to
increased flooding (Section 3.4.5).
In summary, there is medium confidence that global warming of 2C
above the pre-industrial period would lead to an expansion of the
area with significant increases in runoff, as well as the area affected
by flood hazard, compared to conditions at 1.5C of global warming.
A global warming of 1.5C would also lead to an expansion of the global
land area with significant increases in runoff (medium confidence) and
to an increase in flood hazard in some regions (medium confidence)
compared to present-day conditions.

3.3.6

Tropical Cyclones and Extratropical Storms

Most recent studies on observed trends in the attributes of tropical
cyclones have focused on the satellite era starting in 1979 (Rienecker
et al., 2011), but the study of observed trends is complicated by the
heterogeneity of constantly advancing remote sensing techniques and
instrumentation during this period (e.g., Landsea, 2006; Walsh et al.,
2016). Numerous studies leading up to and after AR5 have reported
a decreasing trend in the global number of tropical cyclones and/or
the globally accumulated cyclonic energy (Emanuel, 2005; Elsner et al.,
2008; Knutson et al., 2010; Holland and Bruyere, 2014; Klotzbach and
Landsea, 2015; Walsh et al., 2016). A theoretical physical basis for such
a decrease to occur under global warming was recently provided by
Kang and Elsner (2015). However, using a relatively short (20 year)
and relatively homogeneous remotely sensed record, Klotzbach (2006)
reported no significant trends in global cyclonic activity, consistent
with more recent findings of Holland and Bruyere (2014). Such
contradictions, in combination with the fact that the almost fourdecade-long period of remotely sensed observations remains relatively
short to distinguish anthropogenically induced trends from decadal
and multi-decadal variability, implies that there is only low confidence
regarding changes in global tropical cyclone numbers under global
warming over the last four decades.
Studies in the detection of trends in the occurrence of very intense
tropical cyclones (category 4 and 5 hurricanes on the Saffir-Simpson
scale) over recent decades have yielded contradicting results. Most
studies have reported increases in these systems (Emanuel, 2005;
Webster et al., 2005; Klotzbach, 2006; Elsner et al., 2008; Knutson et al.,
2010; Holland and Bruyere, 2014; Walsh et al., 2016), in particular for the
North Atlantic, North Indian and South Indian Ocean basins (e.g., Singh
et al., 2000; Singh, 2010; Kossin et al., 2013; Holland and Bruyere, 2014;
Walsh et al., 2016). In the North Indian Ocean over the Arabian Sea, an
increase in the frequency of extremely severe cyclonic storms has been
reported and attributed to anthropogenic warming (Murakami et al.,
2017). However, to the east over the Bay of Bengal, tropical cyclones
and severe tropical cyclones have exhibited decreasing trends over
203

3

Chapter 3

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

the period 1961-2010, although the ratio between severe tropical
cyclones and all tropical cyclones is increasing (Mohapatra et al.,
2017). Moreover, studies that have used more homogeneous records,
but were consequently limited to rather short periods of 20 to 25 years,
have reported no statistically significant trends or decreases in the
global number of these systems (Kamahori et al., 2006; Klotzbach and
Landsea, 2015). Likewise, CMIP5 model simulations of the historical
period have not produced anthropogenically induced trends in very
intense tropical cyclones (Bender et al., 2010; Knutson et al., 2010,
2013; Camargo, 2013; Christensen et al., 2013), consistent with the
findings of Klotzbach and Landsea (2015). There is consequently low
confidence in the conclusion that the number of very intense cyclones
is increasing globally.

degrees of global warming on tropical cyclones over the southwest
Indian Ocean, using transient simulations that downscaled a number of
RCP8.5 GCM projections. Decreases in tropical cyclone frequencies are
projected under both 1.5C and 2C of global warming. The decreases
in cyclone frequencies under 2C of global warming are somewhat
larger than under 1.5C, but no further decreases are projected under
3C. This suggests that 2C of warming, at least in these downscaling
simulations, represents a type of stabilization level in terms of tropical
cyclone formation over the southwest Indian Ocean and landfall over
southern Africa (Muthige et al., 2018). There is thus limited evidence
that the global number of tropical cyclones will be lower under 2C
compared to 1.5C of global warming, but with an increase in the
number of very intense cyclones (low confidence).

General circulation model (GCM) projections of the changing
attributes of tropical cyclones under high levels of greenhouse gas
forcing (3C to 4C of global warming) consistently indicate decreases
in the global number of tropical cyclones (Knutson et al., 2010, 2015;
Sugi and Yoshimura, 2012; Christensen et al., 2013; Yoshida et al.,
2017). A smaller number of studies based on statistical downscaling
methodologies contradict these findings, however, and indicate
increases in the global number of tropical cyclones under climate
change (Emanuel, 2017). Most studies also indicate increases in the
global number of very intense tropical cyclones under high levels of
global warming (Knutson et al., 2015; Sugi et al., 2017), consistent
with dynamic theory (Kang and Elsner, 2015), although a few studies
contradict this finding (e.g., Yoshida et al., 2017). Hence, it is assessed
that under 3C to 4C of warming that the global number of tropical
cyclones would decrease whilst the number of very intense cyclones
would increase (medium confidence).

The global response of the mid-latitude atmospheric circulation to
1.5C and 2C of warming was investigated using the HAPPI ensemble
with a focus on the winter season (Li et al., 2018). Under 1.5C of
global warming a weakening of storm activity over North America,
an equatorward shift of the North Pacific jet exit and an equatorward
intensification of the South Pacific jet are projected. Under an additional
0.5C of warming a poleward shift of the North Atlantic jet exit and
an intensification on the flanks of the Southern Hemisphere storm
track are projected to become more pronounced. The weakening of
the Mediterranean storm track that is projected under low mitigation
emerges in the 2C warmer world (Li et al., 2018). AR5 assessed that
under high greenhouse gas forcing (3C or 4C of global warming)
there is low confidence in projections of poleward shifts of the
Northern Hemisphere storm tracks, while there is high confidence that
there would be a small poleward shift of the Southern Hemisphere
storm tracks (Stocker et al., 2013). In the context of this report, the
assessment is that there is limited evidence and low confidence in
whether any projected signal for higher levels of warming would be
clearly manifested under 2C of global warming.

To date, only two studies have directly explored the changing tropical
cyclone attributes under 1.5C versus 2C of global warming. Using
a high resolution global atmospheric model, Wehner et al. (2018a)
concluded that the differences in tropical cyclone statistics under 1.5C
versus 2C stabilization scenarios, as defined by the HAPPI protocols
(Mitchell et al., 2017) are small. Consistent with the majority of studies
performed for higher degrees of global warming, the total number
of tropical cyclones is projected to decrease under global warming,
whilst the most intense (categories 4 and 5) cyclones are projected
to occur more frequently. These very intense storms are projected
to be associated with higher peak wind speeds and lower central
pressures under 2C versus 1.5C of global warming. The accumulated
cyclonic energy is projected to decrease globally from 1.5C to 2C, in
association with a decrease in the global number of tropical cyclones
under progressively higher levels of global warming. It is also noted
that heavy rainfall associated with tropical cyclones was assessed in
the IPCC SREX as likely to increase under increasing global warming
(Seneviratne et al., 2012). Two recent articles suggest that there is
high confidence that the current level of global warming (i.e., about
1C, see Section 3.3.1) increased the heavy precipitation associated
with the 2017 Hurricane Harvey by about 15% or more (Risser and
Wehner, 2017; van Oldenborgh et al., 2017). Hence, it can be inferred,
under the assumption of linear dynamics, that further increases in
heavy precipitation would occur under 1.5C, 2C and higher levels of
global warming (medium confidence). Using a high resolution regional
climate model, Muthige et al. (2018) explored the effects of different
204

3.3.7

Ocean Circulation and Temperature

It is virtually certain that the temperature of the upper layers of the
ocean (0-700 m in depth) has been increasing, and that the global
mean for sea surface temperature (SST) has been changing at a rate
just behind that of GMST. The surfaces of three ocean basins has
warmed over the period 1950-2016 (by 0.11C, 0.07C and 0.05C
per decade for the Indian, Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, respectively;
Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014), with the greatest changes occurring
at the highest latitudes. Isotherms (i.e., lines of equal temperature) of
sea surface temperature (SST) are shifting to higher latitudes at rates
of up to 40 km per year (Burrows et al., 2014; Garcia Molinos et al.,
2015). Long-term patterns of variability make detecting signals due to
climate change complex, although the recent acceleration of changes
to the temperature of the surface layers of the ocean has made the
climate signal more distinct (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014). There is also
evidence of significant increases in the frequency of marine heatwaves
in the observational record (Oliver et al., 2018), consistent with
changes in mean ocean temperatures (high confidence). Increasing
climate extremes in the ocean are associated with the general rise in
global average surface temperature, as well as more intense patterns
of climate variability (e.g., climate change intensification of ENSO)
(Section 3.5.2.5). Increased heat in the upper layers of the ocean is

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

also driving more intense storms and greater rates of inundation in
some regions, which, together with sea level rise, are already driving
significant impacts to sensitive coastal and low-lying areas (Section
3.3.6).
Increasing land-sea temperature gradients have the potential to
strengthen upwelling systems associated with the eastern boundary
currents (Benguela, Canary, Humboldt and Californian Currents;
Bakun, 1990). Observed trends support the conclusion that a general
strengthening of longshore winds has occurred (Sydeman et al., 2014),
but the implications of trends detected in upwelling currents themselves
are unclear (Lluch-Cota et al., 2014). Projections of the scale of changes
between 1C and 1.5C of global warming and between 1.5C and
2C are only informed by the changes during the past increase in GMST
of 0.5C (low confidence). However, evidence from GCM projections
of future climate change indicates that a general strengthening of the
Benguela, Canary and Humboldt upwelling systems under enhanced
anthropogenic forcing (D. Wang et al., 2015) is projected to occur
(medium confidence). This strengthening is projected to be stronger
at higher latitudes. In fact, evidence from regional climate modelling
is supportive of an increase in long-shore winds at higher latitudes,
whereas long-shore winds may decrease at lower latitudes as a
consequence of the poleward displacement of the subtropical highs
under climate change (Christensen et al., 2007; Engelbrecht et al.,
2009).
It is more likely than not that the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) has been weakening in recent decades, given
the detection of the cooling of surface waters in the North Atlantic
and evidence that the Gulf Stream has slowed since the late 1950s
(Rahmstorf et al., 2015b; Srokosz and Bryden, 2015; Caesar et al.,
2018). There is only limited evidence linking the current anomalously
weak state of AMOC to anthropogenic warming (Caesar et al., 2018). It
is very likely that the AMOC will weaken over the 21st century. The best
estimates and ranges for the reduction based on CMIP5 simulations
are 11% (1- 24%) in RCP2.6 and 34% (12- 54%) in RCP8.5 (AR5).
There is no evidence indicating significantly different amplitudes of
AMOC weakening for 1.5C versus 2C of global warming.

3.3.8

Sea Ice

Summer sea ice in the Arctic has been retreating rapidly in recent
decades. During the period 1997 to 2014, for example, the monthly
mean sea ice extent during September (summer) decreased on average
by 130,000 km per year (Serreze and Stroeve, 2015). This is about four
times as fast as the September sea ice loss during the period 1979
to 1996. Sea ice thickness has also decreased substantially, with an
estimated decrease in ice thickness of more than 50% in the central
Arctic (Lindsay and Schweiger, 2015). Sea ice coverage and thickness
also decrease in CMIP5 simulations of the recent past, and are
projected to decrease in the future (Collins et al., 2013). However,
the modelled sea ice loss in most CMIP5 models is much smaller
than observed losses. Compared to observations, the simulations are
less sensitive to both global mean temperature rise (Rosenblum and
5

Chapter 3

Eisenman, 2017) and anthropogenic CO2 emissions (Notz and Stroeve,
2016). This mismatch between the observed and modelled sensitivity
of Arctic sea ice implies that the multi-model-mean responses of future
sea ice evolution probably underestimates the sea ice loss for a given
amount of global warming. To address this issue, studies estimating
the future evolution of Arctic sea ice tend to bias correct the model
simulations based on the observed evolution of Arctic sea ice in
response to global warming. Based on such bias correction, pre-AR5
and post-AR5 studies generally agree that for 1.5C of global warming
relative to pre-industrial levels, the Arctic Ocean will maintain a sea ice
cover throughout summer in most years (Collins et al., 2013; Notz and
Stroeve, 2016; Screen and Williamson, 2017; Jahn, 2018; Niederdrenk
and Notz, 2018; Sigmond et al., 2018). For 2C of global warming,
chances of a sea ice-free Arctic during summer are substantially higher
(Screen and Williamson, 2017; Jahn, 2018; Niederdrenk and Notz,
2018; Screen et al., 2018; Sigmond et al., 2018). Model simulations
suggest that there will be at least one sea ice-free Arctic5 summer after
approximately 10 years of stabilized warming at 2C, as compared
to one sea ice-free summer after 100 years of stabilized warming at
1.5C above pre-industrial temperatures (Jahn, 2018; Screen et al.,
2018; Sigmond et al., 2018). For a specific given year under stabilized
warming of 2C, studies based on large ensembles of simulations with
a single model estimate the likelihood of ice-free conditions as 35%
without a bias correction of the underlying model (Sanderson et al.,
2017; Jahn, 2018); as between 10% and >99% depending on the
observational record used to correct the sensitivity of sea ice decline
to global warming in the underlying model (Niederdrenk and Notz,
2018); and as 19% based on a procedure to correct for biases in the
climatological sea ice coverage in the underlying model (Sigmond et
al., 2018). The uncertainty of the first year of the occurrence of an icefree Arctic Ocean arising from internal variability is estimated to be
about 20 years (Notz, 2015; Jahn et al., 2016).
The more recent estimates of the warming necessary to produce an icefree Arctic Ocean during summer are lower than the ones given in AR5
(about 2.6C-3.1C of global warming relative to pre-industrial levels
or 1.6C-2.1C relative to present-day conditions), which were similar
to the estimate of 3C of global warming relative to pre-industrial
levels (or 2C relative to present-day conditions) by Mahlstein and
Knutti (2012) based on bias-corrected CMIP3 models. Rosenblum and
Eisenman (2016) explained why the sensitivity estimated by Mahlstein
and Knutti (2012) might be too low, estimating instead that September
sea ice in the Arctic would disappear at 2C of global warming
relative to pre-industrial levels (or about 1C relative to present-day
conditions), in line with the other recent estimates. Notz and Stroeve
(2016) used the observed correlation between September sea ice
extent and cumulative CO2 emissions to estimate that the Arctic Ocean
would become nearly free of sea ice during September with a further
1000 Gt of emissions, which also implies a sea ice loss at about 2C of
global warming. Some of the uncertainty in these numbers stems from
the possible impact of aerosols (Gagne et al., 2017) and of volcanic
forcing (Rosenblum and Eisenman, 2016). During winter, little Arctic
sea ice is projected to be lost for either 1.5C or 2C of global warming
(Niederdrenk and Notz, 2018).

Ice free is defined for the Special Report as when the sea ice extent is less than 106 km2. Ice coverage less than this is considered to be equivalent to an ice-free Arctic Ocean
for practical purposes in all recent studies.

205

3

Chapter 3

A substantial number of pre-AR5 studies found that there is no
indication of hysteresis behaviour of Arctic sea ice under decreasing
temperatures following a possible overshoot of a long-term
temperature target (Holland et al., 2006; Schroder and Connolley, 2007;
Armour et al., 2011; Sedlaek et al., 2011; Tietsche et al., 2011; Boucher
et al., 2012; Ridley et al., 2012). In particular, the relationship between
Arctic sea ice coverage and GMST was found to be indistinguishable
between a warming scenario and a cooling scenario. These results have
been confirmed by post-AR5 studies (Li et al., 2013; Jahn, 2018), which
implies high confidence that an intermediate temperature overshoot
has no long-term consequences for Arctic sea ice coverage.

3

In the Antarctic, sea ice shows regionally contrasting trends, such as a
strong decrease in sea ice coverage near the Antarctic peninsula but
increased sea ice coverage in the Amundsen Sea (Hobbs et al., 2016).
Averaged over these contrasting regional trends, there has been a slow
long-term increase in overall sea ice coverage in the Southern Ocean,
although with comparably low ice coverage from September 2016
onwards. Collins et al. (2013) assessed low confidence in Antarctic
sea ice projections because of the wide range of model projections
and an inability of almost all models to reproduce observations such
as the seasonal cycle, interannual variability and the long-term slow
increase. No existing studies have robustly assessed the possible future
evolution of Antarctic sea ice under low-warming scenarios.
In summary, the probability of a sea-ice-free Arctic Ocean during
summer is substantially higher at 2C compared to 1.5C of global
warming relative to pre-industrial levels, and there is medium
confidence that there will be at least one sea ice-free Arctic summer
after about 10 years of stabilized warming at 2C, while about
100 years are required at 1.5C. There is high confidence that an
intermediate temperature overshoot has no long-term consequences
for Arctic sea ice coverage with regrowth on decadal time scales.

3.3.9

Sea Level

Sea level varies over a wide range of temporal and spatial scales, which
can be divided into three broad categories. These are global mean sea
level (GMSL), regional variation about this mean, and the occurrence of
sea-level extremes associated with storm surges and tides. GMSL has
been rising since the late 19th century from the low rates of change that
characterized the previous two millennia (Church et al., 2013). Slowing
in the reported rate over the last two decades (Cazenave et al., 2014)
may be attributable to instrumental drift in the observing satellite
system (Watson et al., 2015) and increased volcanic activity (Fasullo
et al., 2016). Accounting for the former results in rates (1993 to mid2014) between 2.6 and 2.9 mm yr-1 (Watson et al., 2015). The relative
contributions from thermal expansion, glacier and ice-sheet mass loss,
and freshwater storage on land are relatively well understood (Church
et al., 2013; Watson et al., 2015) and their attribution is dominated by
anthropogenic forcing since 1970 (15  55% before 1950, 69  31%
after 1970) (Slangen et al., 2016).
There has been a significant advance in the literature since AR5, which
has included the development of semi-empirical models (SEMs) into a
broader emulation-based approach (Kopp et al., 2014; Mengel et al.,
2016; Nauels et al., 2017) that is partially based on the results from
206

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

more detailed, process-based modelling Church et al. (2013) assigned
low confidence to SEMs because these models assume that the
relation between climate forcing and GMSL is the same in the past
(calibration) and future (projection). Probable future changes in the
relative contributions of thermal expansion, glaciers and (in particular)
ice sheets invalidate this assumption. However, recent emulationbased studies overcame this shortcoming by considering individual
GMSL contributors separately, and they are therefore employed in
this assessment. In this subsection, the process-based literature of
individual contributors to GMSL is considered for scenarios close to
1.5C and 2C of global warming before emulation-based approaches
are assessed.
A limited number of processes-based studies are relevant to GMSL in
1.5C and 2C worlds. Marzeion et al. (2018) used a global glacier model
with temperature-scaled scenarios based on RCP2.6 to investigate
the difference between 1.5C and 2C of global warming and found
little difference between scenarios in the glacier contribution to GMSL
for the year 2100 (54-97 mm relative to present-day levels for 1.5C
and 63-112 mm for 2C, using a 90% confidence interval). This arises
because glacier melt during the remainder of the century is dominated
by the response to warming from pre-industrial to present-day levels,
which is in turn a reflection of the slow response times of glaciers. Furst
et al. (2015) made projections of the Greenland ice sheet's contribution
to GMSL using an ice-flow model forced by the regional climate
model Modele Atmospherique Regional (MAR; considered by Church
et al. (2013) to be the `most realistic' such model). They projected an
RCP2.6 range of 24-60 mm (1 standard deviation) by the end of the
century (relative to the year 2000 and consistent with the assessment
of Church et al. (2013); however, their projections do not allow the
difference between 1.5C and 2C worlds to be evaluated.
The Antarctic ice sheet can contribute both positively, through increases
in outflow (solid ice lost directly to the ocean), and negatively, through
increases in snowfall (owing to the increased moisture-bearing capacity
of a warmer atmosphere), to future GMSL rise. Frieler et al. (2015)
suggested a range of 3.5-8.7% C-1 for this effect, which is consistent
with AR5. Observations from the Amundsen Sea sector of Antarctica
suggest an increase in outflow (Mouginot et al., 2014) over recent
decades associated with grounding line retreat (Rignot et al., 2014)
and the influx of relatively warm Circumpolar Deepwater (Jacobs et al.,
2011). Literature on the attribution of these changes to anthropogenic
forcing is still in its infancy (Goddard et al., 2017; Turner et al., 2017a).
RCP2.6-based projections of Antarctic outflow (Levermann et al.,
2014; Golledge et al., 2015; DeConto and Pollard, 2016, who include
snowfall changes) are consistent with the AR5 assessment of Church
et al. (2013) for end-of-century GMSL for RCP2.6, and do not support
substantial additional GMSL rise by Marine Ice Sheet Instability or
associated instabilities (see Section 3.6). While agreement is relatively
good, concerns about the numerical fidelity of these models still exist,
and this may affect the quality of their projections (Drouet et al., 2013;
Durand and Pattyn, 2015). An assessment of Antarctic contributions
beyond the end of the century, in particular related to the Marine Ice
Sheet Instability, can be found in Section 3.6.
While some literature on process-based projections of GMSL for the
period up to 2100 is available, it is insufficient for distinguishing

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

between emissions scenarios associated with 1.5C and 2C warmer
worlds. This literature is, however, consistent with the assessment by
Church et al. (2013) of a likely range of 0.28-0.61 m in 2100 (relative
to 1986-2005), suggesting that the AR5 assessment is still appropriate.

Chapter 3

Recent emulation-based studies show convergence towards this
AR5 assessment (Table 3.1) and offer the advantage of allowing a
comparison between 1.5C and 2C warmer worlds. Table 3.1 features
a compilation of recent emulation-based and SEM studies.

Table 3.1 | Compilation of recent projections for sea level at 2100 (in cm) for Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)2.6, and 1.5C and 2C scenarios. Upper and lower
limits are shown for the 17-84% and 5-95% confidence intervals quoted in the original papers.
Study
AR5
Kopp et al. (2014)
Jevrejeva et al. (2016)
Kopp et al. (2016)

Baseline

RCP2.6
67%

1986-2005

28-61

2000

37-65

1986-2005

1.5C
90%

Mengel et al. (2016)

1986-2005

28-56

Nauels et al. (2017)

1986-2005

35-56

Goodwin et al. (2017)

1986-2005

31-59
45-70
45-72

Schaeffer et al. (2012)

2000

52-96

Schleussner et al. (2016b)

2000

Rasmussen et al. (2018)
Goodwin et al. (2018)

90%

24-61

54-99
26-53

2000
1986-2005

1986-2005
2000
1986-2005

There is little consensus between the reported ranges of GMSL rise
(Table 3.1). Projections vary in the range 0.26-0.77 m and 0.35-0.93
m for 1.5C and 2C respectively for the 17-84% confidence interval
(0.20-0.99 m and 0.24-1.17 m for the 5-95% confidence interval).
There is, however, medium agreement that GMSL in 2100 would be
0.04-0.16 m higher in a 2C warmer world compared to a 1.5C
warmer world based on the 17-84% confidence interval (0.00-0.24
m based on 5-95% confidence interval) with a value of around 0.1
m. There is medium confidence in this assessment because of issues
associated with projections of the Antarctic contribution to GMSL
that are employed in emulation-based studies (see above) and the
issues previously identified with SEMs (Church et al., 2013).
Translating projections of GMSL to the scale of coastlines and
islands requires two further steps. The first step accounts for regional
changes associated with changing water and ice loads (such as
Earth's gravitational field and rotation, and vertical land movement),
as well as spatial differences in ocean heat uptake and circulation.
The second step maps regional sea level to changes in the return
periods of particular flood events to account for effects not included
in global climate models, such as tides, storm surges, and wave setup
and runup. Kopp et al. (2014) presented a framework to do this and
gave an example application for nine sites located in the US, Japan,
northern Europe and Chile. Of these sites, seven (all except those in
northern Europe) were found to experience at least a quadrupling
in the number of years in the 21st century with 1-in-100-year floods
under RCP2.6 compared to under no future sea level rise. Rasmussen

56-105
36-65

29-46
30-58
40-77

Sanderson et al. (2017)
Nicholls et al. (2018)

67%

29-58
28-51

Bittermann et al. (2017)

90%

29-82

2000

Jackson et al. (2018)

67%

2C

35-64

20-67
28-93

39-61
35-64
47-93

50-80

60-90

24-54

31-65

28-82
26-62

39-76

3

24-74
32-117

28-96
30-69

et al. (2018) used this approach to investigate the difference
between 1.5C and 2C warmer worlds up to 2200. They found that
the reduction in the frequency of 1-in-100-year floods in a 1.5C
compared to a 2C warmer world would be greatest in the eastern
USA and Europe, with ESL event frequency amplification being
reduced by about a half and with smaller reductions for small island
developing states (SIDS). This last result contrasts with the finding
of Vitousek et al. (2017) that regions with low variability in extreme
water levels (such as SIDS in the tropics) are particularly sensitive to
GMSL rise, such that a doubling of frequency may be expected for
even small (0.1-0.2 m) rises. Schleussner et al. (2011) emulated the
AMOC based on a subset of CMIP-class climate models. When forced
using global temperatures appropriate for the CP3-PD scenario (1C
of warming in 2100 relative to 2000 or about 2C of warming relative
to pre-industrial) the emulation suggests an 11% median reduction
in AMOC strength at 2100 (relative to 2000) with an associated
0.04 m dynamic sea level rise along the New York City coastline.
In summary, there is medium confidence that GMSL rise will be about
0.1 m (within a 0.00-0.20 m range based on 17-84% confidenceinterval projections) less by the end of the 21st century in a 1.5C
compared to a 2C warmer world. Projections for 1.5C and 2C
global warming cover the ranges 0.2-0.8 m and 0.3-1.00 m relative
to 1986-2005, respectively (medium confidence). Sea level rise
beyond 2100 is discussed in Section 3.6; however, recent literature
strongly supports the assessment by Church et al. (2013) that sea
level rise will continue well beyond 2100 (high confidence).
207

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Box 3.3 | Lessons from Past Warm Climate Episodes
Climate projections and associated risk assessments for a future warmer world are based on climate model simulations. However,
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) climate models do not include all existing Earth system feedbacks and
may therefore underestimate both rates and extents of changes (Knutti and Sedlaek, 2012). Evidence from natural archives of three
moderately warmer (1.5C-2C) climate episodes in Earth's past help to assess such long-term feedbacks (Fischer et al., 2018).
While evidence over the last 2000 years and during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) was discussed in detail in the IPCC Fifth
Assessment Report (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2013), the climate system response during past warm intervals was the focus of a recent
review paper (Fischer et al., 2018) summarized in this Box. Examples of past warmer conditions with essentially modern physical
geography include the Holocene Thermal Maximum (HTM; broadly defined as about 10-5 kyr before present (BP), where present
is defined as 1950), the Last Interglacial (LIG; about 129-116 kyr BP) and the Mid Pliocene Warm Period (MPWP; 3.3-3.0 Myr BP).
Changes in insolation forcing during the HTM (Marcott et al., 2013) and the LIG (Hoffman et al., 2017) led to a global temperature
up to 1C higher than that in the pre-industrial period (1850-1900); high-latitude warming was 2C-4C (Capron et al., 2017), while
temperature in the tropics changed little (Marcott et al., 2013). Both HTM and LIG experienced atmospheric CO2 levels similar to
pre-industrial conditions (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2013). During the MPWP, the most recent time period when CO2 concentrations
were similar to present-day levels, the global temperature was >1C and Arctic temperatures about 8C warmer than pre-industrial
(Brigham-Grette et al., 2013).
Although imperfect as analogues for the future, these regional changes can inform risk assessments such as the potential for
crossing irreversible thresholds or amplifying anthropogenic changes (Box 3.3, Figure 1). For example, HTM and LIG greenhouse gas
(GHG) concentrations show no evidence of runaway greenhouse gas releases under limited global warming. Transient releases of
CO2 and CH4 may follow permafrost melting, but these occurrences may be compensated by peat growth over longer time scales (Yu
et al., 2010). Warming may release CO2 by enhancing soil respiration, counteracting CO2 fertilization of plant growth (Frank et al.,
2010). Evidence of a collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) during these past events of limited global
warming could not be found (Galaasen et al., 2014).

3

The distribution of ecosystems and biomes (major ecosystem types) changed significantly during past warming events, both in
the ocean and on land. For example, some tropical and temperate forests retreated because of increased aridity, while savannas
expanded (Dowsett et al., 2016). Further, poleward shifts of marine and terrestrial ecosystems, upward shifts in alpine regions, and
reorganizations of marine productivity during past warming events are recorded in natural archives (Williams et al., 2009; Haywood
et al., 2016). Finally, past warming events are associated with partial sea ice loss in the Arctic. The limited amount of data collected
so far on Antarctic sea ice precludes firm conclusions about Southern Hemisphere sea ice losses (de Vernal et al., 2013).
Reconstructed global sea level rise of 6-9 m during the LIG and possibly >6 m during the MPWP requires a retreat of either the
Greenland or Antarctic ice sheets or both (Dutton et al., 2015). While ice sheet and climate models suggest a substantial retreat
of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) and parts of the East Antarctic ice sheet (DeConto and Pollard, 2016) during these periods,
direct observational evidence is still lacking. Evidence for ice retreat in Greenland is stronger, although a complete collapse of the
Greenland ice sheet during the LIG can be excluded (Dutton et al., 2015). Rates of past sea level rises under modest warming were
similar to or up to two times larger than rises observed over the past two decades (Kopp et al., 2013). Given the long time scales
required to reach equilibrium in a warmer world, sea level rise will likely continue for millennia even if warming is limited to 2C.
Finally, temperature reconstructions from these past warm intervals suggest that current climate models underestimate regional
warming at high latitudes (polar amplification) and long-term (multi-millennial) global warming. None of these past warm climate
episodes involved the high rate of change in atmospheric CO2 and temperatures that we are experiencing today (Fischer et al., 2018).

208

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Box 3.3 (continued)
Arctic sea ice:
HTM: reduced
LIG: reduced
MPWP: reduced

GIS:
HTM: deglacial reequilibration
LIG: partial retreat
MPWP: smaller

boreal forests:
HTM: northward expansion
LIG: expansion
MPWP: northward expansion

Savanna:
HTM: expansion
LIG: expansion likely
MPWP: expansion

marine ecosystems:
HTM: rather unchanged
LIG: poleward shift
MPWP: poleward shift

Antarctic sea ice:
HTM: limited evidence
LIG: reduced
MPWP: reduced
WAIS
HTM: deglacial reequilibration
LIG: partial retreat likely
MPWP: retreat likely

marine ecosystems:
HTM: rather unchanged
LIG: poleward shift
MPWP: poleward shift

3

EAIS:
HTM: deglacial reequilibration
LIG: partial retreat possible
MPWP: partial retreat possible

Box 3.3, Figure 1 | Impacts and responses of components of the Earth System. Summary of typical changes found for warmer periods in the paleorecord, as discussed
by Fischer et al. (2018). All statements are relative to pre-industrial conditions. Statements in italics indicate that no conclusions can be drawn for the future. Note that
significant spatial variability and uncertainty exists in the assessment of each component, and this figure therefore should not be referred to without reading the
publication in detail. HTM: Holocene Thermal Maximum, LIG: Last Interglacial, MPWP: Mid Pliocene Warm Period. (Adapted from Fischer et al., 2018).

3.3.10

Ocean Chemistry

Ocean chemistry includes pH, salinity, oxygen, CO2, and a range of other
ions and gases, which are in turn affected by precipitation, evaporation,
storms, river runoff, coastal erosion, up-welling, ice formation, and the
activities of organisms and ecosystems (Stocker et al., 2013). Ocean
chemistry is changing alongside increasing global temperature, with
impacts projected at 1.5C and, more so, at 2C of global warming
(Doney et al., 2014) (medium to high confidence). Projected changes in
the upper layers of the ocean include altered pH, oxygen content and
sea level. Despite its many component processes, ocean chemistry has
been relatively stable for long periods of time prior to the industrial
period (Honisch et al., 2012). Ocean chemistry is changing under the
influence of human activities and rising greenhouse gases (virtually
certain; Rhein et al., 2013; Stocker et al., 2013). About 30% of CO2
emitted by human activities, for example, has been absorbed by
the upper layers of the ocean, where it has combined with water to
produce a dilute acid that dissociates and drives ocean acidification

(high confidence) (Cao et al., 2007; Stocker et al., 2013). Ocean pH has
decreased by 0.1 pH units since the pre-industrial period, a shift that
is unprecedented in the last 65 Ma (high confidence) (Ridgwell and
Schmidt, 2010) or even 300 Ma of Earth's history (medium confidence)
(Honisch et al., 2012).
Ocean acidification is a result of increasing CO2 in the atmosphere
(very high confidence) and is most pronounced where temperatures
are lowest (e.g., polar regions) or where CO2-rich water is brought to
the ocean surface by upwelling (Feely et al., 2008). Acidification can
also be influenced by effluents from natural or disturbed coastal land
use (Salisbury et al., 2008), plankton blooms (Cai et al., 2011), and
the atmospheric deposition of acidic materials (Omstedt et al., 2015).
These sources may not be directly attributable to climate change,
but they may amplify the impacts of ocean acidification (Bates and
Peters, 2007; Duarte et al., 2013). Ocean acidification also influences
the ionic composition of seawater by changing the organic and
inorganic speciation of trace metals (e.g., 20-fold increases in free ion
209

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

concentrations of metals such as aluminium) - with changes expected
to have impacts although they are currently poorly documented and
understood (low confidence) (Stockdale et al., 2016).
Oxygen varies regionally and with depth; it is highest in polar regions
and lowest in the eastern basins of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and
in the northern Indian Ocean (Doney et al., 2014; Karstensen et al.,
2015; Schmidtko et al., 2017). Increasing surface water temperatures
have reduced oxygen in the ocean by 2% since 1960, with other
variables such as ocean acidification, sea level rise, precipitation, wind
and storm patterns playing roles (Schmidtko et al., 2017). Changes
to ocean mixing and metabolic rates, due to increased temperature
and greater supply of organic carbon to deep areas, has increased the
frequency of `dead zones', areas where oxygen levels are so low that
they no longer support oxygen dependent life (Diaz and Rosenberg,
2008). The changes are complex and include both climate change and
other variables (Altieri and Gedan, 2015), and are increasing in tropical
as well as temperate regions (Altieri et al., 2017).

3

Ocean salinity is changing in directions that are consistent with
surface temperatures and the global water cycle (i.e., precipitation
versus evaporation). Some regions, such as northern oceans and the
Arctic, have decreased in salinity, owing to melting glaciers and ice
sheets, while others have increased in salinity, owing to higher sea
surface temperatures and evaporation (Durack et al., 2012). These
changes in salinity (i.e., density) are also potentially contributing to
large-scale changes in water movement (Section 3.3.8).

3.3.11

Global Synthesis

Table 3.2 features a summary of the assessments of global and
regional climate changes and associated hazards described in this
chapter, based on the existing literature. For more details about
observation and attribution in ocean and cryosphere systems,
please refer to the upcoming IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) due to be released in
2019.

Table 3.2 | Summary of assessments of global and regional climate changes and associated hazards. Confidence and likelihood statements are quoted from the relevant
chapter text and are omitted where no assessment was made, in which case the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) assessment is given where available.
GMST: global mean surface temperature, AMOC: Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, GMSL: global mean sea level.

Observed change
(recent past versus
pre-industrial)

GMST
anomaly

GMST anomalies were 0.87C
(0.10C likely range) above
pre-industrial (1850-1900)
values in the 2006-2015
decade, with a recent warming
of about 0.2C (0.10C) per
decade (high confidence)
[Chapter 1]

Attribution of observed
change to humaninduced forcing
(present-day versus
pre-industrial)

Projected change
at 1.5C of global
warming compared
to pre-industrial
(1.5C versus 0C)

Projected change
at 2C of global
warming compared
to pre-industrial
(2C versus 0C)

Differences between
2C and 1.5C of
global warming

The observed 0.87C GMST
increase in the 2006-2015
decade compared to
pre-industrial (1850-1900)
conditions was mostly humaninduced (high confidence)

1.5C

2C

0.5C

Global-scale increased intensity
and frequency of hot days
and nights, and decreased
intensity and frequency of cold
days and nights (very likely)

Global-scale increased intensity
and frequency of hot days
and nights, and decreased
intensity and frequency of cold
days and nights (very likely)

Global-scale increased intensity
and frequency of hot days and
nights, and decreased intensity
and frequency of cold days
and nights (high confidence)

Warming of temperature
extremes highest over land,
including many inhabited
regions (high confidence), with
increases of up to 3C in the
mid-latitude warm season and
up to 4.5C in the high-latitude
cold season (high confidence)

Warming of temperature
extremes highest over land,
including many inhabited
regions (high confidence), with
increases of up to 4C in the
mid-latitude warm season and
up to 6C in the high-latitude
cold season (high confidence)

Global-scale increase in
length of warm spells and
decrease in length of cold
spells (high confidence)

Largest increase in
frequency of unusually
hot extremes in tropical
regions (high confidence)

Largest increase in
frequency of unusually
hot extremes in tropical
regions (high confidence)

Particularly large increases
in hot extremes in inhabited
regions (high confidence)

[Section 3.3.2]

[Section 3.3.2]

[Section 3.3.2]

Human-induced warming
reached about 1C (0.2C
likely range) above preindustrial levels in 2017
[Chapter 1]

Overall decrease in the
number of cold days and
nights and overall increase
in the number of warm days
and nights at the global
scale on land (very likely)

Temperature
extremes

Continental-scale increase in
intensity and frequency of hot
days and nights, and decrease
in intensity and frequency
of cold days and nights, in
North America, Europe and
Australia (very likely)
Increases in frequency or
duration of warm spell lengths
in large parts of Europe, Asia
and Australia (high confidence
(likely)), as well as at the global
scale (medium confidence)
[Section 3.3.2]

210

Anthropogenic forcing has
contributed to the observed
changes in frequency and
intensity of daily temperature
extremes on the global
scale since the mid-20th
century (very likely)
[Section 3.3.2]

Strongest increase in
frequency for the rarest
and most extreme events
(high confidence)

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Table 3.2 (continued)

Observed change
(recent past versus
pre-industrial)
More areas with increases than
decreases in the frequency,
intensity and/or amount of
heavy precipitation (likely)
[Section 3.3.3]

Heavy
precipitation

Attribution of observed
change to humaninduced forcing
(present-day versus
pre-industrial)

Projected change
at 1.5C of global
warming compared
to pre-industrial
(1.5C versus 0C)

Projected change
at 2C of global
warming compared
to pre-industrial
(2C versus 0C)

Differences between
2C and 1.5C of
global warming

Human influence contributed to the global-scale
tendency towards increases in
the frequency, intensity and/or
amount of heavy precipitation
events (medium confidence)

Increases in frequency,
intensity and/or amount
heavy precipitation when
averaged over global land,
with positive trends in several
regions (high confidence)

Increases in frequency,
intensity and/or amount
heavy precipitation when
averaged over global land,
with positive trends in several
regions (high confidence)

Higher frequency, intensity
and/or amount of heavy
precipitation when averaged
over global land, with positive
trends in several regions
(medium confidence)

[Section 3.3.3; AR5 Chapter
10 (Bindoff et al., 2013a)]

[Section 3.3.3]

[Section 3.3.3]

Several regions are projected
to experience increases
in heavy precipitation at
2C versus 1.5C (medium
confidence), in particular in
high-latitude and mountainous
regions, as well as in eastern
Asia and eastern North
America (medium confidence)
[Section 3.3.3]

High confidence in dryness
trends in some regions,
especially drying in the Mediterranean region (including
southern Europe, northern
Africa and the Near East)
Low confidence in drought
and dryness trends at
the global scale
Drought and
dryness

[Section 3.3.4]

Medium confidence in
attribution of drying
trends in southern Europe
(Mediterranean region)
Low confidence elsewhere, in
part due to large interannual
variability and longer duration
(and thus lower frequency) of
drought events, as well as to
dependency on the dryness
index definition applied
[Section 3.3.4]

Streamflow trends mostly
not statistically significant
(high confidence)
Runoff and
river flooding

Not assessed in this report

Increase in flood frequency and
extreme streamflow in some
regions (high confidence)
[Section 3.3.5]
Low confidence in
the robustness of
observed changes
[Section 3.3.6]

Tropical and
extra-tropical
cyclones

Not meaningful to assess given
low confidence in changes,
due to large interannual
variability, heterogeneity
of the observational record
and contradictory findings
regarding trends in the
observational record

Medium confidence in
stronger drying trends in
the Mediterranean region
and Southern Africa

Medium confidence
in drying trends in the
Mediterranean region

Medium confidence in drying
trends in the Mediterranean
region and Southern Africa

Low confidence elsewhere, in
part due to large interannual
variability and longer duration
(and thus lower frequency) of
drought events, as well as to
dependency on the dryness
index definition applied

Low confidence elsewhere, in
part due to large interannual
variability and longer duration
(and thus lower frequency) of
drought events, as well as to
dependency on the dryness
index definition applied

Increases in drought, dryness
or precipitation deficits
projected in some regions
compared to the pre-industrial
or present-day conditions,
but substantial variability
in signals depending on
considered indices or climate
model (medium confidence)

Increases in drought, dryness
or precipitation deficits
projected in some regions
compared to the pre-industrial
or present-day conditions,
but substantial variability
in signals depending on
considered indices or climate
model (medium confidence).

[Section 3.3.4]

[Section 3.3.4]

Expansion of the global land
area with a significant increase
in runoff (medium confidence)

Expansion of the global land
area with a significant increase
in runoff (medium confidence)

Expansion of the global land
area with significant increase
in runoff (medium confidence)

Increase in flood
hazard in some regions
(medium confidence)

Increase in flood
hazard in some regions
(medium confidence)

Expansion in the area
affected by flood hazard
(medium confidence)

Low confidence elsewhere, in
part due to large interannual
variability and longer duration
(and thus lower frequency) of
drought events, as well as to
dependency on the dryness
index definition applied
[Section 3.3.4]

[Section 3.3.5]

[Section 3.3.5]

[Section 3.3.5]

Increases in heavy precipitation
associated with tropical
cyclones (medium confidence)

Further increases in heavy
precipitation associated
with tropical cyclones
(medium confidence)

Heavy precipitation associated
with tropical cyclones is
projected to be higher at
2C compared to 1.5C
global warming (medium
confidence). Limited evidence
that the global number of
tropical cyclones will be lower
under 2C of global warming
compared to under 1.5C of
warming, but an increase in
the number of very intense
cyclones (low confidence)

211

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Table 3.2 (continued)
Observed change
(recent past versus
pre-industrial)

Ocean
circulation and
temperature

Attribution of observed
change to humaninduced forcing
(present-day versus
pre-industrial)

Observed warming of the
upper ocean, with slightly
lower rates than global
warming (virtually certain)

Limited evidence attributing
the weakening of AMOC
in recent decades to
anthropogenic forcing

Increased occurrence of marine
heatwaves (high confidence)

[Section 3.3.7]

Projected change
at 1.5C of global
warming compared
to pre-industrial
(1.5C versus 0C)

Projected change
at 2C of global
warming compared
to pre-industrial
(2C versus 0C)

Differences between
2C and 1.5C of
global warming

Further increases in ocean temperatures, including more frequent marine heatwaves (high confidence)
AMOC will weaken over the 21st century and substantially so under high levels (more than 2C) of
global warming (very likely)
[Section 3.3.7]

AMOC has been weakening
over recent decades
(more likely than not)
[Section 3.3.7]

Sea ice

Continuing the trends reported
in AR5, the annual Arctic sea
ice extent decreased over
the period 1979-2012. The
rate of this decrease was
very likely between 3.5 and
4.1% per decade (0.45 to
0.51 million km2 per decade)

Anthropogenic forcings are
very likely to have contributed
to Arctic sea ice loss since 1979
[AR5 Chapter 10
(Bindoff et al., 2013a)]

Sea level

It is likely that the rate of
GMSL rise has continued to
increase since the early 20th
century, with estimates that
range from 0.000 [-0.002
to 0.002] mm yr-2 to 0.013
[0.007 to 0.019] mm yr-2

At least one sea-ice-free
Arctic summer after about
10 years of stabilized warming
(medium confidence)

Probability of sea-ice-free
Arctic summer greatly reduced
at 1.5C versus 2C of global
warming (medium confidence)

[Section 3.3.8]

[Section 3.3.8]

[Section 3.3.8]

Intermediate temperature overshoot has no long-term consequences for Arctic sea ice cover
(high confidence)

[AR5 Chapter 4 (Vaughan
et al., 2013)]

3

At least one sea-ice-free Arctic
summer after about 100 years
of stabilized warming
(medium confidence)

[3.3.8]
It is very likely that there is
a substantial contribution
from anthropogenic forcings
to the global mean sea
level rise since the 1970s

Not assessed in this report

Not assessed in this report

GMSL rise will be about
0.1 m (0.00-0.20 m) less
at 1.5C versus 2C global
warming (medium confidence)
[Section 3.3.9]

[AR5 Chapter 10 (Bindoff
et al., 2013a)]

[AR5 Chapter 13
(Church et al., 2013)]

Ocean
chemistry

Ocean acidification due to
increased CO2 has resulted in
a 0.1 pH unit decrease since
the pre-industrial period, which
is unprecedented in the last
65 Ma (high confidence)

The oceanic uptake of
anthropogenic CO2 has resulted
in acidification of surface
waters (very high confidence).

Ocean chemistry is changing with global temperature increases, with impacts
projected at 1.5C and, more so, at 2C of warming (high confidence)
[Section 3.3.10]

[Section 3.3.10]

[Section 3.3.10]

3.4

Observed Impacts and Projected Risks
in Natural and Human Systems

3.4.1

Introduction

In Section 3.4, new literature is explored and the assessment of impacts
and projected risks is updated for a large number of natural and
human systems. This section also includes an exploration of adaptation
opportunities that could be important steps towards reducing climate
change, thereby laying the ground for later discussions on opportunities
to tackle both mitigation and adaptation while at the same time
recognising the importance of sustainable development and reducing
the inequities among people and societies facing climate change.
Working Group II (WGII) of the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
provided an assessment of the literature on the climate risk for natural
and human systems across a wide range of environments, sectors
and greenhouse gas scenarios, as well as for particular geographic
212

regions (IPCC, 2014a, b). The comprehensive assessment undertaken
by AR5 evaluated the evidence of changes to natural systems, and
the impact on human communities and industry. While impacts varied
substantially among systems, sectors and regions, many changes
over the past 50 years could be attributed to human driven climate
change and its impacts. In particular, AR5 attributed observed impacts
in natural ecosystems to anthropogenic climate change, including
changes in phenology, geographic and altitudinal range shifts in flora
and fauna, regime shifts and increased tree mortality, all of which can
reduce ecosystem functioning and services thereby impacting people.
AR5 also reported increasing evidence of changing patterns of disease
and invasive species, as well as growing risks for communities and
industry, which are especially important with respect to sea level rise
and human vulnerability.
One of the important themes that emerged from AR5 is that previous
assessments may have under-estimated the sensitivity of natural and
human systems to climate change. A more recent analysis of attribution

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

to greenhouse gas forcing at the global scale (Hansen and Stone,
2016) confirmed that many impacts related to changes in regional
atmospheric and ocean temperature can be confidently attributed to
anthropogenic forcing, while attribution to anthropogenic forcing of
changes related to precipitation are by comparison less clear. Moreover,
there is no strong direct relationship between the robustness of climate
attribution and that of impact attribution (Hansen and Stone, 2016).
The observed changes in human systems are amplified by the loss
of ecosystem services (e.g., reduced access to safe water) that are
supported by biodiversity (Oppenheimer et al., 2014). Limited research
on the risks of warming of 1.5C and 2C was conducted following
AR5 for most key economic sectors and services, for livelihoods and
poverty, and for rural areas. For these systems, climate is one of many
drivers that result in adverse outcomes. Other factors include patterns
of demographic change, socio-economic development, trade and
tourism. Further, consequences of climate change for infrastructure,
tourism, migration, crop yields and other impacts interact with
underlying vulnerabilities, such as for individuals and communities
engaged in pastoralism, mountain farming and artisanal fisheries, to
affect livelihoods and poverty (Dasgupta et al., 2014).
Incomplete data and understanding of these lower-end climate
scenarios have increased the need for more data and an improved
understanding of the projected risks of warming of 1.5C and 2C for
reference. In this section, the available literature on the projected risks,
impacts and adaptation options is explored, supported by additional
information and background provided in Supplementary Material
3.SM.3.1, 3.SM.3.2, 3.SM.3.4, and 3.SM.3.5. A description of the main
assessment methods of this chapter is given in Section 3.2.2.

3.4.2

Freshwater Resources (Quantity and Quality)

3.4.2.1 Water availability
Working Group II of AR5 concluded that about 80% of the world's
population already suffers from serious threats to its water security, as
measured by indicators including water availability, water demand and
pollution (Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014). UNESCO (2011) concluded
that climate change can alter the availability of water and threaten
water security.
Although physical changes in streamflow and continental runoff that
are consistent with climate change have been identified (Section
3.3.5), water scarcity in the past is still less well understood because
the scarcity assessment needs to take into account various factors, such
as the operations of water supply infrastructure and human water use
behaviour (Mehran et al., 2017), as well as green water, water quality
and environmental flow requirements (J. Liu et al., 2017). Over the past
century, substantial growth in populations, industrial and agricultural
activities, and living standards have exacerbated water stress in many
parts of the world, especially in semi-arid and arid regions such as
California in the USA (AghaKouchak et al., 2015; Mehran et al., 2015).
Owing to changes in climate and water consumption behaviour, and
particularly effects of the spatial distribution of population growth
relative to water resources, the population under water scarcity
increased from 0.24 billion (14% of the global population) in the
1900s to 3.8 billion (58%) in the 2000s. In that last period (2000s), 1.1

Chapter 3

billion people (17% of the global population) who mostly live in South
and East Asia, North Africa and the Middle East faced serious water
shortage and high water stress (Kummu et al., 2016).
Over the next few decades, and for increases in global mean
temperature less than about 2C, AR5 concluded that changes in
population will generally have a greater effect on water resource
availability than changes in climate. Climate change, however, will
regionally exacerbate or offset the effects of population pressure
(Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014).
The differences in projected changes to levels of runoff under 1.5C
and 2C of global warming, particularly those that are regional, are
described in Section 3.3.5. Constraining warming to 1.5C instead
of 2C might mitigate the risks for water availability, although
socio-economic drivers could affect water availability more than the
risks posed by variation in warming levels, while the risks are not
homogeneous among regions (medium confidence) (Gerten et al.,
2013; Hanasaki et al., 2013; Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes, 2014; Schewe et
al., 2014; Karnauskas et al., 2018). Assuming a constant population in
the models used in his study, Gerten et al. (2013) determined that an
additional 8% of the world population in 2000 would be exposed to
new or aggravated water scarcity at 2C of global warming. This value
was almost halved - with 50% greater reliability - when warming was
constrained to 1.5C. People inhabiting river basins, particularly in the
Middle East and Near East, are projected to become newly exposed
to chronic water scarcity even if global warming is constrained to
less than 2C. Many regions, especially those in Europe, Australia
and southern Africa, appear to be affected at 1.5C if the reduction
in water availability is computed for non-water-scarce basins as well
as for water-scarce regions. Out of a contemporary population of
approximately 1.3 billion exposed to water scarcity, about 3% (North
America) to 9% (Europe) are expected to be prone to aggravated
scarcity at 2C of global warming (Gerten et al., 2013). Under the
Shared Socio-Economic Pathway (SSP)2 population scenario, about 8%
of the global population is projected to experience a severe reduction
in water resources under warming of 1.7C in 2021-2040, increasing
to 14% of the population under 2.7C in 2043-2071, based on the
criteria of discharge reduction of either >20% or >1 standard deviation
(Schewe et al., 2014). Depending on the scenarios of SSP1-5, exposure
to the increase in water scarcity in 2050 will be globally reduced by
184-270 million people at about 1.5C of warming compared to the
impacts at about 2C. However, the variation between socio-economic
levels is larger than the variation between warming levels (Arnell and
Lloyd-Hughes, 2014).
On many small islands (e.g., those constituting SIDS), freshwater stress
is expected to occur as a result of projected aridity change. Constraining
warming to 1.5C, however, could avoid a substantial fraction of
water stress compared to 2C, especially across the Caribbean region,
particularly on the island of Hispaniola (Dominican Republic and Haiti)
(Karnauskas et al., 2018). Hanasaki et al. (2013) concluded that the
projected range of changes in global irrigation water withdrawal
(relative to the baseline of 1971-2000), using human configuration
fixing non-meteorological variables for the period around 2000, are
1.1-2.3% and 0.6-2.0% lower at 1.5C and 2C, respectively. In the
same study, Hanasaki et al. (2013) highlighted the importance of water
213

3

Chapter 3

use scenarios in water scarcity assessments, but neither quantitative
nor qualitative information regarding water use is available.
When the impacts on hydropower production at 1.5C and 2C are
compared, it is found that mean gross potential increases in northern,
eastern and western Europe, and decreases in southern Europe (Jacob
et al., 2018; Tobin et al., 2018). The Baltic and Scandinavian countries
are projected to experience the most positive impacts on hydropower
production. Greece, Spain and Portugal are expected to be the most
negatively impacted countries, although the impacts could be reduced
by limiting warming to 1.5C (Tobin et al., 2018). In Greece, Spain and
Portugal, warming of 2C is projected to decrease hydropower potential
below 10%, while limiting global warming to 1.5C would keep the
reduction to 5% or less. There is, however, substantial uncertainty
associated with these results due to a large spread between the
climate models (Tobin et al., 2018).

3

Due to a combination of higher water temperatures and reduced
summer river flows, the usable capacity of thermoelectric power plants
using river water for cooling is expected to reduce in all European
countries (Jacob et al., 2018; Tobin et al., 2018), with the magnitude
of decreases being about 5% for 1.5C and 10% for 2C of global
warming for most European countries (Tobin et al., 2018). Greece,
Spain and Bulgaria are projected to have the largest reduction at 2C
of warming (Tobin et al., 2018).
Fricko et al. (2016) assessed the direct water use of the global energy
sector across a broad range of energy system transformation pathways
in order to identify the water impacts of a 2C climate policy. This
study revealed that there would be substantial divergence in water
withdrawal for thermal power plant cooling under conditions in which
the distribution of future cooling technology for energy generation is
fixed, whereas adopting alternative cooling technologies and water
resources would make the divergence considerably smaller.

3.4.2.2 Extreme hydrological events (floods and droughts)
Working Group II of AR5 concluded that socio-economic losses from
flooding since the mid-20th century have increased mainly because
of greater exposure and vulnerability (high confidence) (Jimenez
Cisneros et al., 2014). There was low confidence due to limited
evidence, however, that anthropogenic climate change has affected
the frequency and magnitude of floods. WGII AR5 also concluded that
there is no evidence that surface water and groundwater drought
frequency has changed over the last few decades, although impacts
of drought have increased mostly owing to increased water demand
(Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014).
Since AR5, the number of studies related to fluvial flooding and
meteorological drought based on long-term observed data has been
gradually increasing. There has also been progress since AR5 in
identifying historical changes in streamflow and continental runoff
(Section 3.3.5). As a result of population and economic growth,
increased exposure of people and assets has caused more damage
due to flooding. However, differences in flood risks among regions
reflect the balance among the magnitude of the flood, the populations,
their vulnerabilities, the value of assets affected by flooding, and the
214

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

capacity to cope with flood risks, all of which depend on socio-economic
development conditions, as well as topography and hydro-climatic
conditions (Tanoue et al., 2016). AR5 concluded that there was low
confidence in the attribution of global changes in droughts (Bindoff et
al., 2013b). However, recent publications based on observational and
modelling evidence assessed that human emissions have substantially
increased the probability of drought years in the Mediterranean region
(Section 3.3.4).
WGII AR5 assessed that global flood risk will increase in the future,
partly owing to climate change (low to medium confidence), with
projected changes in the frequency of droughts longer than 12 months
being more uncertain because of their dependence on accumulated
precipitation over long periods (Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014).
Increases in the risks associated with runoff at the global scale
(medium confidence), and in flood hazard in some regions (medium
confidence), can be expected at global warming of 1.5C, with an
overall increase in the area affected by flood hazard at 2C (medium
confidence) (Section 3.3.5). There are studies, however, that indicate
that socio-economic conditions will exacerbate flood impacts
more than global climate change, and that the magnitude of these
impacts could be larger in some regions (Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes,
2014; Winsemius et al., 2016; Alfieri et al., 2017; Arnell et al., 2018;
Kinoshita et al., 2018). Assuming constant population sizes, countries
representing 73% of the world population will experience increasing
flood risk, with an average increase of 580% at 4C compared to the
impact simulated over the baseline period 1976-2005. This impact
is projected to be reduced to a 100% increase at 1.5C and a 170%
increase at 2C (Alfieri et al., 2017). Alfieri et al. (2017) additionally
concluded that the largest increases in flood risks would be found in
the US, Asia, and Europe in general, while decreases would be found in
only a few countries in eastern Europe and Africa. Overall, Alfieri et al.
(2017) reported that the projected changes are not homogeneously
distributed across the world land surface. Alfieri et al. (2018) studied
the population affected by flood events using three case studies in
European states, specifically central and western Europe, and found
that the population affected could be limited to 86% at 1.5C of
warming compared to 93% at 2C. Under the SSP2 population
scenario, Arnell et al. (2018) found that 39% (range 36-46%) of
impacts on populations exposed to river flooding globally could be
avoided at 1.5C compared to 2C of warming.
Under scenarios SSP1-5, Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes (2014) found
that the number of people exposed to increased flooding in 2050
under warming of about 1.5C could be reduced by 26-34 million
compared to the number exposed to increased flooding associated
with 2C of warming. Variation between socio-economic levels,
however, is projected to be larger than variation between the two
levels of global warming. Kinoshita et al. (2018) found that a serious
increase in potential flood fatality (5.7%) is projected without any
adaptation if global warming increases from 1.5C to 2C, whereas
the projected increase in potential economic loss (0.9%) is relatively
small. Nevertheless, their study indicates that socio-economic changes
make a larger contribution to the potentially increased consequences
of future floods, and about half of the increase in potential economic
losses could be mitigated by autonomous adaptation.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

There is limited information about the global and regional
projected risks posed by droughts at 1.5C and 2C of global
warming. However, hazards by droughts at 1.5C could be reduced
compared to the hazards at 2C in some regions, in particular in the
Mediterranean region and southern Africa (Section 3.3.4). Under
constant socio-economic conditions, the population exposed to
drought at 2C of warming is projected to be larger than at 1.5C
(low to medium confidence) (Smirnov et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2017;
Arnell et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018). Under the same scenario, the
global mean monthly number of people expected to be exposed to
extreme drought at 1.5C in 2021-2040 is projected to be 114.3
million, compared to 190.4 million at 2C in 2041-2060 (Smirnov et
al., 2016). Under the SSP2 population scenario, Arnell et al. (2018)
projected that 39% (range 36-51%) of impacts on populations
exposed to drought could be globally avoided at 1.5C compared
to 2C warming.

3.4.2.3 Groundwater

Liu et al. (2018) studied the changes in population exposure to severe
droughts in 27 regions around the globe for 1.5C and 2C of warming
using the SSP1 population scenario compared to the baseline period
of 1986-2005 based on the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI).
They concluded that the drought exposure of urban populations in
most regions would be decreased at 1.5C (350.2  158.8 million
people) compared to 2C (410.7  213.5 million people). Liu et al.
(2018) also suggested that more urban populations would be exposed
to severe droughts at 1.5C in central Europe, southern Europe, the
Mediterranean, West Africa, East and West Asia, and Southeast Asia,
and that number of affected people would increase further in these
regions at 2C. However, it should be noted that the PDSI is known
to have limitations (IPCC SREX, Seneviratne et al., 2012), and drought
projections strongly depend on considered indices (Section 3.3.4); thus
only medium confidence is assigned to these projections. In the Haihe
River basin in China, a study has suggested that the proportion of the
population exposed to droughts is projected to be reduced by 30.4%
at 1.5C but increased by 74.8% at 2C relative to the baseline value
of 339.65 million people in the 1986-2005 period, when assessing
changes in droughts using the Standardized Precipitation-Evaporation
Index, using a Penman-Monteith estimate of potential evaporation
(Sun et al., 2017) .

In some regions, groundwater is often intensively used to supplement
the excess demand, often leading to groundwater depletion. Climate
change adds further pressure on water resources and exaggerates
human water demands by increasing temperatures over agricultural
lands (Wada et al., 2017). Very few studies have projected the risks of
groundwater depletion under 1.5C and 2C of global warming. Under
2C of warming, impacts posed on groundwater are projected to be
greater than at 1.5C (low confidence) (Portmann et al., 2013; Salem
et al., 2017).

Alfieri et al. (2018) estimated damage from flooding in Europe for
the baseline period (1976-2005) at 5 billion euro of losses annually,
with projections of relative changes in flood impacts that will rise with
warming levels, from 116% at 1.5C to 137% at 2C.

Working Group II of AR5 concluded that most observed changes to
water quality from climate change are from isolated studies, mostly
of rivers or lakes in high-income countries, using a small number of
variables (Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014). AR5 assessed that climate
change is projected to reduce raw water quality, posing risks to
drinking water quality with conventional treatment (medium to high
confidence) (Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014).

Kinoshita et al. (2018) studied the increase of potential economic loss
under SSP3 and projected that the smaller loss at 1.5C compared
to 2C (0.9%) is marginal, regardless of whether the vulnerability is
fixed at the current level or not. By analysing the differences in results
with and without flood protection standards, Winsemius et al. (2016)
showed that adaptation measures have the potential to greatly reduce
present-day and future flood damage. They concluded that increases in
flood-induced economic impacts (% gross domestic product, GDP) in
African countries are mainly driven by climate change and that Africa's
growing assets would become increasingly exposed to floods. Hence,
there is an increasing need for long-term and sustainable investments
in adaptation in Africa.

Working Group II of AR5 concluded that the detection of changes in
groundwater systems, and attribution of those changes to climatic
changes, are rare, owing to a lack of appropriate observation wells
and an overall small number of studies (Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014).
Since AR5, the number of studies based on long-term observed data
continues to be limited. The groundwater-fed lakes in northeastern
central Europe have been affected by climate and land-use changes,
and they showed a predominantly negative lake-level trend in 1999-
2008 (Kaiser et al., 2014).
WGII AR5 concluded that climate change is projected to reduce
groundwater resources significantly in most dry subtropical regions
(high confidence) (Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014).

Portmann et al. (2013) indicated that 2% (range 1.1-2.6%) of the
global land area is projected to suffer from an extreme decrease in
renewable groundwater resources of more than 70% at 2C, with a
clear mitigation at 1.5C. These authors also projected that 20% of
the global land surface would be affected by a groundwater reduction
of more than 10% at 1.5C of warming, with the percentage of land
impacted increasing at 2C. In a groundwater-dependent irrigated
region in northwest Bangladesh, the average groundwater level during
the major irrigation period (January-April) is projected to decrease in
accordance with temperature rise (Salem et al., 2017).

3.4.2.4 Water quality

Since AR5, studies have detected climate change impacts on several
indices of water quality in lakes, watersheds and regions (e.g., Patino
et al., 2014; Aguilera et al., 2015; Watts et al., 2015; Marszelewski
and Pius, 2016; Capo et al., 2017). The number of studies utilising
RCP scenarios at the regional or watershed scale have gradually
increased since AR5 (e.g., Boehlert et al., 2015; Teshager et al., 2016;
Marcinkowski et al., 2017). Few studies, have explored projected
impacts on water quality under 1.5C versus 2C of warming,
however, the differences are unclear (low confidence) (Bonte and
215

3

Chapter 3

3

Zwolsman, 2010; Hosseini et al., 2017). The daily probability of
exceeding the chloride standard for drinking water taken from Lake
IJsselmeer (Andijk, the Netherlands) is projected to increase by
a factor of about five at 2C relative to the present-day warming
level of 1C since 1990 (Bonte and Zwolsman, 2010). Mean monthly
dissolved oxygen concentrations and nutrient concentrations in
the upper Qu'Appelle River (Canada) in 2050-2055 are projected
to decrease less at about 1.5C of warming (RCP2.6) compared to
concentrations at about 2C (RCP4.5) (Hosseini et al., 2017). In three
river basins in Southeast Asia (Sekong, Sesan and Srepok), about 2C
of warming (corresponding to a 1.05C increase in the 2030s relative
to the baseline period 1981-2008, RCP8.5), impacts posed by landuse change on water quality are projected to be greater than at 1.5C
(corresponding to a 0.89C increase in the 2030s relative to the
baseline period 1981-2008, RCP4.5) (Trang et al., 2017). Under the
same warming scenarios, Trang et al. (2017) projected changes in the
annual nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) yields in the 2030s, as well as
with combinations of two land-use change scenarios: (i) conversion
of forest to grassland, and (ii) conversion of forest to agricultural
land. The projected changes in N (P) yield are +7.3% (+5.1%) under
a 1.5C scenario and -6.6% (-3.6%) under 2C, whereas changes
under the combination of land-use scenarios are (i) +5.2% (+12.6%)
at 1.5C and +8.8% (+11.7%) at 2C, and (ii) +7.5% (+14.9%) at
1.5C and +3.7% (+8.8%) at 2C (Trang et al., 2017).

3.4.2.5 Soil erosion and sediment load
Working Group II of AR5 concluded that there is little or no
observational evidence that soil erosion and sediment load have been
altered significantly by climate change (low to medium confidence)
(Jimenez Cisneros et al., 2014). As the number of studies on climate
change impacts on soil erosion has increased where rainfall is an
important driver (Lu et al., 2013), studies have increasingly considered
other factors, such as rainfall intensity (e.g., Shi and Wang, 2015;
Li and Fang, 2016), snow melt, and change in vegetation cover
resulting from temperature rise (Potemkina and Potemkin, 2015),
as well as crop management practices (Mullan et al., 2012). WGII
AR5 concluded that increases in heavy rainfall and temperature are
projected to change soil erosion and sediment yield, although the
extent of these changes is highly uncertain and depends on rainfall
seasonality, land cover, and soil management practices (Jimenez
Cisneros et al., 2014).
While the number of published studies of climate change impacts on
soil erosion have increased globally since 2000 (Li and Fang, 2016),
few articles have addressed impacts at 1.5C and 2C of global
warming. The existing studies have found few differences in projected
risks posed on sediment load under 1.5C and 2C (low confidence)
(Cousino et al., 2015; Shrestha et al., 2016). The differences between
average annual sediment load under 1.5C and 2C of warming are
not clear, owing to complex interactions among climate change, land
cover/surface and soil management (Cousino et al., 2015; Shrestha
et al., 2016). Averages of annual sediment loads are projected to
be similar under 1.5C and 2C of warming, in particular in the
Great Lakes region in the USA and in the Lower Mekong region in
Southeast Asia (Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter, Cousino et al.,
2015; Shrestha et al., 2016).
216

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.4.3

Terrestrial and Wetland Ecosystems

3.4.3.1 Biome shifts
Latitudinal and elevational shifts of biomes (major ecosystem
types) in boreal, temperate and tropical regions have been detected
(Settele et al., 2014) and new studies confirm these changes (e.g.,
shrub encroachment on tundra; Larsen et al., 2014). Attribution
studies indicate that anthropogenic climate change has made a
greater contribution to these changes than any other factor (medium
confidence) (Settele et al., 2014).
An ensemble of seven Dynamic Vegetation Models driven by projected
climates from 19 alternative general circulation models (GCMs)
(Warszawski et al., 2013) shows 13% (range 8-20%) of biomes
transforming at 2C of global warming, but only 4% (range 2-7%)
doing so at 1C, suggesting that about 6.5% may be transformed at
1.5C; these estimates indicate a doubling of the areal extent of biome
shifts between 1.5C and 2C of warming (medium confidence) (Figure
3.16a). A study using the single ecosystem model LPJmL (Gerten et
al., 2013) illustrated that biome shifts in the Arctic, Tibet, Himalayas,
southern Africa and Australia would be avoided by constraining
warming to 1.5C compared with 2C (Figure 3.16b). Seddon et al.
(2016) quantitatively identified ecologically sensitive regions to climate
change in most of the continents from tundra to tropical rainforest.
Biome transformation may in some cases be associated with novel
climates and ecological communities (Prober et al., 2012).

3.4.3.2 Changes in phenology
Advancement in spring phenology of 2.8  0.35 days per decade has
been observed in plants and animals in recent decades in most Northern
Hemisphere ecosystems (between 30N and 72N), and these shifts
have been attributed to changes in climate (high confidence) (Settele
et al., 2014). The rates of change are particularly high in the Arctic
zone owing to the stronger local warming (Oberbauer et al., 2013),
whereas phenology in tropical forests appears to be more responsive
to moisture stress (Zhou et al., 2014). While a full review cannot be
included here, trends consistent with this earlier finding continue to
be detected, including in the flowering times of plants (Parmesan
and Hanley, 2015), in the dates of egg laying and migration in birds
(newly reported in China; Wu and Shi, 2016), in the emergence dates
of butterflies (Roy et al., 2015), and in the seasonal greening-up of
vegetation as detected by satellites (i.e., in the normalized difference
vegetation index, NDVI; Piao et al., 2015).
The potential for decoupling species-species interactions owing to
differing phenological responses to climate change is well established
(Settele et al., 2014), for example for plants and their insect pollinators
(Willmer, 2012; Scaven and Rafferty, 2013). Mid-century projections
of plant and animal phenophases in the UK clearly indicate that
the timing of phenological events could change more for primary
consumers (6.2 days earlier on average) than for higher trophic
levels (2.5-2.9 days earlier on average) (Thackeray et al., 2016). This
indicates the potential for phenological mismatch and associated
risks for ecosystem functionality in the future under global warming
of 2.1C-2.7C above pre-industrial levels. Further, differing responses

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

(a)

3

(b)

Figure 3.16 | (a) Fraction of global natural vegetation (including managed forests) at risk of severe ecosystem change as a function of global mean temperature change for
all ecosystems, models, global climate change models and Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The colours represent the different ecosystem models, which are also
horizontally separated for clarity. Results are collated in unit-degree bins, where the temperature for a given year is the average over a 30-year window centred on that year.
The boxes span the 25th and 75th percentiles across the entire ensemble. The short, horizontal stripes represent individual (annual) data points, the curves connect the mean
value per ecosystem model in each bin. The solid (dashed) curves are for models with (without) dynamic vegetation composition changes. Source: (Warszawski et al., 2013)
(b) Threshold level of global temperature anomaly above pre-industrial levels that leads to significant local changes in terrestrial ecosystems. Regions with severe (coloured) or
moderate (greyish) ecosystem transformation; delineation refers to the 90 biogeographic regions. All values denote changes found in >50% of the simulations. Source: (Gerten
et al., 2013). Regions coloured in dark red are projected to undergo severe transformation under a global warming of 1.5C while those coloured in light red do so at 2C; other
colours are used when there is no severe transformation unless global warming exceeds 2C.

217

Chapter 3

could alter community structure in temperate forests (Roberts et al.,
2015). Specifically, temperate forest phenology is projected to advance
by 14.3 days in the near term (2010-2039) and 24.6 days in the
medium term (2040-2069), so as a first approximation the difference
between 2C and 1.5C of global warming is about 10 days (Roberts et
al., 2015). This phenological plasticity is not always adaptive and must
be interpreted cautiously (Duputie et al., 2015), and considered in the
context of accompanying changes in climate variability (e.g., increased
risk of frost damage for plants or earlier emergence of insects resulting in
mortality during cold spells). Another adaptive response of some plants is
range expansion with increased vigour and altered herbivore resistance
in their new range, analogous to invasive plants (Macel et al., 2017).
In summary, limiting warming to 1.5C compared with 2C may avoid
advance in spring phenology (high confidence) by perhaps a few days
(medium confidence) and hence decrease the risks of loss of ecosystem
functionality due to phenological mismatch between trophic levels,
and also of maladaptation coming from the sensitivity of many species
to increased climate variability. Nevertheless, this difference between
1.5C and 2C of warming might be limited for plants that are able to
expand their range.

3

3.4.3.3 Changes in species range, abundance and extinction
AR5 (Settele et al., 2014) concluded that the geographical ranges of
many terrestrial and freshwater plant and animal species have moved
over the last several decades in response to warming: approximately 17
km poleward and 11 m up in altitude per decade. Recent trends confirm
this finding; for example, the spatial and interspecific variance in bird
populations in Europe and North America since 1980 were found to be
well predicted by trends in climate suitability (Stephens et al., 2016).
Further, a recent meta-analysis of 27 studies concerning a total of 976
species (Wiens, 2016) found that 47% of local extinctions (extirpations)
reported across the globe during the 20th century could be attributed to
climate change, with significantly more extinctions occurring in tropical
regions, in freshwater habitats and for animals. IUCN (2018) lists 305
terrestrial animal and plant species from Pacific Island developing nations
as being threatened by climate change and severe weather. Owing
to lags in the responses of some species to climate change, shifts in
insect pollinator ranges may result in novel assemblages with unknown
implications for biodiversity and ecosystem function (Rafferty, 2017).
Warren et al. (2013) simulated climatically determined geographic range
loss under 2C and 4C of global warming for 50,000 plant and animal
species, accounting for uncertainty in climate projections and for the
potential ability of species to disperse naturally in an attempt to track their
geographically shifting climate envelope. This earlier study has now been
updated and expanded to incorporate 105,501 species, including 19,848
insects, and new findings indicate that warming of 2C by 2100 would
lead to projected bioclimatic range losses of >50% in 18% (6-35%) of
the 19,848 insects species, 8% (4-16%) of the 12,429 vertebrate species,
and 16% (9-28%) of the 73,224 plant species studied (Warren et al.,
2018a). At 1.5C of warming, these values fall to 6% (1-18%) of the
insects, 4% (2-9%) of the vertebrates and 8% (4-15%) of the plants
studied. Hence, the number of insect species projected to lose over half
of their geographic range is reduced by two-thirds when warming is
limited to 1.5C compared with 2C, while the number of vertebrate
218

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

and plant species projected to lose over half of their geographic range
is halved (Warren et al., 2018a) (medium confidence). These findings are
consistent with estimates made from an earlier study suggesting that
range losses at 1.5C were significantly lower for plants than those at
2C of warming (Smith et al., 2018). It should be noted that at 1.5C
of warming, and if species' ability to disperse naturally to track their
preferred climate geographically is inhibited by natural or anthropogenic
obstacles, there would still remain 10% of the amphibians, 8% of the
reptiles, 6% of the mammals, 5% of the birds, 10% of the insects and
8% of the plants which are projected to lose over half their range, while
species on average lose 20-27% of their range (Warren et al., 2018a).
Given that bird and mammal species can disperse more easily than
amphibians and reptiles, a small proportion can expand their range
as climate changes, but even at 1.5C of warming the total range loss
integrated over all birds and mammals greatly exceeds the integrated
range gain (Warren et al., 2018a).
A number of caveats are noted for studies projecting changes to climatic
range. This approach, for example, does not incorporate the effects of
extreme weather events and the role of interactions between species.
As well, trophic interactions may locally counteract the range expansion
of species towards higher altitudes (Brathen et al., 2018). There is also
the potential for highly invasive species to become established in new
areas as the climate changes (Murphy and Romanuk, 2014), but there is
no literature that quantifies this possibility for 1.5C of global warming.
Pecl et al. (2017) summarized at the global level the consequences
of climate-change-induced species redistribution for economic
development, livelihoods, food security, human health and culture.
These authors concluded that even if anthropogenic greenhouse gas
emissions stopped today, the effort for human systems to adapt to
the most crucial effects of climate-driven species redistribution will
be far-reaching and extensive. For example, key insect crop pollinator
families (Apidae, Syrphidae and Calliphoridae; i.e., bees, hoverflies
and blowflies) are projected to retain significantly greater geographic
ranges under 1.5C of global warming compared with 2C (Warren
et al., 2018a). In some cases, when species (such as pest and disease
species) move into areas which have become climatically suitable
they may become invasive or harmful to human or natural systems
(Settele et al., 2014). Some studies are beginning to locate `refugial'
areas where the climate remains suitable in the future for most of the
species currently present. For example, Smith et al. (2018) estimated
that 5.5-14% more of the globe's terrestrial land area could act as
climatic refugia for plants under 1.5C of warming compared to 2C.
There is no literature that directly estimates the proportion of species at
increased risk of global (as opposed to local) commitment to extinction
as a result of climate change, as this is inherently difficult to quantify.
However, it is possible to compare the proportions of species at risk
of very high range loss; for example, a discernibly smaller number of
terrestrial species are projected to lose over 90% of their range at
1.5C of global warming compared with 2C (Figure 2 in Warren et
al., 2018a). A link between very high levels of range loss and greatly
increased extinction risk may be inferred (Urban, 2015). Hence, limiting
global warming to 1.5C compared with 2C would be expected to
reduce both range losses and associated extinction risks in terrestrial
species (high confidence).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.4.3.4 Changes in ecosystem function, biomass
and carbon stocks
Working Group II of AR5 (Settele et al., 2014) concluded that there is
high confidence that net terrestrial ecosystem productivity at the global
scale has increased relative to the pre-industrial era and that rising
CO2 concentrations are contributing to this trend through stimulation
of photosynthesis. There is, however, no clear and consistent signal
of a climate change contribution. In northern latitudes, the change in
productivity has a lower velocity than the warming, possibly because of
a lack of resource and vegetation acclimation mechanisms (M. Huang
et al., 2017). Biomass and soil carbon stocks in terrestrial ecosystems
are currently increasing (high confidence), but they are vulnerable to
loss of carbon to the atmosphere as a result of projected increases in
the intensity of storms, wildfires, land degradation and pest outbreaks
(Settele et al., 2014; Seidl et al., 2017). These losses are expected to
contribute to a decrease in the terrestrial carbon sink. Anderegg et al.
(2015) demonstrated that total ecosystem respiration at the global
scale has increased in response to increases in night-time temperature
(1 PgC yr-1 C-1, P=0.02).
The increase in total ecosystem respiration in spring and autumn,
associated with higher temperatures, may convert boreal forests
from carbon sinks to carbon sources (Hadden and Grelle, 2016). In
boreal peatlands, for example, increased temperature may diminish
carbon storage and compromise the stability of the peat (Dieleman
et al., 2016). In addition, J. Yang et al. (2015) showed that fires reduce
the carbon sink of global terrestrial ecosystems by 0.57 PgC yr-1 in
ecosystems with large carbon stores, such as peatlands and tropical
forests. Consequently, for adaptation purposes, it is necessary to
enhance carbon sinks, especially in forests which are prime regulators
within the water, energy and carbon cycles (Ellison et al., 2017). Soil can
also be a key compartment for substantial carbon sequestration (Lal,
2014; Minasny et al., 2017), depending on the net biome productivity
and the soil quality (Bispo et al., 2017).
AR5 assessed that large uncertainty remains regarding the land carbon
cycle behaviour of the future (Ciais et al., 2013), with most, but not all,
CMIP5 models simulating continued terrestrial carbon uptake under
all four RCP scenarios (Jones et al., 2013). Disagreement between
models outweighs differences between scenarios even up to the year
2100 (Hewitt et al., 2016; Lovenduski and Bonan, 2017). Increased
atmospheric CO2 concentrations are expected to drive further increases
in the land carbon sink (Ciais et al., 2013; Schimel et al., 2015), which
could persist for centuries (Pugh et al., 2016). Nitrogen, phosphorus and
other nutrients will limit the terrestrial carbon cycle response to both
elevated CO2 and altered climate (Goll et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2014;
Wieder et al., 2015; Zaehle et al., 2015; Ellsworth et al., 2017). Climate
change may accelerate plant uptake of carbon (Gang et al., 2015)
but also increase the rate of decomposition (Todd-Brown et al., 2014;
Koven et al., 2015; Crowther et al., 2016). Ahlstrom et al. (2012) found
a net loss of carbon in extra-tropical regions and the largest spread
across model results in the tropics. The projected net effect of climate
change is to reduce the carbon sink expected under CO2 increase alone
(Settele et al., 2014). Friend et al. (2014) found substantial uptake of
carbon by vegetation under future scenarios when considering the
effects of both climate change and elevated CO2.

Chapter 3

There is limited published literature examining modelled land carbon
changes specifically under 1.5C of warming, but existing CMIP5
models and published data are used in this report to draw some
conclusions. For systems with significant inertia, such as vegetation or
soil carbon stores, changes in carbon storage will depend on the rate
of change of forcing and thus depend on the choice of scenario (Jones
et al., 2009; Ciais et al., 2013; Sihi et al., 2017). To avoid legacy effects
of the choice of scenario, this report focuses on the response of gross
primary productivity (GPP) - the rate of photosynthetic carbon uptake
- by the models, rather than by changes in their carbon store.
Figure 3.17 shows different responses of the terrestrial carbon cycle
to climate change in different regions. The models show a consistent
response of increased GPP in temperate latitudes of approximately 2
GtC yr-1 C-1. Similarly, Gang et al. (2015) projected a robust increase
in the net primary productivity (NPP) of temperate forests. However,
Ahlstrom et al. (2012) showed that this effect could be offset or reversed
by increases in decomposition. Globally, most models project that GPP
will increase or remain approximately unchanged (Hashimoto et al.,
2013). This projection is supported by findings by Sakalli et al. (2017)
for Europe using Euro-CORDEX regional models under a 2C global
warming for the period 2034-2063, which indicated that storage
will increase by 5% in soil and by 20% in vegetation. However, using
the same models Jacob et al. (2018) showed that limiting warming
to 1.5C instead of 2C avoids an increase in ecosystem vulnerability
(compared to a no-climate change scenario) of 40-50%.
At the global level, linear scaling is acceptable for net primary production,
biomass burning and surface runoff, and impacts on terrestrial carbon
storage are projected to be greater at 2C than at 1.5C (Tanaka et
al., 2017). If global CO2 concentrations and temperatures stabilize, or
peak and decline, then both land and ocean carbon sinks - which are
primarily driven by the continued increase in atmospheric CO2 - will
also decline and may even become carbon sources (Jones et al., 2016).
Consequently, if a given amount of anthropogenic CO2 is removed from
the atmosphere, an equivalent amount of land and ocean anthropogenic
CO2 will be released to the atmosphere (Cao and Caldeira, 2010).
In conclusion, ecosystem respiration is expected to increase with
increasing temperature, thus reducing soil carbon storage. Soil carbon
storage is expected to be larger if global warming is restricted to
1.5C, although some of the associated changes will be countered by
enhanced gross primary production due to elevated CO2 concentrations
(i.e., the `fertilization effect') and higher temperatures, especially at
mid- and high latitudes (medium confidence).

3.4.3.5 Regional and ecosystem-specific risks
A large number of threatened systems, including mountain
ecosystems, highly biodiverse tropical wet and dry forests, deserts,
freshwater systems and dune systems, were assessed in AR5. These
include Mediterranean areas in Europe, Siberian, tropical and desert
ecosystems in Asia, Australian rainforests, the Fynbos and succulent
Karoo areas of South Africa, and wetlands in Ethiopia, Malawi, Zambia
and Zimbabwe. In all these systems, it has been shown that impacts
accrue with greater warming, and thus impacts at 2C are expected to
be greater than those at 1.5C (medium confidence).
219

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Global

20

0

-20
-40
-1

0

10
5
0
-5
0

1
2
3
4
Change in global T (C)

0
-10
-20
-30
0

5

6

1
2
3
4
Change in global T (C)

5

6

5

6

60N - 90N

15

15

-10
-1

10

-40
-1

6

GPP change (GtC yr-1)

GPP change (GtC yr-1)

5

30N - 60N

20

3

1
2
3
4
Change in global T (C)

30S - 30N

20

GPP change (GtC yr-1)

GPP change (GtC yr-1)

40

10

5

0
-5
-1

0

1
2
3
4
Change in global T (C)

Figure 3.17 | The response of terrestrial productivity (gross primary productivity, GPP) to climate change, globally (top left) and for three latitudinal regions: 30S-30N;
30-60N and 60-90N. Data come from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) archive (http://cmip-pcmdi.llnl.gov/cmip5/). Seven Earth System
Models were used: Norwegian Earth System Model (NorESM-ME, yellow); Community Earth System Model (CESM, red); Institute Pierre Simon Laplace (IPLS)-CM5-LR (dark
blue); Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL, pale blue); Max Plank Institute-Earth System Model (MPI-ESM, pink); Hadley Centre New Global Environmental Model
2-Earth System (HadGEM2-ES, orange); and Canadian Earth System Model 2 (CanESM2, green). Differences in GPP between model simulations with (`1pctCO2') and without
(`esmfixclim1') the effects of climate change are shown. Data are plotted against the global mean temperature increase above pre-industrial levels from simulations with a 1%
per year increase in CO2 (`1pctCO2').

The High Arctic region, with tundra-dominated landscapes, has warmed
more than the global average over the last century (Section 3.3; Settele
et al., 2014). The Arctic tundra biome is experiencing increasing fire
disturbance and permafrost degradation (Bring et al., 2016; DeBeer et
al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016). Both of these processes
facilitate the establishment of woody species in tundra areas. Arctic
terrestrial ecosystems are being disrupted by delays in winter onset
and mild winters associated with global warming (high confidence)
(Cooper, 2014). Observational constraints suggest that stabilization
at 1.5C of warming would avoid the thawing of approximately 1.5
to 2.5 million km2 of permafrost (medium confidence) compared
with stabilization at 2C (Chadburn et al., 2017), but the time scale
for release of thawed carbon as CO2 or CH4 should be many centuries
(Burke et al., 2017). In northern Eurasia, the growing season length is
projected to increase by about 3-12 days at 1.5C and 6-16 days at
2C of warming (medium confidence) (Zhou et al., 2018). Aalto et al.
(2017) predicted a 72% reduction in cryogenic land surface processes
in northern Europe for RCP2.6 in 2040-2069 (corresponding to a global
warming of approximately 1.6C), with only slightly larger losses for
RCP4.5 (2C of global warming).
220

Projected impacts on forests as climate change occurs include increases
in the intensity of storms, wildfires and pest outbreaks (Settele et al.,
2014), potentially leading to forest dieback (medium confidence).
Warmer and drier conditions in particular facilitate fire, drought and insect
disturbances, while warmer and wetter conditions increase disturbances
from wind and pathogens (Seidl et al., 2017). Particularly vulnerable
regions are Central and South America, Mediterranean Basin, South
Africa, South Australia where the drought risk will increase (see Figure
3.12). Including disturbances in simulations may influence productivity
changes in European forests in response to climate change (Reyer et
al., 2017b). There is additional evidence for the attribution of increased
forest fire frequency in North America to anthropogenic climate change
during 1984-2015, via the mechanism of increasing fuel aridity almost
doubling the western USA forest fire area compared to what would
have been expected in the absence of climate change (Abatzoglou and
Williams, 2016). This projection is in line with expected fire risks, which
indicate that fire frequency could increase over 37.8% of the global land
area during 2010-2039 (Moritz et al., 2012), corresponding to a global
warming level of approximately 1.2C, compared with over 61.9% of
the global land area in 2070-2099, corresponding to a warming of

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

approximately 3.5C.6 The values in Table 26-1 in a recent paper by
Romero-Lankao et al. (2014) also indicate significantly lower wildfire
risks in North America for near-term warming (2030-2040, considered a
proxy for 1.5C of warming) than at 2C (high confidence).
The Amazon tropical forest has been shown to be close to its climatic
limits (Hutyra et al., 2005), but this threshold may move under elevated
CO2 (Good et al., 2011). Future changes in rainfall, especially dry season
length, will determine responses of the Amazon forest (Good et al.,
2013). The forest may be especially vulnerable to combined pressure
from multiple stressors, namely changes in climate and continued
anthropogenic disturbance (Borma et al., 2013; Nobre et al., 2016).
Modelling (Huntingford et al., 2013) and observational constraints
(Cox et al., 2013) suggest that large-scale forest dieback is less likely
than suggested under early coupled modelling studies (Cox et al., 2000;
Jones et al., 2009). Nobre et al. (2016) estimated a climatic threshold of
4C of warming and a deforestation threshold of 40%.
In many places around the world, the savanna boundary is moving
into former grasslands. Woody encroachment, including increased
tree cover and biomass, has increased over the past century, owing
to changes in land management, rising CO2 levels, and climate
variability and change (often in combination) (Settele et al., 2014). For
plant species in the Mediterranean region, shifts in phenology, range
contraction and health decline have been observed with precipitation
decreases and temperature increases (medium confidence) (Settele
et al., 2014). Recent studies using independent complementary
approaches have shown that there is a regional-scale threshold in the
Mediterranean region between 1.5C and 2C of warming (Guiot and
Cramer, 2016; Schleussner et al., 2016b). Further, Guiot and Cramer
(2016) concluded that biome shifts unprecedented in the last 10,000
years can only be avoided if global warming is constrained to 1.5C
(medium confidence) - whilst 2C of warming will result in a decrease
of 12-15% of the Mediterranean biome area. The Fynbos biome in
southwestern South Africa is vulnerable to the increasing impact of
fires under increasing temperatures and drier winters. It is projected
to lose about 20%, 45% and 80% of its current suitable climate area
under 1C, 2C and 3C of global warming, respectively, compared to
1961-1990 (high confidence) (Engelbrecht and Engelbrecht, 2016). In
Australia, an increase in the density of trees and shrubs at the expense
of grassland species is occurring across all major ecosystems and is
projected to be amplified (NCCARF, 2013). Regarding Central America,
Lyra et al. (2017) showed that the tropical rainforest biomass would be
reduced by about 40% under global warming of 3C, with considerable
replacement by savanna and grassland. With a global warming of close
to 1.5C in 2050, a biomass decrease of 20% is projected for tropical
rainforests of Central America (Lyra et al., 2017). If a linear response is
assumed, this decrease may reach 30% (medium confidence).
Freshwater ecosystems are considered to be among the most threatened
on the planet (Settele et al., 2014). Although peatlands cover only about
3% of the land surface, they hold one-third of the world's soil carbon
stock (400 to 600 Pg) (Settele et al., 2014). When drained, this carbon
is released to the atmosphere. At least 15% of peatlands have drained,
6

Chapter 3

mostly in Europe and Southeast Asia, and are responsible for 5% of
human derived CO2 emissions (Green and Page, 2017). Moreover, in the
Congo basin (Dargie et al., 2017) and in the Amazonian basin (Draper et
al., 2014), the peatlands store the equivalent carbon as that of a tropical
forest. However, stored carbon is vulnerable to land-use change and
future risk of drought, for example in northeast Brazil (high confidence)
(Figure 3.12, Section 3.3.4.2). At the global scale, these peatlands are
undergoing rapid major transformations through drainage and burning
in preparation for oil palm and other crops or through unintentional
burning (Magrin et al., 2014). Wetland salinization, a widespread
threat to the structure and ecological functioning of inland and coastal
wetlands, is occurring at a high rate and large geographic scale (Section
3.3.6; Herbert et al., 2015). Settele et al. (2014) found that rising water
temperatures are projected to lead to shifts in freshwater species
distributions and worsen water quality. Some of these ecosystems
respond non-linearly to changes in temperature. For example, Johnson
and Poiani (2016) found that the wetland function of the Prairie Pothole
region in North America is projected to decline at temperatures beyond
a local warming of 2C-3C above present-day values (1C local
warming, corresponding to 0.6C of global warming). If the ratio of local
to global warming remains similar for these small levels of warming,
this would indicate a global temperature threshold of 1.2C-1.8C
of warming. Hence, constraining global warming to approximately
1.5C would maintain the functioning of prairie pothole ecosystems in
terms of their productivity and biodiversity, although a 20% increase
of precipitation could offset 2C of global warming (high confidence)
(Johnson and Poiani, 2016).

3.4.3.6 Summary of implications for ecosystem services
In summary, constraining global warming to 1.5C rather than 2C
has strong benefits for terrestrial and wetland ecosystems and their
services (high confidence). These benefits include avoidance or
reduction of changes such as biome transformations, species range
losses, increased extinction risks (all high confidence) and changes
in phenology (high confidence), together with projected increases
in extreme weather events which are not yet factored into these
analyses (Section 3.3). All of these changes contribute to disruption of
ecosystem functioning and loss of cultural, provisioning and regulating
services provided by these ecosystems to humans. Examples of such
services include soil conservation (avoidance of desertification), flood
control, water and air purification, pollination, nutrient cycling, sources
of food, and recreation.

3.4.4

Ocean Ecosystems

The ocean plays a central role in regulating atmospheric gas
concentrations, global temperature and climate. It also provides
habitat to a large number of organisms and ecosystems that provide
goods and services worth trillions of USD per year (e.g., Costanza et
al., 2014; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2015). Together with local stresses
(Halpern et al., 2015), climate change poses a major threat to an
increasing number of ocean ecosystems (e.g., warm water or tropical
coral reefs: virtually certain, WGII AR5) and consequently to many

The approximate temperatures are derived from Figure 10.5a in Meehl et al. (2007), which indicates an ensemble average projection of 0.7C or 3C above 1980-1999
temperatures, which were already 0.5C above pre-industrial values.

221

3

Chapter 3

coastal communities that depend on marine resources for food,
livelihoods and a safe place to live. Previous sections of this report
have described changes in the ocean, including rapid increases
in ocean temperature down to a depth of at least 700 m (Section
3.3.7). In addition, anthropogenic carbon dioxide has decreased
ocean pH and affected the concentration of ions in seawater such
as carbonate (Sections 3.3.10 and 3.4.4.5), both over a similar depth
range. Increased ocean temperatures have intensified storms in some
regions (Section 3.3.6), expanded the ocean volume and increased
sea levels globally (Section 3.3.9), reduced the extent of polar
summer sea ice (Section 3.3.8), and decreased the overall solubility
of the ocean for oxygen (Section 3.3.10). Importantly, changes in the
response to climate change rarely operate in isolation. Consequently,
the effect of global warming of 1.5C versus 2C must be considered
in the light of multiple factors that may accumulate and interact over
time to produce complex risks, hazards and impacts on human and
natural systems.

3.4.4.1 Observed impacts

3

Physical and chemical changes to the ocean resulting from increasing
atmospheric CO2 and other GHGs are already driving significant changes
to ocean systems (very high confidence) and will continue to do so at
1.5C, and more so at 2C, of global warming above pre-industrial
temperatures (Section 3.3.11). These changes have been accompanied
by other changes such as ocean acidification, intensifying storms and
deoxygenation (Levin and Le Bris, 2015). Risks are already significant
at current greenhouse gas concentrations and temperatures, and they
vary significantly among depths, locations and ecosystems, with impacts
being singular, interactive and/or cumulative (Boyd et al., 2015).

3.4.4.2 Warming and stratification of the surface ocean
As atmospheric greenhouse gases have increased, the global mean
surface temperature (GMST) has reached about 1C above the preindustrial period, and oceans have rapidly warmed from the ocean
surface to the deep sea (high confidence) (Sections 3.3.7; Hughes
and Narayanaswamy, 2013; Levin and Le Bris, 2015; Yasuhara and
Danovaro, 2016; Sweetman et al., 2017). Marine organisms are
already responding to these changes by shifting their biogeographical
ranges to higher latitudes at rates that range from approximately 0
to 40 km yr-1 (Burrows et al., 2014; Chust, 2014; Bruge et al.,
2016; Poloczanska et al., 2016), which has consequently affected
the structure and function of the ocean, along with its biodiversity
and foodwebs (high confidence). Movements of organisms does
not necessarily equate to the movement of entire ecosystems. For
example, species of reef-building corals have been observed to shift
their geographic ranges, yet this has not resulted in the shift of entire
coral ecosystems (high confidence) (Woodroffe et al., 2010; Yamano
et al., 2011). In the case of `less mobile' ecosystems (e.g., coral reefs,
kelp forests and intertidal communities), shifts in biogeographical
ranges may be limited, with mass mortalities and disease outbreaks
increasing in frequency as the exposure to extreme temperatures
increases (very high confidence) (Hoegh-Guldberg, 1999; Garrabou
et al., 2009; Rivetti et al., 2014; Maynard et al., 2015; Krumhansl et
al., 2016; Hughes et al., 2017b; see also Box 3.4). These trends are
projected to become more pronounced at warming of 1.5C, and
222

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

more so at 2C, above the pre-industrial period (Hoegh-Guldberg et
al., 2007; Donner, 2009; Frieler et al., 2013; Horta E Costa et al., 2014;
Verges et al., 2014, 2016; Zarco-Perello et al., 2017) and are likely to
result in decreases in marine biodiversity at the equator but increases
in biodiversity at higher latitudes (Cheung et al., 2009; Burrows et
al., 2014).
While the impacts of species shifting their ranges are mostly negative
for human communities and industry, there are instances of shortterm gains. Fisheries, for example, may expand temporarily at high
latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere as the extent of summer sea ice
recedes and NPP increases (medium confidence) (Cheung et al., 2010;
Lam et al., 2016; Weatherdon et al., 2016). High-latitude fisheries are
not only influenced by the effect of temperature on NPP but are also
strongly influenced by the direct effects of changing temperatures on
fish and fisheries (Section 3.4.4.9; Barange et al., 2014; Portner et al.,
2014; Cheung et al., 2016b; Weatherdon et al., 2016). Temporary gains
in the productivity of high-latitude fisheries are offset by a growing
number of examples from low and mid-latitudes where increases in
sea temperature are driving decreases in NPP, owing to the direct
effects of elevated temperatures and/or reduced ocean mixing from
reduced ocean upwelling, that is, increased stratification (low-medium
confidence) (Cheung et al., 2010; Ainsworth et al., 2011; Lam et al.,
2012, 2014, 2016; Bopp et al., 2013; Boyd et al., 2014; Chust et al., 2014;
Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014; Poloczanska et al., 2014; Portner et al.,
2014; Signorini et al., 2015). Reduced ocean upwelling has implications
for millions of people and industries that depend on fisheries for food
and livelihoods (Bakun et al., 2015; FAO, 2016; Kampf and Chapman,
2016), although there is low confidence in the projection of the size
of the consequences at 1.5C. It is also important to appreciate these
changes in the context of large-scale ocean processes such as the
ocean carbon pump. The export of organic carbon to deeper layers of
the ocean increases as NPP changes in the surface ocean, for example,
with implications for foodwebs and oxygen levels (Boyd et al., 2014;
Sydeman et al., 2014; Altieri and Gedan, 2015; Bakun et al., 2015;
Boyd, 2015).

3.4.4.3 Storms and coastal runoff
Storms, wind, waves and inundation can have highly destructive impacts
on ocean and coastal ecosystems, as well as the human communities
that depend on them (IPCC, 2012; Seneviratne et al., 2012). The intensity
of tropical cyclones across the world's oceans has increased, although the
overall number of tropical cyclones has remained the same or decreased
(medium confidence) (Section 3.3.6; Elsner et al., 2008; Holland and
Bruyere, 2014). The direct force of wind and waves associated with
larger storms, along with changes in storm direction, increases the risks
of physical damage to coastal communities and to ecosystems such as
mangroves (low to medium confidence) (Long et al., 2016; Primavera et
al., 2016; Villamayor et al., 2016; Cheal et al., 2017) and tropical coral
reefs (De'ath et al., 2012; Bozec et al., 2015; Cheal et al., 2017). These
changes are associated with increases in maximum wind speed, wave
height and the inundation, although trends in these variables vary from
region to region (Section 3.3.5). In some cases, this can lead to increased
exposure to related impacts, such as flooding, reduced water quality and
increased sediment runoff (medium-high confidence) (Brodie et al., 2012;
Wong et al., 2014; Anthony, 2016; AR5, Table 5.1).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Sea level rise also amplifies the impacts of storms and wave action
(Section 3.3.9), with robust evidence that storm surges and damage
are already penetrating farther inland than a few decades ago,
changing conditions for coastal ecosystems and human communities.
This is especially true for small islands (Box 3.5) and low-lying coastal
communities, where issues such as storm surges can transform coastal
areas (Section 3.4.5; Brown et al., 2018a). Changes in the frequency of
extreme events, such as an increase in the frequency of intense storms,
have the potential (along with other factors, such as disease, food web
changes, invasive organisms and heat stress-related mortality; Burge
et al., 2014; Maynard et al., 2015; Weatherdon et al., 2016; Clements
et al., 2017) to overwhelm the capacity for natural and human systems
to recover following disturbances. This has recently been seen for key
ecosystems such as tropical coral reefs (Box 3.4), which have changed
from coral-dominated ecosystems to assemblages dominated by other
organisms such as seaweeds, with changes in associated organisms
and ecosystem services (high confidence) (De'ath et al., 2012; Bozec et
al., 2015; Cheal et al., 2017; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2017; Hughes et al.,
2017a, b). The impacts of storms are amplified by sea level rise (Section
3.4.5), leading to substantial challenges today and in the future for
cities, deltas and small island states in particular (Sections 3.4.5.2 to
3.4.5.4), as well as for coastlines and their associated ecosystems
(Sections 3.4.5.5 to 3.4.5.7).

3.4.4.4 Ocean circulation
The movement of water within the ocean is essential to its biology
and ecology, as well to the circulation of heat, water and nutrients
around the planet (Section 3.3.7). The movement of these factors
drives local and regional climates, as well as primary productivity and
food production. Firmly attributing recent changes in the strength and
direction of ocean currents to climate change, however, is complicated
by long-term patterns and variability (e.g., Pacific decadal oscillation,
PDO; Signorini et al., 2015) and a lack of records that match the longterm nature of these changes in many cases (Lluch-Cota et al., 2014). An
assessment of the literature since AR5 (Sydeman et al., 2014), however,
concluded that (overall) upwelling-favourable winds have intensified
in the California, Benguela and Humboldt upwelling systems, but
have weakened in the Iberian system and have remained neutral in
the Canary upwelling system in over 60 years of records (1946-2012)
(medium confidence). These conclusions are consistent with a growing
consensus that wind-driven upwelling systems are likely to intensify
under climate change in many upwelling systems (Sydeman et al.,
2014; Bakun et al., 2015; Di Lorenzo, 2015), with potentially positive
and negative consequences (Bakun et al., 2015).
Changes in ocean circulation can have profound impacts on marine
ecosystems by connecting regions and facilitating the entry and
establishment of species in areas where they were unknown before (e.g.,
`tropicalization' of temperate ecosystems; Wernberg et al., 2012; Verges
et al., 2014, 2016; Zarco-Perello et al., 2017), as well as the arrival of novel
disease agents (low-medium confidence) (Burge et al., 2014; Maynard
et al., 2015; Weatherdon et al., 2016). For example, the herbivorous sea
urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii has been reached Tasmania from the
Australian mainland, where it was previously unknown, owing to a
strengthening of the East Australian Current (EAC) that connects the
two regions (high confidence) (Ling et al., 2009). As a consequence, the

Chapter 3

distribution and abundance of kelp forests has rapidly decreased, with
implications for fisheries and other ecosystem services (Ling et al., 2009).
These risks to marine ecosystems are projected to become greater at
1.5C, and more so at 2C (medium confidence) (Cheung et al., 2009;
Pereira et al., 2010; Pinsky et al., 2013; Burrows et al., 2014).
Changes to ocean circulation can have even larger influence in terms of
scale and impacts. Weakening of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC), for example, is projected to be highly disruptive to
natural and human systems as the delivery of heat to higher latitudes
via this current system is reduced (Collins et al., 2013). Evidence of
a slowdown of AMOC has increased since AR5 (Smeed et al., 2014;
Rahmstorf et al., 2015a, b; Kelly et al., 2016), yet a strong causal
connection to climate change is missing (low confidence) (Section
3.3.7).

3.4.4.5 Ocean acidification
Ocean chemistry encompasses a wide range of phenomena and chemical
species, many of which are integral to the biology and ecology of the
ocean (Section 3.3.10; Gattuso et al., 2014, 2015; Hoegh-Guldberg et
al., 2014; Portner et al., 2014). While changes to ocean chemistry are
likely to be of central importance, the literature on how climate change
might influence ocean chemistry over the short and long term is limited
(medium confidence). By contrast, numerous risks from the specific
changes associated with ocean acidification have been identified (Dove
et al., 2013; Kroeker et al., 2013; Portner et al., 2014; Gattuso et al.,
2015; Albright et al., 2016), with the consensus that resulting changes
to the carbonate chemistry of seawater are having, and are likely to
continue to have, fundamental and substantial impacts on a wide variety
of organisms (high confidence). Organisms with shells and skeletons
made out of calcium carbonate are particularly at risk, as are the early
life history stages of a large number of organisms and processes such
as de-calcification, although there are some taxa that have not shown
high-sensitivity to changes in CO2, pH and carbonate concentrations
(Dove et al., 2013; Fang et al., 2013; Kroeker et al., 2013; Portner et
al., 2014; Gattuso et al., 2015). Risks of these impacts also vary with
latitude and depth, with the greatest changes occurring at high latitudes
as well as deeper regions. The aragonite saturation horizon (i.e., where
concentrations of calcium and carbonate fall below the saturation point
for aragonite, a key crystalline form of calcium carbonate) is decreasing
with depth as anthropogenic CO2 penetrates deeper into the ocean over
time. Under many models and scenarios, the aragonite saturation is
projected to reach the surface by 2030 onwards, with a growing list of
impacts and consequences for ocean organisms, ecosystems and people
(Orr et al., 2005; Hauri et al., 2016).
Further, it is difficult to reliably separate the impacts of ocean warming
and acidification. As ocean waters have increased in sea surface
temperature (SST) by approximately 0.9C they have also decreased
by 0.2 pH units since 1870-1899 (`pre-industrial'; Table 1 in Gattuso et
al., 2015; Bopp et al., 2013). As CO2 concentrations continue to increase
along with other GHGs, pH will decrease while sea temperature will
increase, reaching 1.7C and a decrease of 0.2 pH units (by 2100
under RCP4.5) relative to the pre-industrial period. These changes are
likely to continue given the negative correlation of temperature and
pH. Experimental manipulation of CO2, temperature and consequently
223

3

Chapter 3

While many risks have been defined through laboratory and mesocosm
experiments, there is a growing list of impacts from the field (medium
confidence) that include community-scale impacts on bacterial
assemblages and processes (Endres et al., 2014), coccolithophores
(K.J.S. Meier et al., 2014), pteropods and polar foodwebs (Bednarek et
al., 2012, 2014), phytoplankton (Moy et al., 2009; Riebesell et al., 2013;
Richier et al., 2014), benthic ecosystems (Hall-Spencer et al., 2008;
Linares et al., 2015), seagrass (Garrard et al., 2014), and macroalgae
(Webster et al., 2013; Ordonez et al., 2014), as well as excavating
sponges, endolithic microalgae and reef-building corals (Dove et al.,
2013; Reyes-Nivia et al., 2013; Fang et al., 2014), and coral reefs (Box
3.4; Fabricius et al., 2011; Allen et al., 2017). Some ecosystems, such as
those from bathyal areas (i.e., 200-3000 m below the surface), are likely
to undergo very large reductions in pH by the year 2100 (0.29 to 0.37
pH units), yet evidence of how deep-water ecosystems will respond is
currently limited despite the potential planetary importance of these
areas (low to medium confidence) (Hughes and Narayanaswamy,
2013; Sweetman et al., 2017).

zones (OMZ) (Turner et al., 2008; Carstensen et al., 2014; Acharya and
Panigrahi, 2016; Lachkar et al., 2018), physiological impacts (Portner
et al., 2014), and mortality and/or displacement of oxygen dependent
organisms such as fish (Hamukuaya et al., 1998; Thronson and Quigg,
2008; Jacinto, 2011) and invertebrates (Hobbs and Mcdonald, 2010;
Bednarek et al., 2016; Seibel, 2016; Altieri et al., 2017). In addition,
deoxygenation interacts with ocean acidification to present substantial
separate and combined challenges for fisheries and aquaculture
(medium confidence) (Hamukuaya et al., 1998; Bakun et al., 2015;
Rodrigues et al., 2015; Feely et al., 2016; S. Li et al., 2016; Asiedu et al.,
2017a; Clements and Chopin, 2017; Clements et al., 2017; Breitburg et
al., 2018). Deoxygenation is expected to have greater impacts as ocean
warming and acidification increase (high confidence), with impacts
being larger and more numerous than today (e.g., greater challenges
for aquaculture and fisheries from hypoxia), and as the number of
hypoxic areas continues to increase. Risks from deoxygenation are
virtually certain to increase as warming continues, although our
understanding of risks at 1.5C versus 2C is incomplete (medium
confidence). Reducing coastal pollution, and consequently the
penetration of organic carbon into deep benthic habitats, is expected
to reduce the loss of oxygen in coastal waters and hypoxic areas in
general (high confidence) (Breitburg et al., 2018).

3.4.4.6 Deoxygenation

3.4.4.7 Loss of sea ice

Oxygen levels in the ocean are maintained by a series of processes
including ocean mixing, photosynthesis, respiration and solubility
(Boyd et al., 2014, 2015; Portner et al., 2014; Breitburg et al., 2018).
Concentrations of oxygen in the ocean are declining (high confidence)
owing to three main factors related to climate change: (i) heat-related
stratification of the water column (less ventilation and mixing), (ii)
reduced oxygen solubility as ocean temperature increases, and (iii)
impacts of warming on biological processes that produce or consume
oxygen such as photosynthesis and respiration (high confidence) (Bopp
et al., 2013; Portner et al., 2014; Altieri and Gedan, 2015; Deutsch et
al., 2015; Schmidtko et al., 2017; Shepherd et al., 2017; Breitburg et
al., 2018). Further, a range of processes (Section 3.4.11) are acting
synergistically, including factors not related to climate change, such
as runoff and coastal eutrophication (e.g., from coastal farming
and intensive aquaculture). These changes can lead to increased
phytoplankton productivity as a result of the increased concentration
of dissolved nutrients. Increased supply of organic carbon molecules
from coastal run-off can also increase the metabolic activity of coastal
microbial communities (Altieri and Gedan, 2015; Bakun et al., 2015;
Boyd, 2015). Deep sea areas are likely to experience some of the
greatest challenges, as abyssal seafloor habitats in areas of deep-water
formation are projected to experience decreased water column oxygen
concentrations by as much as 0.03 mL L-1 by 2100 (Levin and Le Bris,
2015; Sweetman et al., 2017).

Sea ice is a persistent feature of the planet's polar regions (Polyak et al.,
2010) and is central to marine ecosystems, people (e.g., food, culture
and livelihoods) and industries (e.g., fishing, tourism, oil and gas, and
shipping). Summer sea ice in the Arctic, however, has been retreating
rapidly in recent decades (Section 3.3.8), with an assessment of the
literature revealing that a fundamental transformation is occurring
in polar organisms and ecosystems, driven by climate change (high
confidence) (Larsen et al., 2014). These changes are strongly affecting
people in the Arctic who have close relationships with sea ice and
associated ecosystems, and these people are facing major adaptation
challenges as a result of sea level rise, coastal erosion, the accelerated
thawing of permafrost, changing ecosystems and resources, and many
other issues (Ford, 2012; Ford et al., 2015).

acidification indicate that these impacts will continue to increase in
size and scale as CO2 and SST continue to increase in tandem (Dove et
al., 2013; Fang et al., 2013; Kroeker et al., 2013).

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

The number of `dead zones' (areas where oxygenated waters have
been replaced by hypoxic conditions) has been growing strongly
since the 1990s (Diaz and Rosenberg, 2008; Altieri and Gedan, 2015;
Schmidtko et al., 2017). While attribution can be difficult because of
the complexity of the processes involved, both related and unrelated
to climate change, some impacts associated to deoxygenation (lowmedium confidence) include the expansion of oxygen minimum
224

There is considerable and compelling evidence that a further increase
of 0.5C beyond the present-day average global surface temperature
will lead to multiple levels of impact on a variety of organisms, from
phytoplankton to marine mammals, with some of the most dramatic
changes occurring in the Arctic Ocean and western Antarctic Peninsula
(Turner et al., 2014, 2017b; Steinberg et al., 2015; Pinones and Fedorov,
2016).
The impacts of climate change on sea ice are part of the focus
of the IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate (SROCC), due to be released in 2019, and hence
are not covered comprehensively here. However, there is a range of
responses to the loss of sea ice that are occurring and which increase
at 1.5C and further so with 2C of global warming. Some of these
changes are described briefly here. Photosynthetic communities,
such macroalgae, phytoplankton and microalgae dwelling on the
underside of floating sea ice are changing, owing to increased
temperatures, light and nutrient levels. As sea ice retreats, mixing of

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

the water column increases, and phototrophs have increased access
to seasonally high levels of solar radiation (medium confidence)
(Dalpadado et al., 2014; W.N. Meier et al., 2014). These changes are
expected to stimulate fisheries productivity in high-latitude regions
by mid-century (high confidence) (Cheung et al., 2009, 2010, 2016b;
Lam et al., 2014), with evidence that this is already happening for
several high-latitude fisheries in the Northern Hemisphere, such as the
Bering Sea, although these `positive' impacts may be relatively shortlived (Hollowed and Sundby, 2014; Sundby et al., 2016). In addition to
the impact of climate change on fisheries via impacts on net primary
productivity (NPP), there are also direct effects of temperature on
fish, which may in turn have a range of impacts (Portner et al., 2014).
Sea ice in Antarctica is undergoing changes that exceed those seen
in the Arctic (Maksym et al., 2011; Reid et al., 2015), with increases
in sea ice coverage in the western Ross Sea being accompanied by
strong decreases in the Bellingshausen and Amundsen Seas (Hobbs
et al., 2016). While Antarctica is not permanently populated, the
ramifications of changes to the productivity of vast regions, such
as the Southern Ocean, have substantial implications for ocean
foodwebs and fisheries globally.

3.4.4.8

Sea level rise

Mean sea level is increasing (Section 3.3.9), with substantial impacts
already being felt by coastal ecosystems and communities (Wong et
al., 2014) (high confidence). These changes are interacting with other
factors, such as strengthening storms, which together are driving larger
storm surges, infrastructure damage, erosion and habitat loss (Church et
al., 2013; Stocker et al., 2013; Blankespoor et al., 2014). Coastal wetland
ecosystems such as mangroves, sea grasses and salt marshes are under
pressure from rising sea level (medium confidence) (Section 3.4.5; Di
Nitto et al., 2014; Ellison, 2014; Lovelock et al., 2015; Mills et al., 2016;
Nicholls et al., 2018), as well as from a wide range of other risks and
impacts unrelated to climate change, with the ongoing loss of wetlands
recently estimated at approximately 1% per annum across a large
number of countries (Blankespoor et al., 2014; Alongi, 2015). While some
ecosystems (e.g., mangroves) may be able to shift shoreward as sea levels
increase, coastal development (e.g., buildings, seawalls and agriculture)
often interrupts shoreward shifts, as well as reducing sediment supplies
down some rivers (e.g., dams) due to coastal development (Di Nitto et al.,
2014; Lovelock et al., 2015; Mills et al., 2016).
Responses to sea level rise challenges for ocean and coastal systems
include reducing the impact of other stresses, such as those arising
from tourism, fishing, coastal development, reduced sediment
supply and unsustainable aquaculture/agriculture, in order to build
ecological resilience (Hossain et al., 2015; Sutton-Grier and Moore,
2016; Asiedu et al., 2017a). The available literature largely concludes
that these impacts will intensify under a 1.5C warmer world but will
be even higher at 2C, especially when considered in the context of
changes occurring beyond the end of the current century. In some
cases, restoration of coastal habitats and ecosystems may be a costeffective way of responding to changes arising from increasing levels
of exposure to rising sea levels, intensifying storms, coastal inundation
and salinization (Section 3.4.5 and Box 3.5; Arkema et al., 2013),
although limitations of these strategies have been identified (e.g.,
Lovelock et al., 2015; Weatherdon et al., 2016).

Chapter 3

3.4.4.9 Projected risks and adaptation options for oceans under
global warming of 1.5C or 2C above pre-industrial levels
A comprehensive discussion of risk and adaptation options for all
natural and human systems is not possible in the context and length
of this report, and hence the intention here is to illustrate key risks
and adaptation options for ocean ecosystems and sectors. This
assessment builds on the recent expert consensus of Gattuso et al.
(2015) by assessing new literature from 2015-2017 and adjusting
the levels of risk from climate change in the light of literature since
2014. The original expert group's assessment (Supplementary Material
3.SM.3.2) was used as input for this new assessment, which focuses
on the implications of global warming of 1.5C as compared to 2C. A
discussion of potential adaptation options is also provided, the details
of which will be further explored in later chapters of this special report.
The section draws on the extensive analysis and literature presented in
the Supplementary Material of this report (3.SM.3.2, 3.SM.3.3) and has
a summary in Figures 3.18 and 3.20 which outline the added relative
risks of climate change.

3.4.4.10 Framework organisms (tropical corals, mangroves
and seagrass)
Marine organisms (`ecosystem engineers'), such as seagrass, kelp,
oysters, salt marsh species, mangroves and corals, build physical
structures or frameworks (i.e., sea grass meadows, kelp forests, oyster
reefs, salt marshes, mangrove forests and coral reefs) which form the
habitat for a large number of species (Gutierrez et al., 2012). These
organisms in turn provide food, livelihoods, cultural significance, and
services such as coastal protection to human communities (Bell et al.,
2011, 2018; Cinner et al., 2012; Arkema et al., 2013; Nurse et al., 2014;
Wong et al., 2014; Barbier, 2015; Bell and Taylor, 2015; Hoegh-Guldberg
et al., 2015; Mycoo, 2017; Pecl et al., 2017).
Risks of climate change impacts for seagrass and mangrove ecosystems
were recently assessed by an expert group led by Short et al. (2016).
Impacts of climate change were assessed to be similar across a range
of submerged and emerged plants. Submerged plants such as seagrass were affected mostly by temperature extremes (Arias-Ortiz et al.,
2018), and indirectly by turbidity, while emergent communities such
as mangroves and salt marshes were most susceptible to sea level
variability and temperature extremes, which is consistent with other
evidence (Di Nitto et al., 2014; Sierra-Correa and Cantera Kintz, 2015;
Osorio et al., 2016; Sasmito et al., 2016), especially in the context of
human activities that reduce sediment supply (Lovelock et al., 2015)
or interrupt the shoreward movement of mangroves though the
construction of coastal infrastructure. This in turn leads to `coastal
squeeze' where coastal ecosystems are trapped between changing
ocean conditions and coastal infrastructure (Mills et al., 2016).
Projections of the future distribution of seagrasses suggest a poleward
shift, which raises concerns that low-latitude seagrass communities
may contract as a result of increasing stress levels (Valle et al., 2014).
Climate change (e.g., sea level rise, heat stress, storms) presents risk
for coastal ecosystems such as seagrass (high confidence) and reefbuilding corals (very high confidence) (Figure 3.18, Supplementary
Material 3.SM.3.2), with evidence of increasing concern since AR5 and
225

3

Chapter 3

3

the conclusion that tropical corals may be even more vulnerable to
climate change than indicated in assessments made in 2014 (HoeghGuldberg et al., 2014; Gattuso et al., 2015). The current assessment
also considered the heatwave-related loss of 50% of shallow-water
corals across hundreds of kilometres of the world's largest continuous
coral reef system, the Great Barrier Reef. These large-scale impacts,
plus the observation of back-to-back bleaching events on the Great
Barrier Reef (predicted two decades ago, Hoegh-Guldberg, 1999) and
arriving sooner than predicted (Hughes et al., 2017b, 2018), suggest
that the research community may have underestimated climate risks
for coral reefs (Figure 3.18). The general assessment of climate risks for
mangroves prior to this special report was that they face greater risks
from deforestation and unsustainable coastal development than from
climate change (Alongi, 2008; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014; Gattuso et
al., 2015). Recent large-scale die-offs (Duke et al., 2017; Lovelock et al.,
2017), however, suggest that risks from climate change may have been
underestimated for mangroves as well. With the events of the last past
three years in mind, risks are now considered to be undetectable to
moderate (i.e., moderate risks now start at 1.3C as opposed to 1.8C;
medium confidence). Consequently, when average global warming
reaches 1.3C above pre-industrial levels, the risk of climate change to
mangroves are projected to be moderate (Figure 3.18) while tropical
coral reefs will have reached a high level of risk as examplified by
increasing damage from heat stress since the early 1980s. At global
warming of 1.8C above pre-industrial levels, seagrasses are projected
to reach moderate to high levels of risk (e.g., damage resulting from
sea level rise, erosion, extreme temperatures, and storms), while risks
to mangroves from climate change are projected to remain moderate
(e.g., not keeping up with sea level rise, and more frequent heat stress
mortality) although there is low certainty as to when or if this important
ecosystem is likely to transition to higher levels of additional risk from
climate change (Figure 3.18).
Warm water (tropical) coral reefs are projected to reach a very high
risk of impact at 1.2C (Figure 3.18), with most available evidence
suggesting that coral-dominated ecosystems will be non-existent at this
temperature or higher (high confidence). At this point, coral abundance
will be near zero at many locations and storms will contribute to
`flattening' the three-dimensional structure of reefs without recovery,
as already observed for some coral reefs (Alvarez-Filip et al., 2009). The
impacts of warming, coupled with ocean acidification, are expected
to undermine the ability of tropical coral reefs to provide habitat for
thousand of species, which together provide a range of ecosystem
services (e.g., food, livelihoods, coastal protection, cultural services)
that are important for millions of people (high confidence) (Burke et
al., 2011).
Strategies for reducing the impact of climate change on framework
organisms include reducing stresses not directly related to climate
change (e.g., coastal pollution, overfishing and destructive coastal
development) in order to increase their ecological resilience in the face
of accelerating climate change impacts (World Bank, 2013; Ellison,
2014; Anthony et al., 2015; Sierra-Correa and Cantera Kintz, 2015;
Kroon et al., 2016; O'Leary et al., 2017), as well as protecting locations
where organisms may be more robust (Palumbi et al., 2014) or less
exposed to climate change (Bongaerts et al., 2010; van Hooidonk et
al., 2013; Beyer et al., 2018). This might involve cooler areas due to
226

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

upwelling, or involve deep-water locations that experience less extreme
conditions and impacts. Given the potential value of such locations for
promoting the survival of coral communities under climate change,
efforts to prevent their loss resulting from other stresses are important
(Bongaerts et al., 2010, 2017; Chollett et al., 2010, 2014; Chollett and
Mumby, 2013; Fine et al., 2013; van Hooidonk et al., 2013; Cacciapaglia
and van Woesik, 2015; Beyer et al., 2018). A full understanding of
the role of refugia in reducing the loss of ecosystems has yet to be
developed (low to medium confidence). There is also interest in ex
situ conservation approaches involving the restoration of corals via
aquaculture (Shafir et al., 2006; Rinkevich, 2014) or the use of `assisted
evolution' to help corals adapt to changing sea temperatures (van
Oppen et al., 2015, 2017), although there are numerous challenges
that must be surpassed if these approaches are to be cost-effective
responses to preserving coral reefs under rapid climate change (low
confidence) (Hoegh-Guldberg, 2012, 2014a; Bayraktarov et al., 2016).
High levels of adaptation are expected to be required to prevent
impacts on food security and livelihoods in coastal populations
(medium confidence). Integrating coastal infrastructure with changing
ecosystems such as mangroves, seagrasses and salt marsh, may offer
adaptation strategies as they shift shoreward as sea levels rise (high
confidence). Maintaining the sediment supply to coastal areas would
also assist mangroves in keeping pace with sea level rise (Shearman et
al., 2013; Lovelock et al., 2015; Sasmito et al., 2016). For this reason,
habitat for mangroves can be strongly affected by human actions such
as building dams which reduce the sediment supply and hence the
ability of mangroves to escape `drowning' as sea level rises (Lovelock
et al., 2015). In addition, integrated coastal zone management should
recognize the importance and economic expediency of using natural
ecosystems such as mangroves and tropical coral reefs to protect
coastal human communities (Arkema et al., 2013; Temmerman et al.,
2013; Ferrario et al., 2014; Hinkel et al., 2014; Elliff and Silva, 2017).
Adaptation options include developing alternative livelihoods and
food sources, ecosystem-based management/adaptation such as
ecosystem restoration, and constructing coastal infrastructure that
reduces the impacts of rising seas and intensifying storms (Rinkevich,
2015; Weatherdon et al., 2016; Asiedu et al., 2017a; Feller et al.,
2017). Clearly, these options need to be carefully assessed in terms
of feasibility, cost and scalability, as well as in the light of the coastal
ecosystems involved (Bayraktarov et al., 2016).

3.4.4.11 Ocean foodwebs (pteropods, bivalves, krill and fin fish)
Ocean foodwebs are vast interconnected systems that transfer solar
energy and nutrients from phytoplankton to higher trophic levels,
including apex predators and commercially important species such
as tuna. Here, we consider four representative groups of marine
organisms which are important within foodwebs across the ocean, and
which illustrate the impacts and ramifications of 1.5C or higher levels
of warming.
The first group of organisms, pteropods, are small pelagic molluscs
that suspension feed and produce a calcium carbonate shell. They are
highly abundant in temperate and polar waters where they are an
important link in the foodweb between phytoplankton and a range
of other organisms including fish, whales and birds. The second group,

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

bivalve molluscs (e.g., clams, oysters and mussels), are filter-feeding
invertebrates. These invertebrate organisms underpin important
fisheries and aquaculture industries, from polar to tropical regions, and
are important food sources for a range of organisms including humans.
The third group of organisms considered here is a globally significant
group of invertebrates known as euphausiid crustaceans (krill), which
are a key food source for many marine organisms and hence a major
link between primary producers and higher trophic levels (e.g., fish,
mammals and sea birds). Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba, are among
the most abundant species in terms of mass and are consequently an
essential component of polar foodwebs (Atkinson et al., 2009). The last
group, fin fishes, is vitally important components of ocean foodwebs,
contribute to the income of coastal communities, industries and nations,
and are important to the foodsecurity and livelihood of hundreds of
millions of people globally (FAO, 2016). Further background for this
section is provided in Supplementary Material 3.SM.3.2.
There is a moderate risk to ocean foodwebs under present-day
conditions (medium to high confidence) (Figure 3.18). Changing
water chemistry and temperature are already affecting the ability of
pteropods to produce their shells, swim and survive (Bednarek et
al., 2016). Shell dissolution, for example, has increased by 19-26%
in both nearshore and offshore populations since the pre-industrial
period (Feely et al., 2016). There is considerable concern as to
whether these organisms are declining further, especially given
the central importance in ocean foodwebs (David et al., 2017).
Reviewing the literature reveals that pteropods are projected to
face high risks of impact at average global temperatures 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels and increasing risks of impacts at 2C
(medium confidence).
As GMST increases by 1.5C and more, the risk of impacts from ocean
warming and acidification are expected to be moderate to high, except
in the case of bivalves (mid-latitudes) where the risks of impacts are
projected to be high to very high (Figure 3.18). Ocean warming and
acidification are already affecting the life history stages of bivalve
molluscs (e.g., Asplund et al., 2014; Mackenzie et al., 2014; Waldbusser
et al., 2014; Zittier et al., 2015; Shi et al., 2016; Velez et al., 2016; Q.
Wang et al., 2016; Castillo et al., 2017; Lemasson et al., 2017; Ong et al.,
2017; X. Zhao et al., 2017). Impacts on adult bivalves include decreased
growth, increased respiration and reduced calcification, whereas
larval stages tend to show greater developmental abnormalities and
increased mortality after exposure to these conditions (medium to high
confidence) (Q. Wang et al., 2016; Lemasson et al., 2017; Ong et al.,
2017; X. Zhao et al., 2017). Risks are expected to accumulate at higher
temperatures for bivalve molluscs, with very high risks expected at
1.8C of warming or more. This general pattern applies to low-latitude
fin fish, which are expected to experience moderate to high risks of
impact at 1.3C of global warming (medium confidence), and very high
risks at 1.8C at low latitudes (medium confidence) (Figure 3.18).
Large-scale changes to foodweb structure are occurring in all oceans. For
example, record levels of sea ice loss in the Antarctic (Notz and Stroeve,
2016; Turner et al., 2017b) translate into a loss of habitat and hence
reduced abundance of krill (Pinones and Fedorov, 2016), with negative
ramifications for the seabirds and whales which feed on krill (Croxall,
1992; Trathan and Hill, 2016) (low-medium confidence). Other influences,

Chapter 3

such as high rates of ocean acidification coupled with shoaling of the
aragonite saturation horizon, are likely to also play key roles (Kawaguchi
et al., 2013; Pinones and Fedorov, 2016). As with many risks associated
with impacts at the ecosystem scale, most adaptation options focus on
the management of stresses unrelated to climate change but resulting
from human activities, such as pollution and habitat destruction.
Reducing these stresses will be important in efforts to maintain important
foodweb components. Fisheries management at local to regional scales
will be important in reducing stress on foodweb organisms, such as
those discussed here, and in helping communities and industries adapt
to changing foodweb structures and resources (see further discussion of
fisheries per se below; Section 3.4.6.3). One strategy is to maintain larger
population levels of fished species in order to provide more resilient
stocks in the face of challenges that are increasingly driven by climate
change (Green et al., 2014; Bell and Taylor, 2015).

3.4.4.12 Key ecosystem services (e.g., carbon uptake, coastal
protection, and tropical coral reef recreation)
The ocean provides important services, including the regulation of
atmospheric composition via gas exchange across the boundary
between ocean and atmosphere, and the storage of carbon in vegetation
and soils associated with ecosystems such as mangroves, salt marshes
and coastal peatlands. These services involve a series of physicochemical
processes which are influenced by ocean chemistry, circulation, biology,
temperature and biogeochemical components, as well as by factors other
than climate (Boyd, 2015). The ocean is also a net sink for CO2 (another
important service), absorbing approximately 30% of human emissions
from the burning of fossil fuels and modification of land use (IPCC, 2013).
Carbon uptake by the ocean is decreasing (Iida et al., 2015), and there is
increasing concern from observations and models regarding associated
changes to ocean circulation (Sections 3.3.7 and 3.4.4., Rahmstorf et
al., 2015b);. Biological components of carbon uptake by the ocean are
also changing, with observations of changing net primary productivity
(NPP) in equatorial and coastal upwelling systems (medium confidence)
(Lluch-Cota et al., 2014; Sydeman et al., 2014; Bakun et al., 2015), as
well as subtropical gyre systems (low confidence) (Signorini et al., 2015).
There is general agreement that NPP will decline as ocean warming and
acidification increase (medium confidence) (Bopp et al., 2013; Boyd et al.,
2014; Portner et al., 2014; Boyd, 2015).
Projected risks of impacts from reductions in carbon uptake, coastal
protection and services contributing to coral reef recreation suggest
a transition from moderate to high risks at 1.5C and higher (low
confidence). At 2C, risks of impacts associated with changes to
carbon uptake are high (high confidence), while the risks associated
with reduced coastal protection and recreation on tropical coral
reefs are high, especially given the vulnerability of this ecosystem
type, and others (e.g., seagrass and mangroves), to climate change
(medium confidence) (Figure 3.18). Coastal protection is a service
provided by natural barriers such as mangroves, seagrass meadows,
coral reefs, and other coastal ecosystems, and it is important for
protecting human communities and infrastructure against the impacts
associated with rising sea levels, larger waves and intensifying
storms (high confidence) (Gutierrez et al., 2012; Kennedy et al.,
2013; Ferrario et al., 2014; Barbier, 2015; Cooper et al., 2016; Hauer
et al., 2016; Narayan et al., 2016). Both natural and human coastal
227

3

Chapter 3

protection have the potential to reduce these impacts (Fu and Song,
2017). Tropical coral reefs, for example, provide effective protection
by dissipating about 97% of wave energy, with 86% of the energy
being dissipated by reef crests alone (Ferrario et al., 2014; Narayan
et al., 2016). Mangroves similarly play an important role in coastal
protection, as well as providing resources for coastal communities,

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

but they are already under moderate risk of not keeping up with sea
level rise due to climate change and to contributing factors, such as
reduced sediment supply or obstacles to shoreward shifts (Saunders
et al., 2014; Lovelock et al., 2015). This implies that coastal areas
currently protected by mangroves may experience growing risks over
time.

3

Figure 3.18 | Summary of additional risks of impacts from ocean warming (and associated climate change factors such ocean acidification) for a range of ocean organisms,
ecosystems and sectors at 1.0C, 1.5C and 2.0C of warming of the average sea surface temperature (SST) relative to the pre-industrial period. The grey bar represents the
range of GMST for the most recent decade: 2006-2015. The assessment of changing risk levels and associated confidence were primarily derived from the expert judgement
of Gattuso et al. (2015) and the lead authors and relevant contributing authors of Chapter 3 (SR1.5), while additional input was received from the many reviewers of the
ocean systems section of SR1.5. Notes: (i) The analysis shown here is not intended to be comprehensive. The examples of organisms, ecosystems and sectors included here are
intended to illustrate the scale, types and projection of risks for representative natural and human ocean systems. (ii) The evaluation of risks by experts did not consider genetic
adaptation, acclimatization or human risk reduction strategies (mitigation and societal adaptation). (iii) As discussed elsewhere (Sections 3.3.10 and 3.4.4.5, Box 3.4; Gattuso
et al., 2015), ocean acidification is also having impacts on organisms and ecosystems as carbon dioxide increases in the atmosphere. These changes are part of the responses
reported here, although partitioning the effects of the two drivers is difficult at this point in time and hence was not attempted. (iv) Confidence levels for location of transition
points between levels of risk (L = low, M = moderate, H = high and VH = very high) are assessed and presented here as in the accompanying study by Gattuso et al. (2015).
Three transitions in risk were possible: W-Y (white to yellow), Y-R (yellow to red), and R-P (red to purple), with the colours corresponding to the level of additional risk posed
by climate change. The confidence levels for these transitions were assessed, based on level of agreement and extent of evidence, and appear as letters associated with each
transition (see key in diagram).

228

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Tourism is one of the largest industries globally (Rossello-Nadal, 2014;
Markham et al., 2016; Spalding et al., 2017). A substantial part of the
global tourist industry is associated with tropical coastal regions and
islands, where tropical coral reefs and related ecosystems play important
roles (Section 3.4.9.1) (medium confidence). Coastal tourism can be a
dominant money earner in terms of foreign exchange for many countries,
particularly small island developing states (SIDS) (Section 3.4.9.1, Box
3.5; Weatherdon et al., 2016; Spalding et al., 2017). The direct relationship
between increasing global temperatures, intensifying storms, elevated
thermal stress, and the loss of tropical coral reefs has raised concern
about the risks of climate change for local economies and industries
based on tropical coral reefs. Risks to coral reef recreational services from
climate change are considered here, as well as in Box 3.5, Section 3.4.9
and Supplementary Material 3.SM.3.2.
Adaptations to the broad global changes in carbon uptake by the ocean
are limited and are discussed later in this report with respect to changes
in NPP and implications for fishing industries. These adaptation options
are broad and indirect, and the only other solution at large scale is
to reduce the entry of CO2 into the ocean. Strategies for adapting to
reduced coastal protection involve (a) avoidance of vulnerable areas
and hazards, (b) managed retreat from threatened locations, and/or (c)
accommodation of impacts and loss of services (Bell, 2012; Andre et al.,
2016; Cooper et al., 2016; Mills et al., 2016; Raabe and Stumpf, 2016; Fu
and Song, 2017). Within these broad options, there are some strategies
that involve direct human intervention, such as coastal hardening and
the construction of seawalls and artificial reefs (Rinkevich, 2014, 2015;
Andre et al., 2016; Cooper et al., 2016; Narayan et al., 2016), while
others exploit opportunities for increasing coastal protection by involving
naturally occurring oyster banks, coral reefs, mangroves, seagrass and
other ecosystems (UNEP-WCMC, 2006; Scyphers et al., 2011; Zhang et

Chapter 3

al., 2012; Ferrario et al., 2014; Cooper et al., 2016). Natural ecosystems,
when healthy, also have the ability to repair themselves after being
damaged, which sets them apart from coastal hardening and other
human structures that require constant maintenance (Barbier, 2015; Elliff
and Silva, 2017). In general, recognizing and restoring coastal ecosystems
may be more cost-effective than installing human structures, in that
creating and maintaining structures is typically expensive (Temmerman
et al., 2013; Mycoo, 2017).
Recent studies have increasingly stressed the need for coastal protection
to be considered within the context of coastal land management,
including protecting and ensuring that coastal ecosystems are able to
undergo shifts in their distribution and abundance as climate change
occurs (Clausen and Clausen, 2014; Martinez et al., 2014; Cui et al.,
2015; Andre et al., 2016; Mills et al., 2016). Facilitating these changes
will require new tools in terms of legal and financial instruments, as
well as integrated planning that involves not only human communities
and infrastructure, but also associated ecosystem responses and values
(Bell, 2012; Mills et al., 2016). In this regard, the interactions between
climate change, sea level rise and coastal disasters are increasingly
being informed by models (Bosello and De Cian, 2014) with a widening
appreciation of the role of natural ecosystems as an alternative to
hardened coastal structures (Cooper et al., 2016). Adaptation options
for tropical coral reef recreation include: (i) protecting and improving
biodiversity and ecological function by minimizing the impact of
stresses unrelated to climate change (e.g., pollution and overfishing),
(ii) ensuring adequate levels of coastal protection by supporting and
repairing ecosystems that protect coastal regions, (iii) ensuring fair
and equitable access to the economic opportunities associated with
recreational activities, and (iv) seeking and protecting supplies of water
for tourism, industry and agriculture alongside community needs.

Box 3.4 | Warm-Water (Tropical) Coral Reefs in a 1.5C Warmer World
Warm-water coral reefs face very high risks (Figure 3.18) from climate change. A world in which global warming is restricted to 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels would be a better place for coral reefs than that of a 2C warmer world, in which coral reefs would mostly
disappear (Donner et al., 2005; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014; Schleussner et al., 2016b; van Hooidonk et al., 2016; Frieler et al., 2017;
Hughes et al., 2017a). Even with warming up until today (GMST for decade 2006-2015: 0.87C; Chapter 1), a substantial proportion
of coral reefs have experienced large-scale mortalities that have lead to much reduced coral populations (Hoegh-Guldberg et al.,
2014). In the last three years alone (2016-2018), large coral reef systems such as the Great Barrier Reef (Australia) have lost as
much as 50% of their shallow water corals (Hughes et al., 2017b).
Coral-dominated reefs are found along coastlines between latitudes 30S and 30N, where they provide habitat for over a million
species (Reaka-Kudla, 1997) and food, income, coastal protection, cultural context and many other services for millions of people
in tropical coastal areas (Burke et al., 2011; Cinner et al., 2012; Kennedy et al., 2013; Pendleton et al., 2016). Ultimately, coral reefs
are underpinned by a mutualistic symbiosis between reef-building corals and dinoflagellates from the genus Symbiodinium (HoeghGuldberg et al., 2017). Warm-water coral reefs are found down to depths of 150 m and are dependent on light, making them distinct
from the cold deep-water reef systems that extend down to depths of 2000 m or more. The difficulty in accessing deep-water reefs
also means that the literature on the impacts of climate change on these systems is very limited by comparison to those on warmwater coral reefs (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2017). Consequently, this Box focuses on the impacts of climate change on warm-water
(tropical) coral reefs, particularly with respect to their prospects under average global surface temperatures of 1.5C and 2C above
the pre-industrial period.

229

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Box 3.4 (continued)

The distribution and abundance of coral reefs has decreased by approximately 50% over the past 30 years (Gardner et al., 2005;
Bruno and Selig, 2007; De'ath et al., 2012) as a result of pollution, storms, overfishing and unsustainable coastal development (Burke
et al., 2011; Halpern et al., 2015; Cheal et al., 2017). More recently, climate change (i.e., heat stress; Hoegh-Guldberg, 1999; Baker
et al., 2008; Spalding and Brown, 2015; Hughes et al., 2017b) has emerged as the greatest threat to coral reefs, with temperatures
of just 1C above the long-term summer maximum for an area (reference period 1985-1993) over 4-6 weeks being enough to
cause mass coral bleaching (loss of the symbionts) and mortality (very high confidence) (WGII AR5, Box 18-2; Cramer et al., 2014).
Ocean warming and acidification can also slow growth and calcification, making corals less competitive compared to other benthic
organisms such as macroalgae or seaweeds (Dove et al., 2013; Reyes-Nivia et al., 2013, 2014). As corals disappear, so do fish and
many other reef-dependent species, which directly impacts industries such as tourism and fisheries, as well as the livelihoods for
many, often disadvantaged, coastal people (Wilson et al., 2006; Graham, 2014; Graham et al., 2015; Cinner et al., 2016; Pendleton et
al., 2016). These impacts are exacerbated by increasingly intense storms (Section 3.3.6), which physically destroy coral communities
and hence reefs (Cheal et al., 2017), and by ocean acidification (Sections 3.3.10 and 3.4.4.5), which can weaken coral skeletons,
contribute to disease, and slow the recovery of coral communities after mortality events (low to medium confidence) (Gardner et
al., 2005; Dove et al., 2013; Kennedy et al., 2013; Webster et al., 2013; Hoegh-Guldberg, 2014b; Anthony, 2016). Ocean acidification
also leads to enhanced activity by decalcifying organisms such as excavating sponges (Kline et al., 2012; Dove et al., 2013; Fang et
al., 2013, 2014; Reyes-Nivia et al., 2013, 2014).
The predictions of back-to-back bleaching events (Hoegh-Guldberg, 1999) have become the reality in the summers of 2016-2017
(e.g., Hughes et al., 2017b), as have projections of declining coral abundance (high confidence). Models have also become increasingly
capable and are currently predicting the large-scale loss of coral reefs by mid-century under even low-emissions scenarios (HoeghGuldberg, 1999; Donner et al., 2005; Donner, 2009; van Hooidonk and Huber, 2012; Frieler et al., 2013; Hoegh-Guldberg et al.,
2014; van Hooidonk et al., 2016). Even achieving emissions reduction targets consistent with the ambitious goal of 1.5C of global
warming under the Paris Agreement will result in the further loss of 70-90% of reef-building corals compared to today, with 99%
of corals being lost under warming of 2C or more above the pre-industrial period (Frieler et al., 2013; Hoegh-Guldberg, 2014b;
Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014; Schleussner et al., 2016b; Hughes et al., 2017a).

3

The assumptions underpinning these assessments are considered to be highly conservative. In some cases, `optimistic' assumptions
in models include rapid thermal adaptation by corals of 0.2C-1C per decade (Donner et al., 2005) or 0.4C per decade (Schleussner
et al., 2016b), as well as very rapid recovery rates from impacts (e.g., five years in the case of Schleussner et al., 2016b). Adaptation
to climate change at these high rates, has not been documented, and recovery from mass mortality tends to take much longer
(>15 years; Baker et al., 2008). Probability analysis also indicates that the underlying increases in sea temperatures that drive coral
bleaching and mortality are 25% less likely under 1.5C when compared to 2C (King et al., 2017). Spatial differences between
the rates of heating suggest the possibility of temporary climate refugia (Caldeira, 2013; van Hooidonk et al., 2013; Cacciapaglia
and van Woesik, 2015; Keppel and Kavousi, 2015), which may play an important role in terms of the regeneration of coral reefs,
especially if these refuges are protected from risks unrelated to climate change. Locations at higher latitudes are reporting the arrival
of reef-building corals, which may be valuable in terms of the role of limited refugia and coral reef structures but will have low
biodiversity (high confidence) when compared to present-day tropical reefs (Kersting et al., 2017). Similarly, deep-water (30-150
m) or mesophotic coral reefs (Bongaerts et al., 2010; Holstein et al., 2016) may play an important role because they avoid shallow
water extremes (i.e., heat and storms) to some extent, although the ability of these ecosystems to assist in repopulating damaged
shallow water areas may be limited (Bongaerts et al., 2017).
Given the sensitivity of corals to heat stress, even short periods of overshoot (i.e., decades) are expected to be extremely damaging
to coral reefs. Losing 70-90% of today's coral reefs, however, will remove resources and increase poverty levels across the world's
tropical coastlines, highlighting the key issue of equity for the millions of people that depend on these valuable ecosystems
(Cross-Chapter Box 6; Spalding et al., 2014; Halpern et al., 2015). Anticipating these challenges to food and livelihoods for coastal
communities will become increasingly important, as will adaptation options, such as the diversification of livelihoods and the
development of new sustainable industries, to reduce the dependency of coastal communities on threatened ecosystems such as
coral reefs (Cinner et al., 2012, 2016; Pendleton et al., 2016). At the same time, coastal communities will need to pre-empt changes
to other services provided by coral reefs such as coastal protection (Kennedy et al., 2013; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014; Portner et
al., 2014; Gattuso et al., 2015). Other threats and challenges to coastal living, such as sea level rise, will amplify challenges from
declining coral reefs, specially for SIDS and low-lying tropical nations. Given the scale and cost of these interventions, implementing
them earlier rather than later would be expedient.

230

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.4.5

Coastal and Low-Lying Areas, and Sea Level Rise

Sea level rise (SLR) is accelerating in response to climate change
(Section 3.3.9; Church et al., 2013) and will produce significant impacts
(high confidence). In this section, impacts and projections of SLR are
reported at global and city scales (Sections 3.4.5.1 and 3.4.5.2) and for
coastal systems (Sections 3.4.5.3 to 3.4.5.6). For some sectors, there
is a lack of precise evidence of change at 1.5C and 2C of global
warming. Adaptation to SLR is discussed in Section 3.4.5.7.

3.4.5.1

Global / sub-global scale

Sea level rise (SLR) and other oceanic climate changes are already
resulting in salinization, flooding, and erosion and in the future are
projected to affect human and ecological systems, including health,
heritage, freshwater availability, biodiversity, agriculture, fisheries and
other services, with different impacts seen worldwide (high confidence).
Owing to the commitment to SLR, there is an overlapping uncertainty
in projections at 1.5C and 2C (Schleussner et al., 2016b; Sanderson
et al., 2017; Goodwin et al., 2018; Mengel et al., 2018; Nicholls et al.,
2018; Rasmussen et al., 2018) and about 0.1 m difference in global
mean sea level (GMSL) rise between 1.5C and 2C worlds in the year
2100 (Section 3.3.9, Table 3.3). Exposure and impacts at 1.5C and 2C
differ at different time horizons (Schleussner et al., 2016b; Brown et
al., 2018a, b; Nicholls et al., 2018; Rasmussen et al., 2018). However,
these are distinct from impacts associated with higher increases in
temperature (e.g., 4C or more, as discussed in Brown et al., 2018a)
over centennial scales. The benefits of climate change mitigation
reinforce findings of earlier IPCC reports (e.g., Wong et al., 2014).
Table 3.3 shows the land and people exposed to SLR (assuming there
is no adaptation or protection at all) using the Dynamic Interactive
Vulnerability Assessment (DIVA) model (extracted from Brown et al.,
2018a and Goodwin et al., 2018; see also Supplementary Material
3.SM, Table 3.SM.4). Thus, exposure increases even with temperature
stabilization. The exposed land area is projected to at least double by
2300 using a RCP8.5 scenario compared with a mitigation scenario
(Brown et al., 2018a). In the 21st century, land area exposed to
sea level rise (assuming there is no adaptation or protection at all)
is projected to be at least an order of magnitude larger than the
cumulative land loss due to submergence (which takes into account
defences) (Brown et al., 2016, 2018a) regardless of the SLR scenario
applied. Slower rates of rise due to climate change mitigation may
provide a greater opportunity for adaptation (medium confidence),
which could substantially reduce impacts.
In agreement with the assessment in WGII AR5 Section 5.4.3.1 (Wong
et al., 2014), climate change mitigation may reduce or delay coastal
exposure and impacts (very high confidence). Adaptation has the
potential to substantially reduce risk through a portfolio of available
options (Sections 5.4.3.1 and 5.5 of Wong et al., 2014; Sections 6.4.2.3
and 6.6 of Nicholls et al., 2007). At 1.5C in 2100, 31-69 million people
(2010 population values) worldwide are projected to be exposed to
flooding, assuming no adaptation or protection at all, compared
with 32-79 million people (2010 population values) at 2C in 2100
(Supplementary Material 3.SM, Table 3.SM.4; Rasmussen et al., 2018).
As a result, up to 10.4 million more people would be exposed to sea

Chapter 3

level rise at 2C compared with 1.5C in 2100 (medium confidence).
With a 1.5C stabilization scenario in 2100, 62.7 million people per year
are at risk from flooding, with this value increasing to 137.6 million
people per year in 2300 (50th percentile, average across SSP1-5, no
socio-economic change after 2100). These projections assume that no
upgrade to current protection levels occurs (Nicholls et al., 2018). The
number of people at risk increases by approximately 18% in 2030 if
a 2C scenario is used and by 266% in 2300 if an RCP8.5 scenario
is considered (Nicholls et al., 2018). Through prescribed IPCC Special
Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) SLR scenarios, Arnell et al.
(2016) also found that the number of people exposed to flooding
increased substantially at warming levels higher than 2C, assuming
no adaptation beyond current protection levels. Additionally, impacts
increased in the second half of the 21st century.
Coastal flooding is projected to cost thousands of billions of USD
annually, with damage costs under constant protection estimated
at 0.3-5.0% of global gross domestic product (GDP) in 2100 under
an RCP2.6 scenario (Hinkel et al., 2014). Risks are projected to be
highest in South and Southeast Asia, assuming there is no upgrade
to current protection levels, for all levels of climate warming (Arnell et
al., 2016; Brown et al., 2016). Countries with at least 50 million people
exposed to SLR (assuming no adaptation or protection at all) based on
a 1,280 Pg C emissions scenario (approximately a 1.5C temperature
rise above today's level) include China, Bangladesh, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, Japan, Philippines, United States and Vietnam (Clark et al.,
2016). Rasmussen et al. (2018) and Brown et al. (2018a) project that
similar countries would have high exposure to SLR in the 21st century
using 1.5C and 2C scenarios. Thus, there is high confidence that SLR
will have significant impacts worldwide in this century and beyond.

3.4.5.2

Cities

Observations of the impacts of SLR in cities are difficult to record
because multiple drivers of change are involved. There are observations
of ongoing and planned adaptation to SLR and extreme water levels
in some cities (Araos et al., 2016; Nicholls et al., 2018), whilst other
cities have yet to prepare for these impacts (high confidence) (see
Section 3.4.8 and Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4). There are limited
observations and analyses of how cities will cope with higher and/or
multi-centennial SLR, with the exception of Amsterdam, New York and
London (Nicholls et al., 2018).
Coastal urban areas are projected to see more extreme water levels
due to rising sea levels, which may lead to increased flooding and
damage of infrastructure from extreme events (unless adaptation is
undertaken), plus salinization of groundwater. These impacts may be
enhanced through localized subsidence (Wong et al., 2014), which
causes greater relative SLR. At least 136 megacities (port cities with
a population greater than 1 million in 2005) are at risk from flooding
due to SLR (with magnitudes of rise possible under 1.5C or 2C in the
21st century, as indicated in Section 3.3.9) unless further adaptation
is undertaken (Hanson et al., 2011; Hallegatte et al., 2013). Many of
these cities are located in South and Southeast Asia (Hallegatte et
al., 2013; Cazenave and Cozannet, 2014; Clark et al., 2016; Jevrejeva
et al., 2016). Jevrejeva et al. (2016) projected that more than 90% of
global coastlines could experience SLR greater than 0.2 m with 2C
231

3

Chapter 3

of warming by 2040 (RCP8.5). However, for scenarios where 2C is
stabilized or occurs later in time, this figure is likely to differ because
of the commitment to SLR. Raising existing dikes helps protect against
SLR, substantially reducing risks, although other forms of adaptation
exist. By 2300, dike heights under a non-mitigation scenario (RCP8.5)
could be more than 2 m higher (on average for 136 megacities) than
under climate change mitigation scenarios at 1.5C or 2C (Nicholls
et al., 2018). Thus, rising sea levels commit coastal cities to long-term
adaptation (high confidence).

3.4.5.3

3

Small islands

Qualitative physical observations of SLR (and other stresses) include
inundation of parts of low-lying islands, land degradation due to
saltwater intrusion in Kiribati and Tuvalu (Wairiu, 2017), and shoreline
change in French Polynesia (Yates et al., 2013), Tuvalu (Kench et al.,
2015, 2018) and Hawaii (Romine et al., 2013). Observations, models
and other evidence indicate that unconstrained Pacific atolls have kept
pace with SLR, with little reduction in size or net gain in land (Kench
et al., 2015, 2018; McLean and Kench, 2015; Beetham et al., 2017).
Whilst islands are highly vulnerable to SLR (high confidence), they are
also reactive to change. Small islands are impacted by multiple climatic
stressors, with SLR being a more important stressor to some islands
than others (Sections 3.4.10, 4.3.5.6, 5.2.1, 5.5.3.3, Boxes 3.5, 4.3 and
5.3).
Observed adaptation to multiple drivers of coastal change, including
SLR, includes retreat (migration), accommodation and defence.
Migration (internal and international) has always been important
on small islands (Farbotko and Lazrus, 2012; Weir et al., 2017), with
changing environmental and weather conditions being just one factor in
the choice to migrate (Sections 3.4.10, 4.3.5.6 and 5.3.2; Campbell and
Warrick, 2014). Whilst flooding may result in migration or relocation,
for example in Vunidogoloa, Fiji (McNamara and Des Combes, 2015;
Gharbaoui and Blocher, 2016) and the Solomon Islands (Albert et al.,
2017), in situ adaptation may be tried or preferred, for example stilted
housing or raised floors in Tubigon, Bohol, Philippines (Jamero et al.,
2017), raised roads and floors in Batasan and Ubay, Philippines (Jamero
et al., 2018), and raised platforms for faluw in Leang, Federated States
of Micronesia (Nunn et al., 2017). Protective features, such as seawalls
or beach nourishment, are observed to locally reduce erosion and flood
risk but can have other adverse implications (Sovacool, 2012; Mycoo,
2014, 2017; Nurse et al., 2014; AR5 Section 29.6.22).
There is a lack of precise, quantitative studies of projected impacts
of SLR at 1.5C and 2C. Small islands are projected to be at risk
and very sensitive to coastal climate change and other stressors
(high confidence) (Nurse et al., 2014; Benjamin and Thomas, 2016;
Ourbak and Magnan, 2017; Brown et al., 2018a; Nicholls et al., 2018;
Rasmussen et al., 2018; AR5 Sections 29.3 and 29.4), such as oceanic
warming, SLR (resulting in salinization, flooding and erosion), cyclones
and mass coral bleaching and mortality (Section 3.4.4, Boxes 3.4 and
3.5). These impacts can have significant socio-economic and ecological
implications, such as on health, agriculture and water resources, which
in turn have impacts on livelihoods (Sovacool, 2012; Mycoo, 2014,
2017; Nurse et al., 2014). Combinations of drivers causing adverse
impacts are important. For example, Storlazzi et al. (2018) found that
232

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

the impacts of SLR and wave-induced flooding (within a temperature
horizon equivalent of 1.5C), could affect freshwater availability on
Roi-Namur, Marshall Islands, but is also dependent on other extreme
weather events. Freshwater resources may also be affected by
a 0.40 m rise in sea level (which may be experienced with a 1.5C
warming) in other Pacific atolls (Terry and Chui, 2012). Whilst SLR is
a major hazard for atolls, islands reaching higher elevations are also
threatened given that there is often a lot of infrastructure located near
the coast (high confidence) (Kumar and Taylor, 2015; Nicholls et al.,
2018). Tens of thousands of people on small islands are exposed to
SLR (Rasmussen et al., 2018). Giardino et al. (2018) found that hard
defence structures on the island of Ebeye in the Marshall Islands were
effective in reducing damage due to SLR at 1.5C and 2C. Additionally,
damage was also reduced under mitigation scenarios compared with
non-mitigation scenarios. In Jamaica and St Lucia, SLR and extreme
sea levels are projected to threaten transport system infrastructure at
1.5C unless further adaptation is undertaken (Monioudi et al., 2018).
Slower rates of SLR will provide a greater opportunity for adaptation
to be successful (medium confidence), but this may not be substantial
enough on islands with a very low mean elevation. Migration and/or
relocation may be an adaptation option (Section 3.4.10). Thomas and
Benjamin (2017) highlight three areas of concern in the context of loss
and damage at 1.5C: a lack of data, gaps in financial assessments,
and a lack of targeted policies or mechanisms to address these issues
(Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). Small islands are projected to
remain vulnerable to SLR (high confidence).

3.4.5.4

Deltas and estuaries

Observations of SLR and human influence are felt through salinization,
which leads to mixing in deltas and estuaries, aquifers, leading to
flooding (also enhanced by precipitation and river discharge), land
degradation and erosion. Salinization is projected to impact freshwater
sources and pose risks to ecosystems and human systems (Section
5.4; Wong et al., 2014). For instance, in the Delaware River estuary on
the east coast of the USA, upward trends of salinity (measured since
the 1900s), accounting for the effects of streamflow and seasonal
variations, have been detected and SLR is a potential cause (Ross et
al., 2015).
Z. Yang et al. (2015) found that future climate scenarios for the USA
(A1B 1.6C and B1 2C in the 2040s) had a greater effect on salinity
intrusion than future land-use/land-cover change in the Snohomish
River estuary in Washington state (USA). This resulted in a shift in
the salinity both upstream and downstream in low flow conditions.
Projecting impacts in deltas needs an understanding of both fluvial
discharge and SLR, making projections complex because the drivers
operate on different temporal and spatial scales (Zaman et al., 2017;
Brown et al., 2018b). The mean annual flood depth when 1.5C is first
projected to be reached in the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta may be less
than the most extreme annual flood depth seen today, taking into
account SLR, surges, tides, bathymetry and local river flows (Brown et
al., 2018b). Further, increased river salinity and saline intrusion in the
Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna is likely with 2C of warming (Zaman
et al., 2017). Salinization could impact agriculture and food security
(Cross-Chapter Box 6 in this chapter). For 1.5C or 2C stabilization
conditions in 2200 or 2300 plus surges, a minimum of 44% of the

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Bangladeshi Ganges-Brahmaputra, Indian Bengal, Indian Mahanadi
and Ghanese Volta delta land area (without defences) would be
exposed unless sedimentation occurs (Brown et al., 2018b). Other
deltas are similarly vulnerable. SLR is only one factor affecting deltas,
and assessment of numerous geophysical and anthropogenic drivers
of geomorphic change is important (Tessler et al., 2018). For example,
dike building to reduce flooding and dam building (Gupta et al., 2012)
restricts sediment movement and deposition, leading to enhanced
subsidence, which can occur at a greater rate than SLR (Auerbach
et al., 2015; Takagi et al., 2016). Although dikes remain essential for
reducing flood risk today, promoting sedimentation is an advisable
strategy (Brown et al., 2018b) which may involve nature-based
solutions. Transformative decisions regarding the extent of sediment
restrictive infrastructure may need to be considered over centennial
scales (Brown et al., 2018b). Thus, in a 1.5C or 2C warmer world,
deltas, which are home to millions of people, are expected to be highly
threatened from SLR and localized subsidence (high confidence).

3.4.5.5

Wetlands

Observations indicate that wetlands, such as saltmarshes and mangrove
forests, are disrupted by changing conditions (Sections 3.4.4.8; Wong et
al., 2014; Lovelock et al., 2015), such as total water levels and sediment
availability. For example, saltmarshes in Connecticut and New York,
USA, measured from 1900 to 2012, have accreted with SLR but have
lost marsh surface relative to tidal datums, leading to increased marsh
flooding and further accretion (Hill and Anisfeld, 2015). This change
stimulated marsh carbon storage and aided climate change mitigation.
Salinization may lead to shifts in wetland communities and their
ecosystem functions (Herbert et al., 2015). Some projections of wetland
change, with magnitudes (but not necessarily rates or timing) of SLR
analogous to 1.5C and 2C of global warming, indicate a net loss of
wetlands in the 21st century (e.g., Blankespoor et al., 2014; Cui et al.,
2015; Arnell et al., 2016; Crosby et al., 2016), whilst others report a net
gain with wetland transgression (e.g., Raabe and Stumpf, 2016 in the
Gulf of Mexico). However, the feedback between wetlands and sea
level is complex, with parameters such as a lack of accommodation
space restricting inland migration, or sediment supply and feedbacks
between plant growth and geomorphology (Kirwan and Megonigal,
2013; Ellison, 2014; Martinez et al., 2014; Spencer et al., 2016) still
being explored. Reducing global warming from 2C to 1.5C will
deliver long-term benefits, with natural sedimentation rates more likely
keep up with SLR. It remains unclear how wetlands will respond and
under what conditions (including other climate parameters) to a global
temperature rise of 1.5C and 2C. However, they have great potential
to aid and benefit climate change mitigation and adaptation (medium
confidence) (Sections 4.3.2.2 and 4.3.2.3).

3.4.5.6

Other coastal settings

Numerous impacts have not been quantified at 1.5C or 2C but remain
important. This includes systems identified in WGII AR5 (AR5 - Section
5.4 of Wong et al., 2014), such as beaches, barriers, sand dunes, rocky
coasts, aquifers, lagoons and coastal ecosystems (for the last system,
see Section 3.4.4.12). For example, SLR potentially affects erosion and
accretion, and therefore sediment movement, instigating shoreline

Chapter 3

change (Section 5.4.2.1 of Wong et al., 2014), which could affect landbased ecosystems. Global observations indicate no overall clear effect
of SLR on shoreline change (Le Cozannet et al., 2014), as it is highly
site specific (e.g., Romine et al., 2013). Infrastructure and geological
constraints reduce shoreline movement, causing coastal squeeze. In
Japan, for example, SLR is projected to cause beach losses under an
RCP2.6 scenario, which will worsen under RCP8.5 (Udo and Takeda,
2017). Further, compound flooding (the combined risk of flooding from
multiple sources) has increased significantly over the past century in
major coastal cities (Wahl et al., 2015) and is likely to increase with
further development and SLR at 1.5C and 2C unless adaptation is
undertaken. Thus, overall SLR will have a wide range of adverse effects
on coastal zones (medium confidence).

3.4.5.7

Adapting to coastal change

Adaptation to coastal change from SLR and other drivers is occurring
today (high confidence) (see Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter
4), including migration, ecosystem-based adaptation, raising
infrastructure and defences, salt-tolerant food production, early
warning systems, insurance and education (Section 5.4.2.1 of Wong et
al., 2014). Climate change mitigation will reduce the rate of SLR this
century, decreasing the need for extensive and, in places, immediate
adaptation. Adaptation will reduce impacts in human settings (high
confidence) (Hinkel et al., 2014; Wong et al., 2014), although there is
less certainty for natural ecosystems (Sections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3.3). While
some ecosystems (e.g., mangroves) may be able to move shoreward
as sea levels increase, coastal development (e.g., coastal building,
seawalls and agriculture) often interrupt these transitions (Saunders et
al., 2014). Options for responding to these challenges include reducing
the impact of other stresses such as those arising from tourism, fishing,
coastal development and unsustainable aquaculture/agriculture. In
some cases, restoration of coastal habitats and ecosystems can be a
cost-effective way of responding to changes arising from increasing
levels of exposure from rising sea levels, changes in storm conditions,
coastal inundation and salinization (Arkema et al., 2013; Temmerman
et al., 2013; Ferrario et al., 2014; Hinkel et al., 2014; Spalding et al.,
2014; Elliff and Silva, 2017).
Since AR5, planned and autonomous adaptation and forward planning
have become more widespread (Araos et al., 2016; Nicholls et al.,
2018), but continued efforts are required as many localities are in the
early stages of adapting or are not adapting at all (Cross-Chapter Box
9 in Chapter 4; Araos et al., 2016). This is region and sub-sector specific,
and also linked to non-climatic factors (Ford et al., 2015; Araos et al.,
2016; Lesnikowski et al., 2016). Adaptation pathways (e.g., Ranger et
al., 2013; Barnett et al., 2014; Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2014; Buurman
and Babovic, 2016) assist long-term planning but are not widespread
practices despite knowledge of long-term risks (Section 4.2.2).
Furthermore, human retreat and migration are increasingly being
considered as an adaptation response (Hauer et al., 2016; Geisler and
Currens, 2017), with a growing emphasis on green adaptation. There
are few studies on the adaptation limits to SLR where transformation
change may be required (AR5-Section 5.5 of Wong et al., 2014; Nicholls
et al., 2015). Sea level rise poses a long-term threat (Section 3.3.9), and
adaptation will remain essential at the centennial scale under 1.5C
and 2C of warming (high confidence).
233

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Table 3.3 | Land and people exposed to sea level rise (SLR), assuming no protection at all. Extracted from Brown et al. (2018a) and Goodwin et al. (2018). SSP: Shared SocioEconomic Pathway; wrt: with respect to; *:Population held constant at 2100 level.

Climate scenario
1.5C

2C

Impact factor, assuming there is
no adaptation or protection at all
(50th, [5th-95th percentiles])

Year
2050

2100

2200

2300

Temperature rise wrt 1850-1900 (C)

1.71 (1.44-2.16)

1.60 (1.26-2.33)

1.41 (1.15-2.10)

1.32 (1.12-1.81)

SLR (m) wrt 1986-2005

0.20 (0.14-0.29)

0.40 (0.26-0.62)

0.73 (0.47-1.25)

1.00 (0.59-1.55)

Land exposed (x103 km2)

574 [558-597]

620 [575-669]

666 [595-772]

702 [666-853]

People exposed, SSP1-5 (millions)

127.9-139.0
[123.4-134.0,
134.5-146.4]

102.7-153.5
[94.8-140.7,
102.7-153.5]

--

133.8-207.1
[112.3-169.6,
165.2-263.4]*

Temperature rise wrt 1850-1900 ( C)

1.76 (1.51-2.16)

2.03 (1.72-2.64)

1.90 (1.66-2.57)

1.80 (1.60-2.20)

SLR (m) wrt 1986-2005

0.20 (0.14-0.29)

0.46 (0.30-0.69)

0.90 (0.58-1.50)

1.26 (0.74-1.90)

Land exposed (x103 km2)

575 [558-598]

637 [585-686]

705 [618-827]

767 [642-937]

People exposed, SSP1-5 (millions)

128.1-139.2
[123.6-134.2,
134.7-146.6]

105.5-158.1
[97.0-144.1,
118.1-179.0]

--

148.3-233.0
[120.3-183.4,
186.4-301.8]*

Box 3.5 | Small Island Developing States (SIDS)

3

Global warming of 1.5C is expected to prove challenging for small island developing states (SIDS) that are already experiencing
impacts associated with climate change (high confidence). At 1.5C, compounding impacts from interactions between climate drivers
may contribute to the loss of, or change in, critical natural and human systems (medium to high confidence). There are a number of
reduced risks at 1.5C versus 2C, particularly when coupled with adaptation efforts (medium to high confidence).
Changing climate hazards for SIDS at 1.5C
Mean surface temperature is projected to increase in SIDS at 1.5C of global warming (high confidence). The Caribbean region
will experience 0.5C-1.5C of warming compared to a 1971-2000 baseline, with the strongest warming occurring over larger
land masses (Taylor et al., 2018). Under the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)2.6 scenario, the western tropical Pacific
is projected to experience warming of 0.5C-1.7C relative to 1961-1990. Extreme temperatures will also increase, with potential
for elevated impacts as a result of comparably small natural variability (Reyer et al., 2017a). Compared to the 1971-2000 baseline,
up to 50% of the year is projected to be under warm spell conditions in the Caribbean at 1.5C, with a further increase of up to
70 days at 2C (Taylor et al., 2018).
Changes in precipitation patterns, freshwater availability and drought sensitivity differ among small island regions (medium to high
confidence). Some western Pacific islands and those in the northern Indian Ocean may see increased freshwater availability, while
islands in most other regions are projected to see a substantial decline (Holding et al., 2016; Karnauskas et al., 2016). For several
SIDS, approximately 25% of the overall freshwater stress projected under 2C at 2030 could be avoided by limiting global warming
to 1.5C (Karnauskas et al., 2018). In accordance with an overall drying trend, an increasing drought risk is projected for Caribbean
SIDS (Lehner et al., 2017), and moderate to extreme drought conditions are projected to be about 9% longer on average at 2C
versus 1.5C for islands in this region (Taylor et al., 2018).
Projected changes in the ocean system at higher warming targets (Section 3.4.4), including potential changes in circulation (Section
3.3.7) and increases in both surface temperatures (Section 3.3.7) and ocean acidification (Section 3.3.10), suggest increasing risks
for SIDS associated with warming levels close to and exceeding 1.5C.
Differences in global sea level between 1.5C and 2C depend on the time scale considered and are projected to fully materialize
only after 2100 (Section 3.3.9). Projected changes in regional sea level are similarly time dependent, but generally found to be
above the global average for tropical regions including small islands (Kopp et al., 2014; Jevrejeva et al., 2016). Threats related to
sea level rise (SLR) for SIDS, for example from salinization, flooding, permanent inundation, erosion and pressure on ecosystems,
will therefore persist well beyond the 21st century even under 1.5C of warming (Section 3.4.5.3; Nicholls et al., 2018). Prolonged
interannual sea level inundations may increase throughout the tropical Pacific with ongoing warming and in the advent of an

234

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Box 3.5 (continued)

increased frequency of extreme La Nina events, exacerbating coastal impacts of projected global mean SLR (Widlansky et al., 2015).
Changes to the frequency of extreme El Nino and La Nina events may also increase the frequency of droughts and floods in South
Pacific islands (Box 4.2, Section 3.5.2; Cai et al., 2012).
Extreme precipitation in small island regions is often linked to tropical storms and contributes to the climate hazard (Khouakhi et
al., 2017). Similarly, extreme sea levels for small islands, particularly in the Caribbean, are linked to tropical cyclone occurrence
(Khouakhi and Villarini, 2017). Under a 1.5C stabilization scenario, there is a projected decrease in the frequency of weaker tropical
storms and an increase in the number of intense cyclones (Section 3.3.6; Wehner et al., 2018a). There are not enough studies
to assess differences in tropical cyclone statistics for 1.5C versus 2C (Section 3.3.6). There are considerable differences in the
adaptation responses to tropical cyclones across SIDS (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4).
Impacts on key natural and human systems
Projected increases in aridity and decreases in freshwater availability at 1.5C of warming, along with additional risks from SLR
and increased wave-induced run-up, might leave several atoll islands uninhabitable (Storlazzi et al., 2015; Gosling and Arnell,
2016). Changes in the availability and quality of freshwater, linked to a combination of changes to climate drivers, may adversely
impact SIDS' economies (White and Falkland, 2010; Terry and Chui, 2012; Holding and Allen, 2015; Donk et al., 2018). Growth-rate
projections based on temperature impacts alone indicate robust negative impacts on gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
growth for SIDS (Sections 3.4.7.1, 3.4.9.1 and 3.5.4.9; Pretis et al., 2018). These impacts would be reduced considerably under 1.5C
but may be increased by escalating risks from climate-related extreme weather events and SLR (Sections 3.4.5.3, 3.4.9.4 and 3.5.3)

3

Marine systems and associated livelihoods in SIDS face higher risks at 2C compared to 1.5C (medium to high confidence).
Mass coral bleaching and mortality are projected to increase because of interactions between rising ocean temperatures, ocean
acidification, and destructive waves from intensifying storms (Section 3.4.4 and 5.2.3, Box 3.4). At 1.5C, approximately 70-90% of
global coral reefs are projected to be at risk of long-term degradation due to coral bleaching, with these values increasing to 99% at
2C (Frieler et al., 2013; Schleussner et al., 2016b). Higher temperatures are also related to an increase in coral disease development,
leading to coral degradation (Maynard et al., 2015). For marine fisheries, limiting warming to 1.5C decreases the risk of species
extinction and declines in maximum catch potential, particularly for small islands in tropical oceans (Cheung et al., 2016a).
Long-term risks of coastal flooding and impacts on populations, infrastructure and assets are projected to increase with higher levels
of warming (high confidence). Tropical regions including small islands are expected to experience the largest increases in coastal
flooding frequency, with the frequency of extreme water-level events in small islands projected to double by 2050 (Vitousek et al.,
2017). Wave-driven coastal flooding risks for reef-lined islands may increase as a result of coral reef degradation and SLR (Quataert
et al., 2015). Exposure to coastal hazards is particularly high for SIDS, with a significant share of population, infrastructure and assets
at risk (Sections 3.4.5.3 and 3.4.9; Scott et al., 2012; Kumar and Taylor, 2015; Rhiney, 2015; Byers et al., 2018). Limiting warming to
1.5C instead of 2C would spare the inundation of lands currently home to 60,000 individuals in SIDS by 2150 (Rasmussen et al.,
2018). However, such estimates do not consider shoreline response (Section 3.4.5) or adaptation.
Risks of impacts across sectors are projected to be higher at 1.5C compared to the present, and will further increase at 2C (medium
to high confidence). Projections indicate that at 1.5C there will be increased incidents of internal migration and displacement
(Sections 3.5.5, 4.3.6 and 5.2.2; Albert et al., 2017), limited capacity to assess loss and damage (Thomas and Benjamin, 2017)
and substantial increases in the risk to critical transportation infrastructure from marine inundation (Monioudi et al., 2018). The
difference between 1.5C and 2C might exceed limits for normal thermoregulation of livestock animals and result in persistent heat
stress for livestock animals in SIDS (Lallo et al., 2018).
At 1.5C, limits to adaptation will be reached for several key impacts in SIDS, resulting in residual impacts, as well as loss and
damage (Section 1.1.1, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). Limiting temperature increase to 1.5C versus 2C is expected to reduce
a number of risks, particularly when coupled with adaptation efforts that take into account sustainable development (Section 3.4.2
and 5.6.3.1, Box 4.3 and 5.3, Mycoo, 2017; Thomas and Benjamin, 2017). Region-specific pathways for SIDS exist to address climate
change (Section 5.6.3.1, Boxes 4.6 and 5.3, Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4).

235

Chapter 3

3.4.6

Food, Nutrition Security and Food Production
Systems (Including Fisheries and Aquaculture)

3.4.6.1

Crop production

Quantifying the observed impacts of climate change on food security
and food production systems requires assumptions about the many
non-climate variables that interact with climate change variables.
Implementing specific strategies can partly or greatly alleviate the
climate change impacts on these systems (Wei et al., 2017), whilst the
degree of compensation is mainly dependent on the geographical area
and crop type (Rose et al., 2016). Despite these uncertainties, recent
studies confirm that observed climate change has already affected crop
suitability in many areas, resulting in changes in the production levels
of the main agricultural crops. These impacts are evident in many areas
of the world, ranging from Asia (C. Chen et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2015;
He and Zhou, 2016) to America (Cho and McCarl, 2017) and Europe
(Ramirez-Cabral et al., 2016), and they particularly affect the typical
local crops cultivated in specific climate conditions (e.g., Mediterranean
crops like olive and grapevine, Moriondo et al., 2013a, b).

3

Temperature and precipitation trends have reduced crop production
and yields, with the most negative impacts being on wheat and maize
(Lobell et al., 2011), whilst the effects on rice and soybean yields are
less clear and may be positive or negative (Kim et al., 2013; van Oort
and Zwart, 2018). Warming has resulted in positive effects on crop yield
in some high-latitude areas (Jaggard et al., 2007; Supit et al., 2010;
Gregory and Marshall, 2012; C. Chen et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2015; He
and Zhou, 2016; Daliakopoulos et al., 2017), and may make it possible
to have more than one harvest per year (B. Chen et al., 2014; Sun et
al., 2015). Climate variability has been found to explain more than
60% of the of maize, rice, wheat and soybean yield variations in the
main global breadbaskets areas (Ray et al., 2015), with the percentage
varying according to crop type and scale (Moore and Lobell, 2015; Kent
et al., 2017). Climate trends also explain changes in the length of the
growing season, with greater modifications found in the northern highlatitude areas (Qian et al., 2010; Mueller et al., 2015).
The rise in tropospheric ozone has already reduced yields of wheat,
rice, maize and soybean by 3-16% globally (Van Dingenen et al.,
2009). In some studies, increases in atmospheric CO2 concentrations
were found to increase yields by enhancing radiation and water use
efficiencies (Elliott et al., 2014; Durand et al., 2018). In open-top
chamber experiments with a combination of elevated CO2 and 1.5C of
warming, maize and potato yields were observed to increase by 45.7%
and 11%, respectively (Singh et al., 2013; Abebe et al., 2016). However,
observations of trends in actual crop yields indicate that reductions
as a result of climate change remain more common than crop yield
increases, despite increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations (Porter
et al., 2014). For instance, McGrath and Lobell (2013) indicated that
production stimulation at increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations
was mostly driven by differences in climate and crop species, whilst
yield variability due to elevated CO2 was only about 50-70% of the
variability due to climate. Importantly, the faster growth rates induced
by elevated CO2 have been found to coincide with lower protein content
in several important C3 cereal grains (Myers et al., 2014), although this
may not always be the case for C4 grains, such as sorghum, under
236

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

drought conditions (De Souza et al., 2015). Elevated CO2 concentrations
of 568-590 ppm (a range that corresponds approximately to RCP6 in
the 2080s and hence a warming of 2.3C-3.3C (van Vuuren et al.,
2011a, AR5 WGI Table 12.2 ) alone reduced the protein, micronutrient
and B vitamin content of the 18 rice cultivars grown most widely in
Southeast Asia, where it is a staple food source, by an amount sufficient
to create nutrition-related health risks for 600 million people (Zhu et
al., 2018). Overall, the effects of increased CO2 concentrations alone
during the 21st century are therefore expected to have a negative
impact on global food security (medium confidence).
Crop yields in the future will also be affected by projected changes in
temperature and precipitation. Studies of major cereals showed that
maize and wheat yields begin to decline with 1C-2C of local warming
and under nitrogen stress conditions at low latitudes (high confidence)
(Porter et al., 2014; Rosenzweig et al., 2014). A few studies since AR5
have focused on the impacts on cropping systems for scenarios where
the global mean temperature increase is within 1.5C. Schleussner et
al. (2016b) projected that constraining warming to 1.5C rather than
2C would avoid significant risks of declining tropical crop yield in
West Africa, Southeast Asia, and Central and South America. Ricke et al.
(2016) highlighted that cropland stability declines rapidly between 1C
and 3C of warming, whilst Bassu et al. (2014) found that an increase
in air temperature negatively influences the modelled maize yield
response by -0.5 t ha-1 C-1 and Challinor et al. (2014) reported similar
effect for tropical regions. Niang et al. (2014) projected significantly
lower risks to crop productivity in Africa at 1.5C compared to 2C of
warming. Lana et al. (2017) indicated that the impact of temperature
increases on crop failure of maize hybrids would be much greater as
temperatures increase by 2C compared to 1.5C (high confidence). J.
Huang et al. (2017) found that limiting warming to 1.5C compared
to 2C would reduce maize yield losses over drylands. Although
Rosenzweig et al. (2017, 2018) did not find a clear distinction between
yield declines or increases in some breadbasket regions between the
two temperature levels, they generally did find projections of decreasing
yields in breadbasket regions when the effects of CO2 fertilization were
excluded. Iizumi et al. (2017) found smaller reductions in maize and
soybean yields at 1.5C than at 2C of projected warming, higher rice
production at 2C than at 1.5C, and no clear differences for wheat
on a global mean basis. These results are largely consistent with those
of other studies (Faye et al., 2018; Ruane et al., 2018). In the western
Sahel and southern Africa, moving from 1.5C to 2C of warming has
been projected to result in a further reduction of the suitability of maize,
sorghum and cocoa cropping areas and yield losses, especially for C3
crops, with rainfall change only partially compensating these impacts
(Laderach et al., 2013; World Bank, 2013; Sultan and Gaetani, 2016).
A significant reduction has been projected for the global production of
wheat (by 6.0  2.9%), rice (by 3.2  3.7%), maize (by 7.4  4.5%),
and soybean, (by 3.1%) for each degree Celsius increase in global
mean temperature (Asseng et al., 2015; C. Zhao et al., 2017). Similarly,
Li et al. (2017) indicated a significant reduction in rice yields for each
degree Celsius increase, by about 10.3%, in the greater Mekong
subregion (medium confidence; Cross-Chapter Box 6: Food Security
in this chapter). Large rice and maize yield losses are to be expected
in China, owing to climate extremes (medium confidence) (Wei et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2017).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

While not often considered, crop production is also negatively affected
by the increase in both direct and indirect climate extremes. Direct
extremes include changes in rainfall extremes (Rosenzweig et al.,
2014), increases in hot nights (Welch et al., 2010; Okada et al., 2011),
extremely high daytime temperatures (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009;
Jiao et al., 2016; Lesk et al., 2016), drought (Jiao et al., 2016; Lesk et
al., 2016), heat stress (Deryng et al., 2014, Betts et al., 2018), flooding
(Betts et al., 2018; Byers et al., 2018), and chilling damage (Jiao et al.,
2016), while indirect effects include the spread of pests and diseases
(Jiao et al., 2014; van Bruggen et al., 2015), which can also have
detrimental effects on cropping systems.
Taken together, the findings of studies on the effects of changes in
temperature, precipitation, CO2 concentration and extreme weather
events indicate that a global warming of 2C is projected to result in a
greater reduction in global crop yields and global nutrition than global
warming of 1.5C (high confidence; Section 3.6).

3.4.6.2

Livestock production

Studies of climate change impacts on livestock production are few in
number. Climate change is expected to directly affect yield quantity and
quality (Notenbaert et al., 2017), as well as indirectly impacting the
livestock sector through feed quality changes and spread of pests and
diseases (Kipling et al., 2016) (high confidence). Increased warming and
its extremes are expected to cause changes in physiological processes
in livestock (i.e., thermal distress, sweating and high respiratory rates)
(Mortola and Frappell, 2000) and to have detrimental effects on animal
feeding, growth rates (Andre et al., 2011; Renaudeau et al., 2011; Collier
and Gebremedhin, 2015) and reproduction (De Rensis et al., 2015). Wall
et al. (2010) observed reduced milk yields and increased cow mortality
as the result of heat stress on dairy cow production over some UK
regions.
Further, a reduction in water supply might increase cattle water demand
(Masike and Urich, 2008). Generally, heat stress can be responsible
for domestic animal mortality increase and economic losses (Vitali et
al., 2009), affecting a wide range of reproductive parameters (e.g.,
embryonic development and reproductive efficiency in pigs, Barati et al.,
2008; ovarian follicle development and ovulation in horses, Mortensen
et al., 2009). Much attention has also been dedicated to ruminant
diseases (e.g., liver fluke, Fox et al., 2011; blue-tongue virus, Guis et al.,
2012; foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), Brito et al. (2017); and zoonotic
diseases, Njeru et al., 2016; Simulundu et al., 2017).
Climate change impacts on livestock are expected to increase. In
temperate climates, warming is expected to lengthen the forage
growing season but decrease forage quality, with important variations
due to rainfall changes (Craine et al., 2010; Hatfield et al., 2011;
Izaurralde et al., 2011). Similarly, a decrease in forage quality is expected
for both natural grassland in France (Graux et al., 2013) and sown
pastures in Australia (Perring et al., 2010). Water resource availability
for livestock is expected to decrease owing to increased runoff and
reduced groundwater resources. Increased temperature will likely
induce changes in river discharge and the amount of water in basins,
leading human and livestock populations to experience water stress,
especially in the driest areas (i.e., sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia)

Chapter 3

(medium confidence) (Palmer et al., 2008). Elevated temperatures are
also expected to increase methane production (Knapp et al., 2014; M.A.
Lee et al., 2017). Globally, a decline in livestock of 7-10% is expected at
about 2C of warming, with associated economic losses between $9.7
and $12.6 billion (Boone et al., 2018).

3.4.6.3

Fisheries and aquaculture production

Global fisheries and aquaculture contribute a total of 88.6 and 59.8
million tonnes of fish and other products annually (FAO, 2016),
and play important roles in the food security of a large number of
countries (McClanahan et al., 2015; Pauly and Charles, 2015) as well
as being essential for meeting the protein demand of a growing
global population (Cinner et al., 2012, 2016; FAO, 2016; Pendleton
et al., 2016). A steady increase in the risks associated with bivalve
fisheries and aquaculture at mid-latitudes is coincident with increases
in temperature, ocean acidification, introduced species, disease and
other drivers ( Lacoue-Labarthe et al., 2016; Clements and Chopin,
2017; Clements et al., 2017; Parker et al., 2017). Sea level rise and
storm intensification pose a risk to hatcheries and other infrastructure
(Callaway et al., 2012; Weatherdon et al., 2016), whilst others risks
are associated with the invasion of parasites and pathogens (Asplund
et al., 2014; Castillo et al., 2017). Specific human strategies have
reduced these risks, which are expected to be moderate under RCP2.6
and very high under RCP8.5 (Gattuso et al., 2015). The risks related
to climate change for fin fish (Section 3.4.4) are producing a number
of challenges for small-scale fisheries (e.g., Kittinger, 2013; Pauly and
Charles, 2015; Bell et al., 2018). Recent literature from 2015 to 2017
has described growing threats from rapid shifts in the biogeography
of key species (Poloczanska et al., 2013, 2016; Burrows et al., 2014;
Garcia Molinos et al., 2015) and the ongoing rapid degradation of
key ecosystems such as coral reefs, seagrass and mangroves (Section
3.4.4, Box 3.4). The acceleration of these changes, coupled with nonclimate stresses (e.g., pollution, overfishing and unsustainable coastal
development), are driving many small-scale fisheries well below the
sustainable harvesting levels required to maintain these resources
as a source of food (McClanahan et al., 2009, 2015; Cheung et al.,
2010; Pendleton et al., 2016). As a result, future scenarios surrounding
climate change and global population growth increasingly project
shortages of fish protein for many regions, such as the Pacific Ocean
(Bell et al., 2013, 2018) and Indian Ocean (McClanahan et al., 2015).
Mitigation of these risks involves marine spatial planning, fisheries
repair, sustainable aquaculture, and the development of alternative
livelihoods (Kittinger, 2013; McClanahan et al., 2015; Song and
Chuenpagdee, 2015; Weatherdon et al., 2016). Other threats concern
the increasing incidence of alien species and diseases (Kittinger et al.,
2013; Weatherdon et al., 2016).
Risks of impacts related to climate change on low-latitude small-scale
fin fisheries are moderate today but are expected to reach very high
levels by 1.1C of global warming. Projections for mid- to high-latitude
fisheries include increases in fishery productivity in some cases (Cheung
et al., 2013; Hollowed et al., 2013; Lam et al., 2014; FAO, 2016). These
projections are associated with the biogeographical shift of species
towards higher latitudes (Fossheim et al., 2015), which brings benefits
as well as challenges (e.g., increased production yet a greater risk of
disease and invasive species; low confidence). Factors underpinning
237

3

Chapter 3

the expansion of fisheries production to high-latitude locations include
warming, increased light levels and mixing due to retreating sea ice
(Cheung et al., 2009), which result in substantial increases in primary
productivity and fish harvesting in the North Pacific and North Atlantic
(Hollowed and Sundby, 2014).
Present-day risks for mid-latitude bivalve fisheries and aquaculture
become undetectible up to 1.1C of global warming, moderate at
1.3C, and moderate to high up to 1.9C (Figure 3.18). For instance,
Cheung et al. (2016a), simulating the loss in fishery productivity
at 1.5C, 2C and 3.5C above the pre-industrial period, found that
the potential global catch for marine fisheries will likely decrease by
more than three million metric tonnes for each degree of warming.
Low-latitude fin-fish fisheries have higher risks of impacts, with risks
being moderate under present-day conditions and becoming high
above 0.9C and very high at 2C of global warming. High-latitude

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

fisheries are undergoing major transformations, and while production
is increasing, present-day risk is moderate and is projected to remain
moderate at 1.5C and 2C (Figure 3.18).
Adaptation measures can be applied to shellfish, large pelagic fish
resources and biodiversity, and they include options such as protecting
reproductive stages and brood stocks from periods of high ocean
acidification (OA), stock selection for high tolerance to OA (high
confidence) (Ekstrom et al., 2015; Rodrigues et al., 2015; Handisyde
et al., 2016; Lee, 2016; Weatherdon et al., 2016; Clements and Chopin,
2017), redistribution of highly migratory resources (e.g., Pacific tuna)
(high confidence), governance instruments such as international
fisheries agreements (Lehodey et al., 2015; Matear et al., 2015),
protection and regeneration of reef habitats, reduction of coral reef
stresses, and development of alternative livelihoods (e.g., aquaculture;
Bell et al., 2013, 2018).

Cross-Chapter Box 6 | Food Security
Lead Authors:
Ove Hoegh-Guldberg (Australia), Sharina Abdul Halim (Malaysia), Marco Bindi (Italy), Marcos Buckeridge (Brazil), Arona Diedhiou (Ivory
Coast/Senegal), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Deborah Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Diana Liverman (USA), Chandni Singh (India), Rachel Warren
(UK), Guangsheng Zhou (China).

3

Contributing Author:
Lorenzo Brilli (Italy)
Climate change influences food and nutritional security through its effects on food availability, quality, access and distribution (Paterson
and Lima, 2010; Thornton et al., 2014; FAO, 2016). More than 815 million people were undernourished in 2016, and 11% of the world's
population has experienced recent decreases in food security, with higher percentages in Africa (20%), southern Asia (14.4%) and the
Caribbean (17.7%) (FAO et al., 2017). Overall, food security is expected to be reduced at 2C of global warming compared to 1.5C,
owing to projected impacts of climate change and extreme weather on yields, crop nutrient content, livestock, fisheries and aquaculture
and land use (cover type and management) (Sections 3.4.3.6, 3.4.4.12 and 3.4.6), (high confidence). The effects of climate change
on crop yield, cultivation area, presence of pests, food price and supplies are projected to have major implications for sustainable
development, poverty eradication, inequality and the ability of the international community to meet the United Nations sustainable
development goals (SDGs; Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).
Goal 2 of the SDGs is to end hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture by 2030. This goal
builds on the first millennium development goal (MDG-1) which focused on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, through efforts
that reduced the proportion of undernourished people in low- and middle-income countries from 23.3% in 1990 to 12.9% in 2015.
Climate change threatens the capacity to achieve SDG 2 and could reverse the progress made already. Food security and agriculture
are also critical to other aspects of sustainable development, including poverty eradication (SDG 1), health and well-being (SDG 3),
clean water (SDG 6), decent work (SDG 8), and the protection of ecosystems on land (SDG 14) and in water (SDG 15) (UN, 2015, 2017;
Perez-Escamilla, 2017).
Increasing global temperature poses large risks to food security globally and regionally, especially in low-latitude areas (medium
confidence) (Cheung et al., 2010; Rosenzweig et al., 2013; Porter et al., 2014; Rosenzweig and Hillel, 2015; Lam et al., 2016), with warming
of 2C projected to result in a greater reduction in global crop yields and global nutrition than warming of 1.5C (high confidence) (Section
3.4.6), owing to the combined effects of changes in temperature, precipitation and extreme weather events, as well as increasing CO2
concentrations. Climate change can exacerbate malnutrition by reducing nutrient availability and the quality of food products (medium
confidence) (Cramer et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2018). Generally, vulnerability to decreases in water and food availability is projected to be
reduced at 1.5C versus 2C (Cheung et al., 2016a; Betts et al., 2018), especially in regions such as the African Sahel, the Mediterranean,
central Europe, the Amazon, and western and southern Africa (medium confidence) (Sultan and Gaetani, 2016; Lehner et al., 2017; Betts
et al., 2018; Byers et al., 2018; Rosenzweig et al., 2018).

238

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Cross-Chapter Box 6 (continued)

Rosenzweig et al. (2018) and Ruane et al. (2018) reported that the higher CO2 concentrations associated with 2C as compared to
those at 1.5C of global warming are projected to drive positive effects in some regions. Production can also benefit from warming in
higher latitudes, with more fertile soils, favouring crops, and grassland production, in contrast to the situation at low latitudes (Section
3.4.6), and similar benefits could arise for high-latitude fisheries production (high confidence) (Section 3.4.6.3). Studies exploring
regional climate change risks on crop production are strongly influenced by the use of different regional climate change projections
and by the assumed strength of CO2 fertilization effects (Section 3.6), which are uncertain. For C3 crops, theoretically advantageous
CO2 fertilization effects may not be realized in the field; further, they are often accompanied by losses in protein and nutrient content of
crops (Section 3.6), and hence these projected benefits may not be realized. In addition, some micronutrients such as iron and zinc will
accumulate less and be less available in food (Myers et al., 2014). Together, the impacts on protein availability may bring as many as
150 million people into protein deficiency by 2050 (Medek et al., 2017). However, short-term benefits could arise for high-latitude
fisheries production as waters warm, sea ice contracts and primary productivity increases under climate change (high confidence)
(Section 3.4.6.3; Cheung et al., 2010; Hollowed and Sundby, 2014; Lam et al., 2016; Sundby et al., 2016; Weatherdon et al., 2016).
Factors affecting the projections of food security include variability in regional climate projections, climate change mitigation (where
land use is involved; see Section 3.6 and Cross-Chapter Box 7 in this chapter) and biological responses (medium confidence) (Section
3.4.6.1; McGrath and Lobell, 2013; Elliott et al., 2014; Portner et al., 2014; Durand et al., 2018), extreme events such as droughts
and floods (high confidence) (Sections 3.4.6.1, 3.4.6.2; Rosenzweig et al., 2014; Wei et al., 2017), financial volatility (Kannan et al.,
2000; Ghosh, 2010; Naylor and Falcon, 2010; HLPE, 2011), and the distributions of pests and disease (Jiao et al., 2014; van Bruggen
et al., 2015). Changes in temperature and precipitation are projected to increase global food prices by 3-84% by 2050 (IPCC, 2013).
Differences in price impacts of climate change are accompanied by differences in land-use change (Nelson et al., 2014b), energy policies
and food trade (Mueller et al., 2011; Wright, 2011; Roberts and Schlenker, 2013). Fisheries and aquatic production systems (aquaculture)
face similar challenges to those of crop and livestock sectors (Section 3.4.6.3; Asiedu et al., 2017a, b; Utete et al., 2018). Human
influences on food security include demography, patterns of food waste, diet shifts, incomes and prices, storage, health status, trade
patterns, conflict, and access to land and governmental or other assistance (Chapters 4 and 5). Across all these systems, the efficiency
of adaptation strategies is uncertain because it is strongly linked with future economic and trade environments and their response to
changing food availability (medium confidence) (Lobell et al., 2011; von Lampe et al., 2014; d'Amour et al., 2016; Wei et al., 2017).

3

Climate change impacts on food security can be reduced through adaptation (Hasegawa et al., 2014). While climate change is projected
to decrease agricultural yield, the consequences could be reduced substantially at 1.5C versus 2C with appropriate investment (high
confidence) (Neumann et al., 2010; Muller, 2011; Roudier et al., 2011), awareness-raising to help inform farmers of new technologies for
maintaining yield, and strong adaptation strategies and policies that develop sustainable agricultural choices (Sections 4.3.2 and 4.5.3).
In this regard, initiatives such as `climate-smart' food production and distribution systems may assist via technologies and adaptation
strategies for food systems (Lipper et al., 2014; Martinez-Baron et al., 2018; Whitfield et al., 2018), as well as helping meet mitigation
goals (Harvey et al., 2014).
K.R. Smith et al. (2014) concluded that climate change will exacerbate current levels of childhood undernutrition and stunting through
reduced food availability. As well, climate change can drive undernutrition-related childhood mortality, and increase disability-adjusted
life years lost, with the largest risks in Asia and Africa (Supplementary Material 3.SM, Table 3.SM.12; Ishida et al., 2014; Hasegawa et al.,
2016; Springmann et al., 2016). Studies comparing the health risks associated with reduced food security at 1.5C and 2C concluded
that risks would be higher and the globally undernourished population larger at 2C (Hales et al., 2014; Ishida et al., 2014; Hasegawa
et al., 2016). Climate change impacts on dietary and weight-related risk factors are projected to increase mortality, owing to global
reductions in food availability and consumption of fruit, vegetables and red meat (Springmann et al., 2016). Further, temperature
increases are projected to reduce the protein and micronutrient content of major cereal crops, which is expected to further affect food
and nutritional security (Myers et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2018).
Strategies for improving food security often do so in complex settings such as the Mekong River basin in Southeast Asia. The Mekong is
a major food bowl (Smajgl et al., 2015) but is also a climate change hotspot (de Sherbinin, 2014; Lebel et al., 2014). This area is also a
useful illustration of the complexity of adaptation choices and actions in a 1.5C warmer world. Climate projections include increased
annual average temperatures and precipitation in the Mekong (Zhang et al., 2017), as well as increased flooding and related disaster risks
(T.F. Smith et al., 2013; Ling et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). Sea level rise and saline intrusion are ongoing risks to agricultural systems
in this area by reducing soil fertility and limiting the crop productivity (Renaud et al., 2015). The main climate impacts in the Mekong are
expected to be on ecosystem health, through salinity intrusion, biomass reduction and biodiversity losses (Le Dang et al., 2013; Smajgl
et al., 2015); agricultural productivity and food security (Smajgl et al., 2015); livelihoods such as fishing and farming (D. Wu et al., 2013);
and disaster risk (D. Wu et al., 2013; Hoang et al., 2016), with implications for human mortality and economic and infrastructure losses.

239

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Cross-Chapter Box 6 (continued)

Adaptation imperatives and costs in the Mekong will be higher under higher temperatures and associated impacts on agriculture
and aquaculture, hazard exposure, and infrastructure. Adaptation measures to meet food security include greater investment in crop
diversification and integrated agriculture-aquaculture practices (Renaud et al., 2015), improvement of water-use technologies (e.g.,
irrigation, pond capacity improvement and rainwater harvesting), soil management, crop diversification, and strengthening allied
sectors such as livestock rearing and aquaculture (ICEM, 2013). Ecosystem-based approaches, such as integrated water resources
management, demonstrate successes in mainstreaming adaptation into existing strategies (Sebesvari et al., 2017). However, some of
these adaptive strategies can have negative impacts that deepen the divide between land-wealthy and land-poor farmers (Chapman
et al., 2016). Construction of high dikes, for example, has enabled triple-cropping, which benefits land-wealthy farmers but leads to
increasing debt for land-poor farmers (Chapman and Darby, 2016).
Institutional innovation has happened through the Mekong River Commission (MRC), which is an intergovernmental body between
Cambodia, Lao PDR, Thailand and Viet Nam that was established in 1995. The MRC has facilitated impact assessment studies, regional
capacity building and local project implementation (Schipper et al., 2010), although the mainstreaming of adaptation into development
policies has lagged behind needs (Gass et al., 2011). Existing adaptation interventions can be strengthened through greater flexibility
of institutions dealing with land-use planning and agricultural production, improved monitoring of saline intrusion, and the installation
of early warning systems that can be accessed by the local authorities or farmers (Renaud et al., 2015; Hoang et al., 2016; Tran et al.,
2018). It is critical to identify and invest in synergistic strategies from an ensemble of infrastructural options (e.g., building dikes); soft
adaptation measures (e.g., land-use change) (Smajgl et al., 2015; Hoang et al., 2018); combinations of top-down government-led (e.g.,
relocation) and bottom-up household strategies (e.g., increasing house height) (Ling et al., 2015); and community-based adaptation
initiatives that merge scientific knowledge with local solutions (Gustafson et al., 2016, 2018; Tran et al., 2018). Special attention needs
to be given to strengthening social safety nets and livelihood assets whilst ensuring that adaptation plans are mainstreamed into
broader development goals (Sok and Yu, 2015; Kim et al., 2017). The combination of environmental, social and economic pressures on
people in the Mekong River basin highlights the complexity of climate change impacts and adaptation in this region, as well as the fact
that costs are projected to be much lower at 1.5C than 2C of global warming.

3

3.4.7

Human Health

Climate change adversely affects human health by increasing exposure
and vulnerability to climate-related stresses, and decreasing the
capacity of health systems to manage changes in the magnitude and
pattern of climate-sensitive health outcomes (Cramer et al., 2014; Hales
et al., 2014). Changing weather patterns are associated with shifts in
the geographic range, seasonality and transmission intensity of selected
climate-sensitive infectious diseases (e.g., Semenza and Menne, 2009),
and increasing morbidity and mortality are associated with extreme
weather and climate events (e.g., K.R. Smith et al., 2014). Health
detection and attribution studies conducted since AR5 have provided
evidence, using multistep attribution, that climate change is negatively
affecting adverse health outcomes associated with heatwaves,
Lyme disease in Canada, and Vibrio emergence in northern Europe
(Mitchell, 2016; Mitchell et al., 2016; Ebi et al., 2017). The IPCC AR5
concluded there is high to very high confidence that climate change
will lead to greater risks of injuries, disease and death, owing to more
intense heatwaves and fires, increased risks of undernutrition, and
consequences of reduced labour productivity in vulnerable populations
(K.R. Smith et al., 2014).

3.4.7.1

Projected risk at 1.5C and 2C of global warming

The projected risks to human health of warming of 1.5C and 2C,
based on studies of temperature-related morbidity and mortality,
air quality and vector borne diseases assessed in and since AR5, are
summarized in Supplementary Material 3.SM, Tables 3.SM.8, 3.SM.9
240

and 3.SM.10 (based on Ebi et al., 2018). Other climate-sensitive
health outcomes, such as diarrheal diseases, mental health issues
and the full range of sources of poor air quality, were not considered
because of the lack of projections of how risks could change at 1.5C
and 2C. Few projections were available for specific temperatures
above pre-industrial levels; Supplementary Material 3.SM, Table
3.SM.7 provides the conversions used to translate risks projected for
particular time slices to those for specific temperature changes (Ebi
et al., 2018).
Temperature-related morbidity and mortality: The magnitude of
projected heat-related morbidity and mortality is greater at 2C than
at 1.5C of global warming (very high confidence)(Doyon et al., 2008;
Jackson et al., 2010; Hanna et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2012; Petkova
et al., 2013; Hajat et al., 2014; Hales et al., 2014; Honda et al., 2014;
Vardoulakis et al., 2014; Garland et al., 2015; Huynen and Martens,
2015; Li et al., 2015; Schwartz et al., 2015; L. Wang et al., 2015;
Guo et al., 2016; T. Li et al., 2016; Chung et al., 2017; Kendrovski
et al., 2017; Mishra et al., 2017; Arnell et al., 2018; Mitchell et al.,
2018b). The number of people exposed to heat events is projected
to be greater at 2C than at 1.5C (Russo et al., 2016; Mora et al.,
2017; Byers et al., 2018; Harrington and Otto, 2018; King et al.,
2018). The extent to which morbidity and mortality are projected
to increase varies by region, presumably because of differences in
acclimatization, population vulnerability, the built environment,
access to air conditioning and other factors (Russo et al., 2016; Mora
et al., 2017; Byers et al., 2018; Harrington and Otto, 2018; King et
al., 2018). Populations at highest risk include older adults, children,

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

women, those with chronic diseases, and people taking certain
medications (very high confidence). Assuming adaptation takes place
reduces the projected magnitude of risks (Hales et al., 2014; Huynen
and Martens, 2015; T. Li et al., 2016).
In some regions, cold-related mortality is projected to decrease with
increasing temperatures, although increases in heat-related mortality
generally are projected to outweigh any reductions in cold-related
mortality with warmer winters, with the heat-related risks increasing
with greater degrees of warming (Huang et al., 2012; Hajat et al., 2014;
Vardoulakis et al., 2014; Gasparrini et al., 2015; Huynen and Martens,
2015; Schwartz et al., 2015).
Occupational health: Higher ambient temperatures and humidity levels
place additional stress on individuals engaging in physical activity. Safe
work activity and worker productivity during the hottest months of the
year would be increasingly compromised with additional climate change
(medium confidence) (Dunne et al., 2013; Kjellstrom et al., 2013, 2018;
Sheffield et al., 2013; Habibi Mohraz et al., 2016). Patterns of change may
be complex; for example, at 1.5C, there could be about a 20% reduction
in areas experiencing severe heat stress in East Asia, compared to
significant increases in low latitudes at 2C (Lee and Min, 2018). The costs
of preventing workplace heat-related illnesses through worker breaks
suggest that the difference in economic loss between 1.5C and 2C could
be approximately 0.3% of global gross domestic product (GDP) in 2100
(Takakura et al., 2017). In China, taking into account population growth
and employment structure, high temperature subsidies for employees
working on extremely hot days are projected to increase from 38.6 billion
yuan yr-1 in 1979-2005 to 250 billion yuan yr-1 in the 2030s (about 1.5C)
(Zhao et al., 2016).
Air quality: Because ozone formation is temperature dependent,
projections focusing only on temperature increase generally conclude
that ozone-related mortality will increase with additional warming, with
the risks higher at 2C than at 1.5C (high confidence) (Supplementary
Material 3.SM, Table 3.SM.9; Heal et al., 2013; Tainio et al., 2013;
Likhvar et al., 2015; Silva et al., 2016; Dionisio et al., 2017; J.Y. Lee
et al., 2017). Reductions in precursor emissions would reduce future
ozone concentrations and associated mortality. Mortality associated
with exposure to particulate matter could increase or decrease in the
future, depending on climate projections and emissions assumptions
(Supplementary Material 3.SM, Table 3.SM.8; Tainio et al., 2013;
Likhvar et al., 2015; Silva et al., 2016).
Malaria: Recent projections of the potential impacts of climate
change on malaria globally and for Asia, Africa, and South America
(Supplementary Material 3.SM, Table 3.SM.10) confirm that weather
and climate are among the drivers of the geographic range, intensity of
transmission, and seasonality of malaria, and that the relationships are
not necessarily linear, resulting in complex patterns of changes in risk
with additional warming (very high confidence) (Ren et al., 2016; Song
et al., 2016; Semakula et al., 2017). Projections suggest that the burden
of malaria could increase with climate change because of a greater
geographic range of the Anopheles vector, longer season, and/or
increase in the number of people at risk, with larger burdens at higher
levels of warming, but with regionally variable patterns (medium to
high confidence). Vector populations are projected to shift with climate

Chapter 3

change, with expansions and reductions depending on the degree of
local warming, the ecology of the mosquito vector, and other factors
(Ren et al., 2016).
Aedes (mosquito vector for dengue fever, chikungunya, yellow
fever and Zika virus): Projections of the geographic distribution of
Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus (principal vectors) or of the prevalence
of dengue fever generally conclude that there will be an increase in the
number of mosquitos and a larger geographic range at 2C than at
1.5C, and they suggest that more individuals will be at risk of dengue
fever, with regional differences (high confidence) (Fischer et al., 2011,
2013; Colon-Gonzalez et al., 2013, 2018; Bouzid et al., 2014; Ogden
et al., 2014a; Mweya et al., 2016). The risks increase with greater
warming. Projections suggest that climate change is projected to
expand the geographic range of chikungunya, with greater expansions
occurring at higher degrees of warming (Tjaden et al., 2017).
Other vector-borne diseases: Increased warming in North
America and Europe could result in geographic expansions of
regions (latitudinally and altitudinally) climatically suitable for West
Nile virus transmission, particularly along the current edges of its
transmission areas, and extension of the transmission season, with
the magnitude and pattern of changes varying by location and level
of warming (Semenza et al., 2016). Most projections conclude that
climate change could expand the geographic range and seasonality
of Lyme and other tick-borne diseases in parts of North America and
Europe (Ogden et al., 2014b; Levi et al., 2015). The projected changes
are larger with greater warming and under higher greenhouse gas
emissions pathways. Projections of the impacts of climate change on
leishmaniosis and Chagas disease indicate that climate change could
increase or decrease future health burdens, with greater impacts
occurring at higher degrees of warming (Gonzalez et al., 2014;
Ceccarelli and Rabinovich, 2015).
In summary, warming of 2C poses greater risks to human health than
warming of 1.5C, often with the risks varying regionally, with a few
exceptions (high confidence). There is very high confidence that each
additional unit of warming could increase heat-related morbidity and
mortality, and that adaptation would reduce the magnitude of impacts.
There is high confidence that ozone-related mortality could increase if
precursor emissions remain the same, and that higher temperatures
could affect the transmission of some infectious diseases, with
increases and decreases projected depending on the disease (e.g.,
malaria, dengue fever, West Nile virus and Lyme disease), region and
degree of temperature change.

3.4.8

Urban Areas

There is new literature on urban climate change and its differential
impacts on and risks for infrastructure sectors - energy, water, transport
and buildings - and vulnerable populations, including those living in
informal settlements (UCCRN, 2018). However, there is limited literature
on the risks of warming of 1.5C and 2C in urban areas. Heat-related
extreme events (Matthews et al., 2017), variability in precipitation (Yu
et al., 2018) and sea level rise can directly affect urban areas (Section
3.4.5, Bader et al., 2018; Dawson et al., 2018). Indirect risks may arise
from interactions between urban and natural systems.
241

3

Chapter 3

3

Future warming and urban expansion could lead to more extreme
heat stress (Argueso et al., 2015; Suzuki-Parker et al., 2015). At 1.5C
of warming, twice as many megacities (such as Lagos, Nigeria and
Shanghai, China) could become heat stressed, exposing more than
350 million more people to deadly heat by 2050 under midrange
population growth. Without considering adaptation options, such
as cooling from more reflective roofs, and overall characteristics of
urban agglomerations in terms of land use, zoning and building codes
(UCCRN, 2018), Karachi (Pakistan) and Kolkata (India) could experience
conditions equivalent to the deadly 2015 heatwaves on an annual
basis under 2C of warming (Akbari et al., 2009; Oleson et al., 2010;
Matthews et al., 2017). Warming of 2C is expected to increase the
risks of heatwaves in China's urban agglomerations (Yu et al., 2018).
Stabilizing at 1.5C of warming instead of 2C could decrease mortality
related to extreme temperatures in key European cities, assuming no
adaptation and constant vulnerability (Jacob et al., 2018; Mitchell et
al., 2018a). Holding temperature change to below 2C but taking urban
heat islands (UHI) into consideration, projections indicate that there
could be a substantial increase in the occurrence of deadly heatwaves in
cities. The urban impacts of these heatwaves are expected to be similar
at 1.5C and 2C and substantially larger than under the present climate
(Matthews et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018). Increases in the intensity of
UHI could exacerbate warming of urban areas, with projections ranging
from a 6% decrease to a 30% increase for a doubling of CO2 (McCarthy
et al., 2010). Increases in population and city size, in the context of a
warmer climate, are projected to increase UHI (Georgescu et al., 2012;
Argueso et al., 2014; Conlon et al., 2016; Kusaka et al., 2016; GrossmanClarke et al., 2017).
For extreme heat events, an additional 0.5C of warming implies
a shift from the upper bounds of observed natural variability to a
new global climate regime (Schleussner et al., 2016b), with distinct
implications for the urban poor (Revi et al., 2014; Jean-Baptiste et al.,
2018; UCCRN, 2018). Adverse impacts of extreme events could arise
in tropical coastal areas of Africa, South America and Southeast Asia
(Schleussner et al., 2016b). These urban coastal areas in the tropics
are particularly at risk given their large informal settlements and other
vulnerable urban populations, as well as vulnerable assets, including
businesses and critical urban infrastructure (energy, water, transport
and buildings) (McGranahan et al., 2007; Hallegatte et al., 2013; Revi
et al., 2014; UCCRN, 2018). Mediterranean water stress is projected
to increase from 9% at 1.5C to 17% at 2C compared to values in
1986-2005 period. Regional dry spells are projected to expand from
7% at 1.5C to 11% at 2C for the same reference period. Sea level rise
is expected to be lower at 1.5C than 2C, lowering risks for coastal
metropolitan agglomerations (Schleussner et al., 2016b).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

depending on the vulnerability of the location (coastal or non-coastal)
(high confidence), businesses, infrastructure sectors (energy, water
and transport), levels of poverty, and the mix of formal and informal
settlements.

3.4.9

Key Economic Sectors and Services

Climate change could affect tourism, energy systems and transportation
through direct impacts on operations (e.g., sea level rise) and through
impacts on supply and demand, with the risks varying significantly with
geographic region, season and time. Projected risks also depend on
assumptions with respect to population growth, the rate and pattern
of urbanization, and investments in infrastructure. Table 3.SM.11 in
Supplementary Material 3.SM summarizes the cited publications.

3.4.9.1

Tourism

The implications of climate change for the global tourism sector are
far-reaching and are impacting sector investments, destination assets
(environment and cultural), operational and transportation costs, and
tourist demand patterns (Scott et al., 2016a; Scott and Gossling, 2018).
Since AR5, observed impacts on tourism markets and destination
communities continue to be not well analysed, despite the many
analogue conditions (e.g., heatwaves, major hurricanes, wild fires,
reduced snow pack, coastal erosion and coral reef bleaching) that
are anticipated to occur more frequently with climate change. There
is some evidence that observed impacts on tourism assets, such as
environmental and cultural heritage, are leading to the development of
`last chance to see' tourism markets, where travellers visit destinations
before they are substantially degraded by climate change impacts or
to view the impacts of climate change on landscapes (Lemelin et al.,
2012; Stewart et al., 2016; Piggott-McKellar and McNamara, 2017).

Climate models are better at projecting implications of greenhouse
gas forcing on physical systems than at assessing differential risks
associated with achieving a specific temperature target (James et
al., 2017). These challenges in managing risks are amplified when
combined with the scale of urban areas and assumptions about socioeconomic pathways (Krey et al., 2012; Kamei et al., 2016; Yu et al.,
2016; Jiang and Neill, 2017).

There is limited research on the differential risks of a 1.5 versus
2C temperature increase and resultant environmental and socioeconomic impacts in the tourism sector. The translation of these
changes in climate resources for tourism into projections of tourism
demand remains geographically limited to Europe. Based on analyses
of tourist comfort, summer and spring/autumn tourism in much
of western Europe may be favoured by 1.5C of warming, but with
negative effects projected for Spain and Cyprus (decreases of 8% and
2%, respectively, in overnight stays) and most coastal regions of the
Mediterranean (Jacob et al., 2018). Similar geographic patterns of
potential tourism gains (central and northern Europe) and reduced
summer favourability (Mediterranean countries) are projected under
2C (Grillakis et al., 2016). Considering potential changes in natural
snow only, winter overnight stays at 1.5C are projected to decline
by 1-2% in Austria, Italy and Slovakia, with an additional 1.9 million
overnight stays lost under 2C of warming (Jacob et al., 2018). Using
an econometric analysis of the relationship between regional tourism
demand and climate conditions, Ciscar et al. (2014) projected that a
2C warmer world would reduce European tourism by 5% (15 billion
yr-1), with losses of up to 11% (6 billion yr-1) for southern Europe and
a potential gain of 0.5 billion yr-1 in the UK.

In summary, in the absence of adaptation, in most cases, warming
of 2C poses greater risks to urban areas than warming of 1.5C,

There is growing evidence that the magnitude of projected impacts is
temperature dependent and that sector risks could be much greater

242

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

with higher temperature increases and resultant environmental
and socio-economic impacts (Markham et al., 2016; Scott et al.,
2016a; Jones, 2017; Steiger et al., 2017). Studies from 27 countries
consistently project substantially decreased reliability of ski areas that
are dependent on natural snow, increased snowmaking requirements
and investment in snowmaking systems, shortened and more variable
ski seasons, a contraction in the number of operating ski areas,
altered competitiveness among and within regional ski markets,
and subsequent impacts on employment and the value of vacation
properties (Steiger et al., 2017). Studies that omit snowmaking do
not reflect the operating realities of most ski areas and overestimate
impacts at 1.5C-2C. In all regional markets, the extent and timing
of these impacts depend on the magnitude of climate change and the
types of adaptive responses by the ski industry, skiers and destination
communities. The decline in the number of former Olympic Winter
Games host locations that could remain climatically reliable for future
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games has been projected to be much
greater under scenarios warmer than 2C (Scott et al., 2015; Jacob et
al., 2018).
The tourism sector is also affected by climate-induced changes in
environmental assets critical for tourism, including biodiversity,
beaches, glaciers and other features important for environmental and
cultural heritage. Limited analyses of projected risks associated with
1.5C versus 2C are available (Section 3.4.4.12). A global analysis of
sea level rise (SLR) risk to 720 UNESCO Cultural World Heritage sites
projected that about 47 sites might be affected under 1C of warming,
with this number increasing to 110 and 136 sites under 2C and 3C,
respectively (Marzeion and Levermann, 2014). Similar risks to vast
worldwide coastal tourism infrastructure and beach assets remain
unquantified for most major tourism destinations and small island
developing states (SIDS) that economically depend on coastal tourism.
One exception is the projection that an eventual 1 m SLR could
partially or fully inundate 29% of 900 coastal resorts in 19 Caribbean
countries, with a substantially higher proportion (49-60%) vulnerable
to associated coastal erosion (Scott and Verkoeyen, 2017).
A major barrier to understanding the risks of climate change for tourism,
from the destination community scale to the global scale, has been
the lack of integrated sectoral assessments that analyse the full range
of potential compounding impacts and their interactions with other
major drivers of tourism (Rossello-Nadal, 2014; Scott et al., 2016b).
When applied to 181 countries, a global vulnerability index including
27 indicators found that countries with the lowest risk are located in
western and northern Europe, central Asia, Canada and New Zealand,
while the highest sector risks are projected for Africa, the Middle
East, South Asia and SIDS in the Caribbean, Indian and Pacific Oceans
(Scott and Gossling, 2018). Countries with the highest risks and where
tourism represents a significant proportion of the national economy
(i.e., more than 15% of GDP) include many SIDS and least developed
countries. Sectoral climate change risk also aligns strongly with regions
where tourism growth is projected to be the strongest over the coming
decades, including sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, pointing to an
important potential barrier to tourism development. The transnational
implications of these impacts on the highly interconnected global
tourism sector and the contribution of tourism to achieving the 2030
sustainable development goals (SDGs) remain important uncertainties.

Chapter 3

In summary, climate is an important factor influencing the geography
and seasonality of tourism demand and spending globally (very high
confidence). Increasing temperatures are projected to directly impact
climate-dependent tourism markets, including sun, beach and snow
sports tourism, with lesser risks for other tourism markets that are less
climate sensitive (high confidence). The degradation or loss of beach
and coral reef assets is expected to increase risks for coastal tourism,
particularly in subtropical and tropical regions (high confidence).

3.4.9.2

Energy systems

Climate change is projected to lead to an increased demand for air
conditioning in most tropical and subtropical regions (Arent et al.,
2014; Hong and Kim, 2015) (high confidence). Increasing temperatures
will decrease the thermal efficiency of fossil, nuclear, biomass and
solar power generation technologies, as well as buildings and other
infrastructure (Arent et al., 2014). For example, in Ethiopia, capital
expenditures through 2050 might either decrease by approximately
3% under extreme wet scenarios or increase by up to 4% under a
severe dry scenario (Block and Strzepek, 2012).
Impacts on energy systems can affect gross domestic product (GDP).
The economic damage in the United States from climate change is
estimated to be, on average, roughly 1.2% cost of GDP per year per
1C increase under RCP8.5 (Hsiang et al., 2017). Projections of GDP
indicate that negative impacts of energy demand associated with
space heating and cooling in 2100 will be greatest (median: -0.94%
change in GDP) under 4C (RCP8.5) compared with under 1.5C
(median: -0.05%), depending on the socio-economic conditions (Park
et al., 2018). Additionally, projected total energy demands for heating
and cooling at the global scale do not change much with increases in
global mean surface temperature (GMST) of up to 2C. A high degree
of variability is projected between regions (Arnell et al., 2018).
Evidence for the impact of climate change on energy systems since AR5
is limited. Globally, gross hydropower potential is projected to increase
(by 2.4% under RCP2.6 and by 6.3% under RCP8.5 for the 2080s), with
the most growth expected in Central Africa, Asia, India and northern
high latitudes (van Vliet et al., 2016). Byers et al. (2018) found that
energy impacts at 2C increase, including more cooling degree days,
especially in tropical regions, as well as increased hydro-climatic risk
to thermal and hydropower plants predominantly in Europe, North
America, South and Southeast Asia and southeast Brazil. Donk et al.
(2018) assessed future climate impacts on hydropower in Suriname
and projected a decrease of approximately 40% in power capacity
for a global temperature increase in the range of 1.5C. At minimum
and maximum increases in global mean temperature of 1.35C and
2C, the overall stream flow in Florida, USA is projected to increase
by an average of 21%, with pronounced seasonal variations, resulting
in increases in power generation in winter (+72%) and autumn
(+15%) and decreases in summer (-14%; Chilkoti et al., 2017). Greater
changes are projected at higher temperature increases. In a reference
scenario with global mean temperatures rising by 1.7C from 2005
to 2050, U.S. electricity demand in 2050 was 1.6-6.5% higher than
in a control scenario with constant temperatures (McFarland et al.,
2015). Decreased electricity generation of -15% is projected for Brazil
starting in 2040, with values expected to decline to -28% later in the
243

3

Chapter 3

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

century (de Queiroz et al., 2016). In large parts of Europe, electricity
demand is projected to decrease, mainly owing to reduced heating
demand (Jacob et al., 2018).

signal was limited, with more evidence of impacts of climate change on
the places where indigenous people live and use traditional ecological
knowledge (Olsson et al., 2014).

In Europe, no major differences in large-scale wind energy resources
or in inter- or intra-annual variability are projected for 2016-2035
under RCP8.5 and RCP4.5 (Carvalho et al., 2017). However, in 2046-
2100, wind energy density is projected to decrease in eastern Europe
(-30%) and increase in Baltic regions (+30%). Intra-annual variability
is expected to increase in northern Europe and decrease in southern
Europe. Under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, the annual energy yield of European
wind farms as a whole, as projected to be installed by 2050, will remain
stable (5 yield for all climate models). However, wind farm yields are
projected to undergo changes of up to 15% in magnitude at country
and local scales and of 5% at the regional scale (Tobin et al., 2015,
2016). Hosking et al. (2018) assessed wind power generation over
Europe for 1.5C of warming and found the potential for wind energy
to be greater than previously assumed in northern Europe. Additionally,
Tobin et al. (2018) assessed impacts under 1.5C and 2C of warming
on wind, solar photovoltaic and thermoelectric power generation
across Europe. These authors found that photovoltaic and wind power
might be reduced by up to 10%, and hydropower and thermoelectric
generation might decrease by up to 20%, with impacts being limited
at 1.5C of warming but increasing as temperature increases (Tobin et
al., 2018).

3.4.10.1 Livelihoods and poverty

3.4.9.3

Transportation

Road, air, rail, shipping and pipeline transportation can be impacted
directly or indirectly by weather and climate, including increases in
precipitation and temperature; extreme weather events (flooding and
storms); SLR; and incidence of freeze-thaw cycles (Arent et al., 2014).
Much of the published research on the risks of climate change for the
transportation sector has been qualitative.
The limited new research since AR5 supports the notion that increases
in global temperatures will impact the transportation sector. Warming
is projected to result in increased numbers of days of ice-free navigation
and a longer shipping season in cold regions, thus affecting shipping
and reducing transportation costs (Arent et al., 2014). In the North Sea
Route, large-scale commercial shipping might not be possible until
2030 for bulk shipping and until 2050 for container shipping under
RCP8.5. A 0.05% increase in mean temperature is projected from an
increase in short-lived pollutants, as well as elevated CO2 and non-CO2
emissions, associated with additional economic growth enabled by the
North Sea Route. (Yumashev et al., 2017). Open water vessel transit
has the potential to double by mid-century, with a two to four month
longer season (Melia et al., 2016).

3.4.10

Livelihoods and Poverty, and the Changing
Structure of Communities

Multiple drivers and embedded social processes influence the
magnitude and pattern of livelihoods and poverty, as well as the
changing structure of communities related to migration, displacement
and conflict (Adger et al., 2014). In AR5, evidence of a climate change

244

At approximately 1.5C of global warming (2030), climate change is
expected to be a poverty multiplier that makes poor people poorer and
increases the poverty head count (Hallegatte et al., 2016; Hallegatte
and Rozenberg, 2017). Poor people might be heavily affected by climate
change even when impacts on the rest of population are limited.
Climate change alone could force more than 3 million to 16 million
people into extreme poverty, mostly through impacts on agriculture
and food prices (Hallegatte et al., 2016; Hallegatte and Rozenberg,
2017). Unmitigated warming could reshape the global economy later
in the century by reducing average global incomes and widening
global income inequality (Burke et al., 2015b). The most severe impacts
are projected for urban areas and some rural regions in sub-Saharan
Africa and Southeast Asia.

3.4.10.2 The changing structure of communities:
migration, displacement and conflict
Migration: In AR5, the potential impacts of climate change on migration
and displacement were identified as an emerging risk (Oppenheimer et
al., 2014). The social, economic and environmental factors underlying
migration are complex and varied; therefore, detecting the effect of
observed climate change or assessing its possible magnitude with any
degree of confidence is challenging (Cramer et al., 2014).
No studies have specifically explored the difference in risks between
1.5C and 2C of warming on human migration. The literature
consistently highlights the complexity of migration decisions and the
difficulties in attributing causation (e.g., Nicholson, 2014; Baldwin and
Fornale, 2017; Bettini, 2017; Constable, 2017; Islam and Shamsuddoha,
2017; Suckall et al., 2017). The studies on migration that have
most closely explored the probable impacts of 1.5C and 2C have
mainly focused on the direct effects of temperature and precipitation
anomalies on migration or the indirect effects of these climatic changes
through changing agriculture yield and livelihood sources (Mueller et
al., 2014; Piguet and Laczko, 2014; Mastrorillo et al., 2016; SudmeierRieux et al., 2017).
Temperature has had a positive and statistically significant effect
on outmigration over recent decades in 163 countries, but only for
agriculture-dependent countries (R. Cai et al., 2016). A 1C increase
in average temperature in the International Migration Database of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
was associated with a 1.9% increase in bilateral migration flows from
142 sending countries and 19 receiving countries, and an additional
millimetre of average annual precipitation was associated with an
increase in migration by 0.5% (Backhaus et al., 2015). In another
study, an increase in precipitation anomalies from the long-term mean,
was strongly associated with an increase in outmigration, whereas no
significant effects of temperature anomalies were reported (Coniglio
and Pesce, 2015).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Internal and international migration have always been important for
small islands (Farbotko and Lazrus, 2012; Weir et al., 2017). There is
rarely a single cause for migration (Constable, 2017). Numerous factors
are important, including work, education, quality of life, family ties,
access to resources, and development (Bedarff and Jakobeit, 2017;
Speelman et al., 2017; Nicholls et al., 2018). Depending on the situation,
changing weather, climate or environmental conditions might each be
a factor in the choice to migrate (Campbell and Warrick, 2014).
Displacement: At 2C of warming, there is a potential for significant
population displacement concentrated in the tropics (Hsiang and Sobel,
2016). Tropical populations may have to move distances greater than
1000 km if global mean temperature rises by 2C from 2011-2030 to
the end of the century. A disproportionately rapid evacuation from the
tropics could lead to a concentration of population in tropical margins
and the subtropics, where population densities could increase by 300%
or more (Hsiang and Sobel, 2016).
Conflict: A recent study has called for caution in relating conflict
to climate change, owing to sampling bias (Adams et al., 2018).
Insufficient consideration of the multiple drivers of conflict often leads
to inconsistent associations being reported between climate change
and conflict (e.g., Hsiang et al., 2013; Hsiang and Burke, 2014; Buhaug,
2015, 2016; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016; Carleton et al., 2016). There
also are inconsistent relationships between climate change, migration
and conflict (e.g., Theisen et al., 2013; Buhaug et al., 2014; Selby, 2014;
Christiansen, 2016; Brzoska and Frohlich, 2016; Burrows and Kinney,
2016; Reyer et al., 2017c; Waha et al., 2017). Across world regions and
from the international to micro level, the relationship between drought
and conflict is weak under most circumstances (Buhaug, 2016; von
Uexkull et al., 2016). However, drought significantly increases the
likelihood of sustained conflict for particularly vulnerable nations or
groups, owing to the dependence of their livelihood on agriculture.
This is particularly relevant for groups in the least developed countries
(von Uexkull et al., 2016), in sub-Saharan Africa (Serdeczny et al., 2016;
Almer et al., 2017) and in the Middle East (Waha et al., 2017). Hsiang
et al. (2013) reported causal evidence and convergence across studies
that climate change is linked to human conflicts across all major
regions of the world, and across a range of spatial and temporal scales.
A 1C increase in temperature or more extreme rainfall increases
the frequency of intergroup conflicts by 14% (Hsiang et al., 2013). If
the world warms by 2C-4C by 2050, rates of human conflict could
increase. Some causal associations between violent conflict and
socio-political instability were reported from local to global scales
and from hour to millennium time frames (Hsiang and Burke, 2014).
A temperature increase of one standard deviation increased the risk
of interpersonal conflict by 2.4% and intergroup conflict by 11.3%
(Burke et al., 2015a). Armed-conflict risks and climate-related disasters
are both relatively common in ethnically fractionalized countries,
indicating that there is no clear signal that environmental disasters
directly trigger armed conflicts (Schleussner et al., 2016a).

Chapter 3

poorer and increases poverty head count, and the association between
temperature and economic productivity is not linear (high confidence).
Temperature has a positive and statistically significant effect on
outmigration for agriculture-dependent communities (medium
confidence).

3.4.11

Interacting and Cascading Risks

The literature on compound as well as interacting and cascading risks
at warming of 1.5C and 2C is limited. Spatially compound risks,
often referred to as hotspots, involve multiple hazards from different
sectors overlapping in location (Piontek et al., 2014). Global exposures
were assessed for 14 impact indicators, covering water, energy and
land sectors, from changes including drought intensity and water
stress index, cooling demand change and heatwave exposure, habitat
degradation, and crop yields using an ensemble of climate and impact
models (Byers et al., 2018). Exposures are projected to approximately
double between 1.5C and 2C, and the land area affected by climate
risks is expected to increase as warming progresses. For populations
vulnerable to poverty, the exposure to climate risks in multiple sectors
could be an order of magnitude greater (8-32 fold) in the high poverty
and inequality scenarios (SSP3; 765-1,220 million) compared to under
sustainable socio-economic development (SSP1; 23-85 million). Asian
and African regions are projected to experience 85-95% of global
exposure, with 91-98% of the exposed and vulnerable population
(depending on SSP/GMT combination), approximately half of which
are in South Asia. Figure 3.19 shows that moderate and large multisector impacts are prevalent at 1.5C where vulnerable people live,
predominantly in South Asia (mostly Pakistan, India and China), but that
impacts spread to sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and East Asia at
higher levels of warming. Beyond 2C and at higher risk thresholds,
the world's poorest populations are expected to be disproportionately
impacted, particularly in cases (SSP3) of great inequality in Africa and
southern Asia. Table 3.4 shows the number of exposed and vulnerable
people at 1.5C and 2C of warming, with 3C shown for context, for
selected multi-sector risks.

3.4.12

Summary of Projected Risks at 1.5C and 2C
of Global Warming

The information presented in Section 3.4 is summarized below in Table
3.5, which illustrates the growing evidence of increasing risks across a
broad range of natural and human systems at 1.5C and 2C of global
warming.

In summary, average global temperatures that extend beyond 1.5C are
projected to increase poverty and disadvantage in many populations
globally (medium confidence). By the mid- to late 21st century, climate
change is projected to be a poverty multiplier that makes poor people

245

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3

Figure 3.19 | Multi-sector risk maps for 1.5C (top), 2C (middle), and locations where 2C brings impacts not experienced at 1.5C (2C-1.5C; bottom). The maps in the
left column show the full range of the multi-sector risk (MSR) score (0-9), with scores 5.0 shown with a transparency gradient and scores >5.0 shown with a colour gradient.
Score must be >4.0 to be considered `multi-sector'. The maps in the right column overlay the 2050 vulnerable populations (low income) under Shared Socio-Economic Pathway
(SSP)2 (greyscale) with the multi-sector risk score >5.0 (colour gradient), thus indicating the concentrations of exposed and vulnerable populations to risks in multiple sectors.
Source: Byers et al. (2018).

Table 3.4 | Number of exposed and vulnerable people at 1.5C, 2C, and 3C for selected multi-sector risks under shared socioeconomic pathways (SSPs).
Source: Byers et al., 2018
SSP2
(SSP1 to SSP3 range), millions

1.5C

2C

3C

Exposed

Exposed
and vulnerable

Exposed

Exposed
and vulnerable

Exposed

Exposed
and vulnerable

Water stress index

3340 (3032-3584)

496 (103-1159)

3658 (3080-3969)

586 (115-1347)

3920 (3202-4271)

662 (146-1480)

Heatwave event exposure

3960 (3546-4508)

1187 (410-2372)

5986 (5417-6710)

1581 (506-3218)

7909 (7286-8640)

1707 (537-3575)

334 (326-337)

30 (6-76)

385 (374-389)

38 (9-94)

742 (725-739)

72 (16-177)

Crop yield change

35 (32-36)

8 (2-20)

362 (330-396)

81 (24-178)

1817 (1666-1992)

406 (118-854)

Habitat degradation

91 (92-112)

10 (4-31)

680 (314-706)

102 (23-234)

1357 (809-1501)

248 (75-572)

Two indicators

1129 (1019-1250)

203 (42-487)

2726 (2132-2945)

562 (117-1220)

3500 (3212-3864)

707 (212-1545)

Three indicators

66 (66-68)

7 (0.9-19)

422 (297-447)

54 (8-138)

1472 (1177-1574)

237 (48-538)

Four indicators

5 (0.3-5.7)

0.3 (0-1.2)

11 (5-14)

0.5 (0-2)

258 (104-280)

33 (4-86)

Indicator

Hydroclimate risk to power production

Multi-sector exposure

246

Sector

Physical
climate
change
drivers

18% insects,
8% vertebrates,
16% plants lose
>50% range4

350.2  158.8
million, changes
in urban
population
exposure to
severe drought at
the globe scale3
6% insects, 4%
vertebrates,
8% plants, lose
>50% range4

m

About 7%
transformed5

Fluvial flood

Species
range loss

Loss of
ecosystem
functioning
and services

Shifts of biomes
(major ecosystem
types)

Wildfire

h

410.7  213.5
million, changes
in urban
population
exposure to
severe drought at
the globe scale3

100% increase
in the population
affected
compared to the
impact simulated
over the
baseline period
1976-20052

h

13% (range
8-20%)
transformed5

h

70% increase

170% increase
in the population
affected
compared to the
impact simulated
over the
baseline period
1976-20052

Around half
compared to the
risks at 2C1

Water Stress

Drought

Up to 100%
increase

Additional 8%
of the world
population in
2000 exposed
to new or
aggravated
water scarcity1

Nature
of risk

Increased risk

About double

Double or triple

60.5  84.1
million
(84.1 based
on the SSP1
scenario)
(based on PDSI
estimate)

Change in
risk when
moving from
1.5C to 2C
of warming

Global
risks at 2C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

Global risks
at 1.5C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

Confidence
in risk
statements

Canada, USA and
Mediterranean

Central Europe,
southern Europe,
Mediterranean,
West Africa, East
and West Asia,
Southeast Asia
(based on PDSI
estimate#)

USA, Asia,
Europe

Regions
where
risks are
particularly
high with
2C of global
warming

Mediterranean

Arctic, Tibet,
Himalayas, South
Africa, Australia

Amazon, Europe,
southern Africa

Europe, Australia,
southern Africa

Regions
where the
change in risk
when moving
from 1.5C
to 2C are
particularly
high

Central and
South America,
Australia,
Russia, China,
Africa

Africa,
Oceania

Regions
with little
or no
information

1, 2,
4, 5

4

4

l

m

l/m

2

1,4

l/m

l

2

3

RFC*

Adaptation
potential
at 1.5C

l

l

l/m

l/m

l

Adaptation
potential
at 2C

M

H

L

M

M

Confidence
in assigning
adaptation
potential

Table 3.5 | Summary of projected risks to natural and human systems at 1.5C and 2C of global warming, and of the potential to adapt to these risks. Table summarizes the chapter text and with references supporting table entries
found in the main chapter text. Risk magnitude is provided either as assessed levels of risk (very high: vh, high: h, medium: m, or low: l) or as quantitative examples of risk levels taken from the literature. Further compilations
of quantified levels of risk taken from the literature may be found Tables 3.SM1-5 in the Supplementary Material. Similarly, potential to adapt is assessed from the literature by expert judgement as either high (h), medium
(m), or low (l). Confidence in each assessed level/quantification of risk, or in each assessed adaptation potential, is indicated as very high (VH), high (H), medium (M), or low (L). Note that the use of l, m, h and vh here is
distinct from the use of L, M, H and VH in Figures 3.18, 3.20 and 3.21.

Freshwater

Terrestrial ecosystems

Precipitation, temperature, snowmelt

Temperature, precipitation

Heat and cold
stress, warming,
precipitation
drought

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Chapter 3

3

247

Sector

Ocean

Physical
climate
change
drivers

Table 3.5 (continued)

Warming and stratification of the surface ocean

248

Ocean acidification and
elevated sea temperatures

Global risks
at 1.5C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

vh

m

m

h

m

h

m

m/h

l/m

l

l

Nature
of risk

Loss of
framework
species (coral
reefs)

Loss of
framework
species
(seagrass)

Loss of
framework
species
(mangroves)

Disruption of
marine foodwebs

Range migration
of marine species
and ecosystems

Loss of fin fish
and fisheries

Loss of coastal
ecosystems and
protection

Loss of bivalves
and bivalve
fisheries

Changes to
physiology
and ecology of
marine species

Increased
hypoxic dead
zones

Changes to
upwelling
productivity

m

l/m

m

h/vh

h

h/vh

h

vh

m

h

vh

Global
risks at 2C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

Increase in risk

Large increase
in risk

Increase in risk

Large increase
in risk

Increase in risk

Large increase
in risk

Large increase
in risk

Large increase
in risk

Uncertain and
depends on other
human activities

L/M

L/M

H

H

M

H

H

M

M/H

M

H/very H

Greater rate
of loss: from
70-90% loss at
1.5C to 99% loss
at 2C and above

Increase in risk

Confidence
in risk
statements

Change in
risk when
moving from
1.5C to 2C
of warming

Most upwelling
regions

Temperate
countries with
upwelling

Global

Most upwelling
regions

Temperate
countries with
upwelling

Global

Temperate
countries with
upwelling

Low-latitude
tropical/subtropical countries

Low-latitude
tropical/
subtropical
countries
Temperate
countries with
upwelling

Global

Global

Global

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Regions
where the
change in
risk when
moving
from 1.5C
to2C are
particularly
high

Global

Global

Global

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Regions
where
risks are
particularly
high with
2C of global
warming

3

Reduced bulk ocean
circulation and
de-oxygenation

Some
upwelling
systems

Deep sea

Most regions
- risks not
well defined

Most regions
- risks not
well defined

Most regions
- risks not
well defined

Deep sea, upwelling systems

Deep sea

Deep sea

Southern Red
Sea, Somalia,
Yemen,
Myanmar

Southern Red
Sea, Somalia,
Yemen,
Myanmar

Southern Red
Sea, Somalia,
Yemen,
deep water
coral reefs

Regions
with little
or no
information

4

4

4

4

1

4

1

4

1,3

1,2

1,2

RFC*

l

m

l

m/h

m

m

m

m

m

m

h

Adaptation
potential
at 1.5C

l

l

l

l/m

m/l

m/l

l

l

l

l

l

Adaptation
potential
at 2C

M

M

M/H

M/H

M

M/H

H

M/H

L/M

M/H

H

Confidence
in assigning
adaptation
potential

Chapter 3
Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Coastal

Ocean

Sector

Sea level rise, increased storminess

Loss of sea ice

Intensified storms,
precipitation plus
sea level rise

Physical
climate
change
drivers

Table 3.5 (continued)

Area exposed
(assuming no
defences)

Increasing with
time, but highly
dependent on
adaptation9

590-613th km2
when 2C first
reached6,7,8

Increasing; 13-8
million when
temperatures are
first reached, 0-6
million people in
2100, increasing
to 35-95 million
people in 23006

Increasing;
25-38th
km2 when
temperatures
are first reached,
10-17th km2 in
2100 increasing
to 16-230th
km2 in 23006,7,8

(dependent on
adaptation)

M/H

(dependent
on population
datasets)

M/H

(dependent
on population
datasets)

M/H

very H

H

Large increase
in risk
Large increase
in risk

H

H

Confidence
in risk
statements

Large increase
in risk

Large increase
in risk

Change in
risk when
moving from
1.5C to 2C
of warming

m/h

15-53 million
people yr-1 if
defences are not
upgraded from
the modelled
1995 baseline9

562-575th km2
when 1.5C first
reached6,7,8

Increased
productivity
but changing
fisheries

vh

2-28 million
people yr-1 if
defences are not
upgraded from
the modelled
1995 baseline9

l/m

Loss of habitat

h/vh

People at risk
accounting
for defences
(modelled
in 1995)

h

Inundation and
destruction of
human/coastal
infrastructure
and livelihoods

h/vh

141-151 million
when 2C first
reached

h

Loss of coastal
ecosystems

128-143 million
when 1.5C
first reached

h

Nature
of risk

Global
risks at 2C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

Population
exposed
(assuming no
defences)

Global risks
at 1.5C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

1

1, 4

2, 3

Small islands

Small islands

Small islands

Polar regions

Polar regions

Asia, small
islands

Asia, small
islands

Asia, small
islands

Asia, small
islands,
potentially
African nations

Asia, small
islands

Asia, small
islands

Polar regions

Polar regions

2, 3, 4

2, 3

1, 5

Global

Global

1, 4

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

RFC*

Tropical/
subtropical
countries

Regions
with little
or no
information

Regions
where the
change in
risk when
moving
from 1.5C
to2C are
particularly
high

Regions
where
risks are
particularly
high with
2C of global
warming

m

m

m

l

l

m/h

m

Adaptation
potential
at 1.5C

m

m

m

m/l

very l

m

l

Adaptation
potential
at 2C

M

M

M

H

H

M/L

M

Confidence
in assigning
adaptation
potential

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Chapter 3

3

249

Sector

Food security and
food production systems

Human health

m/h (if precursor
emissions remain
the same)

m

m
m (if precursor
emissions remain
the same)

Shift and
composition
change of
biomes (major
ecosystem types)

Heat-related
morbidity and
mortality

Occupational
heat stress

Ozone-related
mortality

Undernutrition

Tourism
(sun, beach, and
snow sports)
m/h

m

m/h

m/h

Changes in
ecosystem
production

h

m/h

m/h

h

h

m/h

Nature
of risk

Global
risks at 2C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

Risk increased

Risk increased

Risk increased

Risk increased

Risk increased

Moderate
increase

Large increase

Change in
risk when
moving from
1.5C to 2C
of warming

VH

H

H

M

VH

L/M

M/H

Confidence
in risk
statements

Low-income
countries in
Africa and Asia
Coastal tourism,
particularly in
subtropical and
tropical regions

Coastal tourism,
particularly in
subtropical and
tropical regions

High income
and emerging
economies

Tropical regions

All regions

Global,
tropical areas,
Mediterranean

North America,
Central and
South America,
Mediterranean
basin, South
Africa, Australia,
Asia

Regions
where the
change in
risk when
moving
from 1.5C
to2C are
particularly
high

Low-income
countries in
Africa and Asia

High income
and emerging
economies

Tropical regions

All regions at risk

Global

Global

Regions
where
risks are
particularly
high with
2C of global
warming

Africa

Small islands

Africa, parts
of Asia

Africa

Africa

Africa, Asia

Regions
with little
or no
information

1, 2, 3

2, 3, 4

2, 3, 4

2, 3, 4

2, 3, 4

1, 2,
3, 4

2, 4, 5

RFC*

m

m

l

h

h

l/m

h

Adaptation
potential
at 1.5C

l

l

l

m

h

l

m/h

Adaptation
potential
at 2C

H

M

M

M

H

L/M

M/H

Confidence
in assigning
adaptation
potential

9

1

Gerten et al., 2013; 2 Alfieri et al., 2017; 3 Liu et al., 2018; 4 Warren et al., 2018a; 5 Warzawski et al., 2013; 6 Brown et al., 2018a; 7 Rasmussen et al., 2018; 8 Yokoki et al., 2018;
Nicholls et al., 2018.

# PDSI-based drought estimates tend to overestimate drought impacts (see Section 3.3.4); hence projections with other drought indices may differ. Further quantifications may be found in
Table 3.SM.1

*RFC: 1 = unique and threatened systems, 2 = extreme events, 3 = unequal distribution of impacts, 4 = global aggregate impacts (economic + biodiversity), 5 = large-scale singular events.

Key
economic
sectors

Physical
climate
change
drivers

Global risks
at 1.5C
of global
warming
above preindustrial

Table 3.5 (continued)

Heat and
cold stress, warming,
precipitation, drought

Heat and cold
stress, warming,
precipitation
drought

Air
quality

Temperature,
precipitation

250

Temperature

3

Temperature

Chapter 3
Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.4.13

Synthesis of Key Elements of Risk

Some elements of the assessment in Section 3.4 were synthesized into
Figure 3.18 and 3.20, indicating the overall risk for a representative set
of natural and human systems from increases in global mean surface
temperature (GMST) and anthropogenic climate change. The elements
included are supported by a substantive enough body of literature
providing at least medium confidence in the assessment. The format for
Figures 3.18 and 3.20 match that of Figure 19.4 of WGII AR5 Chapter
19 (Oppenheimer et al., 2014) indicating the levels of additional risk
as colours: undetectable (white) to moderate (detected and attributed;
yellow), from moderate to high (severe and widespread; red), and
from high to very high (purple), the last of which indicates significant
irreversibility or persistence of climate-related hazards combined
with a much reduced capacity to adapt. Regarding the transition
from undetectable to moderate, the impact literature assessed in AR5
focused on describing and quantifying linkages between weather and
climate patterns and impact outcomes, with limited detection and
attribution to anthropogenic climate change (Cramer et al., 2014). A
more recent analysis of attribution to greenhouse gas forcing at the
global scale (Hansen and Stone, 2016) confirmed that the impacts
related to changes in regional atmospheric and ocean temperature can
be confidently attributed to anthropogenic forcing, while attribution
to anthropogenic forcing of those impacts related to precipitation is
only weakly evident or absent. Moreover, there is no strong direct
relationship between the robustness of climate attribution and that of
impact attribution (Hansen and Stone, 2016).
The current synthesis is complementary to the synthesis in Section 3.5.2
that categorizes risks into `Reasons for Concern' (RFCs), as described in
Oppenheimer et al. (2014). Each element, or burning ember, presented
here (Figures 3.18, 3.20) maps to one or more RFCs (Figure 3.21). It
should be emphasized that risks to the elements assessed here are
only a subset of the full range of risks that contribute to the RFCs.
Figures 3.18 and 3.20 are not intended to replace the RFCs but rather
to indicate how risks to particular elements of the Earth system accrue
with global warming, through the visual burning embers format,
with a focus on levels of warming of 1.5C and 2C. Key evidence
assessed in earlier parts of this chapter is summarized to indicate the
transition points between the levels of risk. In this regard, the assessed
confidence in assigning the transitions between risk levels are as
follows: L=Low, M=Medium, H=High, and VH=Very high levels of
confidence. A detailed account of the procedures involved is provided
in the Supplementary Material (3.SM.3.2 and 3.SM.3.3).
In terrestrial ecosystems (feeding into RFC1 and RFC4), detection and
attribution studies show that impacts of climate change on terrestrial
ecosystems began to take place over the past few decades, indicating
a transition from no risk (white areas in Figure 3.20) to moderate risk
below recent temperatures (high confidence) (Section 3.4.3). Risks to
unique and threatened terrestrial ecosystems are generally projected to
be higher under warming of 2C compared to 1.5C (Section 3.5.2.1),
while at the global scale severe and widespread risks are projected
to occur by 2C of warming. These risks are associated with biome
shifts and species range losses (Sections 3.4.3 and 3.5.2.4); however,
because many systems and species are projected to be unable to adapt
to levels of warming below 2C, the transition to high risk (red areas

Chapter 3

in Figure 3.20) is located below 2C (high confidence). With 3C of
warming, however, biome shifts and species range losses are expected
to escalate to very high levels, and the systems are projected to have
very little capacity to adapt (Figure 3.20) (high confidence) (Section
3.4.3).
In the Arctic (related to RFC1), the increased rate of summer sea ice
melt was detected and attributed to climate change by the year 2000
(corresponding to warming of 0.7C), indicating moderate risk. At
1.5C of warming an ice-free Arctic Ocean is considered unlikely, whilst
by 2C of warming it is considered likely and this unique ecosystem is
projected to be unable to adapt. Hence, a transition from high to very
high risk is expected between 1.5C and 2C of warming.
For warm-water coral reefs, there is high confidence in the transitions
between risk levels, especially in the growing impacts in the
transition of warming from non-detectable (0.2C to 0.4C), and then
successively higher levels risk until high and very high levels of risks
by 1.2C (Section 3.4.4 and Box 3.4). This assessment considered the
heatwave-related loss of 50% of shallow water corals across hundreds
of kilometres of the world's largest continuous coral reef system,
the Great Barrier Reef, as well as losses at other sites globally. The
major increase in the size and loss of coral reefs over the past three
years, plus sequential mass coral bleaching and mortality events on
the Great Barrier Reef, (Hoegh-Guldberg, 1999; Hughes et al., 2017b,
2018), have reinforced the scale of climate-change related risks to
coral reefs. General assessments of climate-related risks for mangroves
prior to this special report concluded that they face greater risks from
deforestation and unsustainable coastal development than from
climate change (Alongi, 2008; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2014; Gattuso et
al., 2015). Recent climate-related die-offs (Duke et al., 2017; Lovelock
et al., 2017), however, suggest that climate change risks may have
been underestimated for mangroves as well, and risks have thus been
assessed as undetectable to moderate, with the transition now starting
at 1.3C as opposed to 1.8C as assessed in 2015 (Gattuso et al., 2015).
Risks of impacts related to climate change on small-scale fisheries at
low latitudes, many of which are dependent on ecosystems such as
coral reefs and mangroves, are moderate today but are expected to
reach high levels of risk around 0.9C-1.1C (high confidence) (Section
3.4.4.10).
The transition from undetectable to moderate risk (related to RFCs 3
and 4), shown as white to yellow in Figure 3.20, is based on AR5 WGII
Chapter 7, which indicated with high confidence that climate change
impacts on crop yields have been detected and attributed to climate
change, and the current assessment has provided further evidence
to confirm this (Section 3.4.6). Impacts have been detected in the
tropics (AR5 WGII Chapters 7 and 18), and regional risks are projected
to become high in some regions by 1.5C of warming, and in many
regions by 2.5C, indicating a transition from moderate to high risk
between 1.5C and 2.5C of warming (medium confidence).
Impacts from fluvial flooding (related to RFCs 2, 3 and 4) depend on
the frequency and intensity of the events, as well as the extent of
exposure and vulnerability of society (i.e., socio-economic conditions
and the effect of non-climate stressors). Moderate risks posed by
1.5C of warming are expected to continue to increase with higher
251

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

risk (Section 3.4.5). With 2.5C of warming, adaptation limits are
expected to be exceeded in sensitive areas, and hence a transition to
very high risk is projected. Additionally, at this temperature, sea level
rise could have adverse effects for centuries, posing significant risk to
low-lying areas (high confidence) (Sections 3.4.5.7 and 3.5.2.5).

levels of warming (Sections 3.3.5 and 3.4.2), with projected risks being
threefold the current risk in economic damages due to flooding in 19
countries for warming of 2C, indicating a transition to high risk at
this level (medium confidence). Because few studies have assessed the
potential to adapt to these risks, there was insufficient evidence to
locate a transition to very high risk (purple).

For heat-related morbidity and mortality (related to RFCs 2, 3 and 4),
detection and attribution studies show heat-related mortality in some
locations increasing with climate change (high confidence) (Section
3.4.7; Ebi et al., 2017). The projected risks of heat-related morbidity and
mortality are generally higher under warming of 2C than 1.5C (high
confidence), with projections of greater exposure to high ambient
temperatures and increased morbidity and mortality (Section 3.4.7).
Risk levels will depend on the rate of warming and the (related) level of
adaptation, so a transition in risk from moderate (yellow) to high (red)
is located between 1C and 3C (medium confidence).

Climate-change induced sea level rise (SLR) and associated coastal
flooding (related to RFCs 2, 3 and 4) have been detectable and
attributable since approximately 1970 (Slangen et al., 2016), during
which time temperatures have risen by 0.3C (medium confidence)
(Section 3.3.9). Analysis suggests that impacts could be more
widespread in sensitive systems such as small islands (high confidence)
(Section 3.4.5.3) and increasingly widespread by the 2070s (Brown
et al., 2018a) as temperatures rise from 1.5C to 2C, even when
adaptation measures are considered, suggesting a transition to high

Risks and/or impacts for specific natural, managed and human systems

Global mean surface temperature change
relative to pre-industrial levels (0C)

3

Global mean surface temperature change
relative to pre-industrial levels (0C)

The key elements are presented here as a function of the risk level assessed
between 1.5C and 2C.
H

Very high

H

2.0
H

H

1.5
1.0

H

VH
H

0

Warm-water
corals,
Coral reefs

H

M

H

VH

High

Moderate

2006-2015
H
H

Artic
(including
ocean area
and sea ice)

Coastal
flooding

M

2.0

H

M

Undetectable

Index: Level of additional
risk due to climate change

Small scale
Terrestrial
fisheries
Ecosystems
(low latitude)

M

M

M

Purple indicates very high
risks of severe impacts and
the presence of significant
irreversibility or the
persistence of climate-related
hazards, combined with
limited ability to adapt due to
the nature of the hazard or
impacts/risks.
Red indicates severe and
widespread impacts/risks.
Yellow indicates that
impacts/risks are detectable
and attributable to climate
change with at least medium
confidence.
White indicates that no
impacts are detectable and
attributable to climate
change.

M
1.5

M
M

H

1.0
M

H

2006-2015

H

0

Fluvial
Flooding

Crop
Yields

Heat-related
morbidity
and mortality

Tourism

Ability to achieve
Sustainable
Development
Goals (SDGs)

Mangroves

Confidence level for transition: L=Low, M=Medium, H=High and VH=Very high
Figure 3.20 | The dependence of risks and/or impacts associated with selected elements of human and natural systems on the level of climate change, adapted from Figure
3.21 and from AR5 WGII Chapter 19, Figure 19.4, and highlighting the nature of this dependence between 0C and 2C warming above pre-industrial levels. The selection of
impacts and risks to natural, managed and human systems is illustrative and is not intended to be fully comprehensive. Following the approach used in AR5, literature was used
to make expert judgements to assess the levels of global warming at which levels of impact and/or risk are undetectable (white), moderate (yellow), high (red) or very high
(purple). The colour scheme thus indicates the additional risks due to climate change. The transition from red to purple, introduced for the first time in AR4, is defined by a very
high risk of severe impacts and the presence of significant irreversibility or persistence of climate-related hazards combined with limited ability to adapt due to the nature of the
hazard or impact. Comparison of the increase of risk across RFCs indicates the relative sensitivity of RFCs to increases in GMST. As was done previously, this assessment takes
autonomous adaptation into account, as well as limits to adaptation independently of development pathway. The levels of risk illustrated reflect the judgements of the authors
of Chapter 3 and Gattuso et al. (2015; for three marine elements). The grey bar represents the range of GMST for the most recent decade: 2006-2015.

252

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

of Oppenheimer et al. (2014) was adopted, with updates to the
aggregation of risk informed by the most recent literature, for the
analysis of avoided impacts at 1.5C compared to 2C of global
warming presented in this section.

For tourism (related to RFCs 3 and 4), changing weather patterns,
extreme weather and climate events, and sea level rise are affecting
many - but not all - global tourism investments, as well as
environmental and cultural destination assets (Section 3.4.4.12), with
`last chance to see' tourism markets developing based on observed
impacts on environmental and cultural heritage (Section 3.4.9.1),
indicating a transition from undetectable to moderate risk between
0C and 1.5C of warming (high confidence). Based on limited
analyses, risks to the tourism sector are projected to be larger at 2C
than at 1.5C, with impacts on climate-sensitive sun, beach and snow
sports tourism markets being greatest. The degradation or loss of
coral reef systems is expected to increase the risks to coastal tourism
in subtropical and tropical regions. A transition in risk from moderate
to high levels of added risk from climate change is projcted to occur
between 1.5C and 3C (medium confidence).

3.5.2

Climate change is already having large scale impacts on ecosystems,
human health and agriculture, which is making it much more difficult
to reach goals to eradicate poverty and hunger, and to protect health
and life on land (Sections 5.1 and 5.2.1 in Chapter 5), suggesting a
transition from undetectable to moderate risk for recent temperatures
at 0.5C of warming (medium confidence). Based on the limited
analyses available, there is evidence and agreement that the risks
to sustainable development are considerably less at 1.5C than 2C
(Section 5.2.2), including impacts on poverty and food security. It is
easier to achieve many of the sustainable development goals (SDGs) at
1.5C, suggesting that a transition to higher risk will not begin yet at
this level. At 2C and higher levels of warming (e.g., RCP8.5), however,
there are high risks of failure to meet SDGs such as eradicating
poverty and hunger, providing safe water, reducing inequality and
protecting ecosystems, and these risks are projected to become severe
and widespread if warming increases further to about 3C (medium
confidence) (Section 5.2.3).

A brief summary of the accrual of RFCs with global warming, as
assessed in WGII AR5, is provided in the following sections, which
leads into an update of relevant literature published since AR5. The
new literature is used to confirm the levels of global warming at which
risks are considered to increase from undetectable to moderate, from
moderate to high, and from high to very high. Figure 3.21 modifies
Figure 19.4 from AR5 WGII, and the following text in this subsection
provides justification for the modifications. O'Neill et al. (2017)
presented a very similar assessment to that of WGII AR5, but with
further discussion of the potential to create `embers' specific to socioeconomic scenarios in the future. There is insufficient literature to
do this at present, so the original, simple approach has been used
here. As the focus of the present assessment is on the consequences
of global warming of 1.5C-2C above the pre-industrial period, no
assessment for global warming of 3C or more is included in the
figure (i.e., analysis is discontinued at 2.5C).

Disclosure statement: The selection of elements depicted in Figures
3.18 and 3.20 is not intended to be fully comprehensive and does not
necessarily include all elements for which there is a substantive body
of literature, nor does it necessarily include all elements which are of
particular interest to decision-makers.

3.5

Avoided Impacts and Reduced Risks
at 1.5C Compared with 2C
of Global Warming

3.5.1

Introduction

Oppenheimer et al. (2014, AR5 WGII Chapter 19) provided a framework
that aggregates projected risks from global mean temperature
change into five categories identified as `Reasons for Concern'. Risks
are classified as moderate, high or very high and coloured yellow,
red or purple, respectively, in Figure 19.4 of that chapter (AR5 WGII
Chapter 19 for details and findings). The framework's conceptual
basis and the risk judgements made by Oppenheimer et al. (2014)
were recently reviewed, and most judgements were confirmed in the
light of more recent literature (O'Neill et al., 2017). The approach

The regional economic benefits that could be obtained by limiting the
global temperature increase to 1.5C of warming, rather than 2C
or higher levels, are discussed in Section 3.5.3 in the light of the five
RFCs explored in Section 3.5.2. Climate change hotspots that could
be avoided or reduced by achieving the 1.5C target are summarized
in Section 3.5.4. The section concludes with a discussion of regional
tipping points that could be avoided at 1.5C compared to higher
degrees of global warming (Section 3.5.5).

3.5.2.1

Aggregated Avoided Impacts and Reduced
Risks at 1.5C versus 2C of Global Warming

RFC 1 - Unique and threatened systems

WGII AR5 Chapter 19 found that some unique and threatened
systems are at risk from climate change at current temperatures,
with increasing numbers of systems at potential risk of severe
consequences at global warming of 1.6C above pre-industrial levels.
It was also observed that many species and ecosystems have a limited
ability to adapt to the very large risks associated with warming of
2.6C or more, particularly Arctic sea ice and coral reef systems (high
confidence). In the AR5 analysis, a transition from white to yellow
indicated that the onset of moderate risk was located below presentday global temperatures (medium confidence); a transition from
yellow to red indicated that the onset of high risk was located at
1.6C, and a transition from red to purple indicated that the onset
of very high risk was located at about 2.6C. This WGII AR5 analysis
already implied that there would be a significant reduction in risks
to unique and threatened systems if warming were limited to 1.5C
compared with 2C. Since AR5, evidence of present-day impacts in
these systems has continued to grow (Sections 3.4.2, 3.4.4 and 3.4.
5), whilst new evidence has also accumulated for reduced risks at
1.5C compared to 2C of warming in Arctic ecosystems (Section
3.3.9), coral reefs (Section 3.4.4) and some other unique ecosystems
(Section 3.4.3), as well as for biodiversity.
253

3

Chapter 3

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Figure 3.21 | The dependence of risks and/or impacts associated with the Reasons for Concern (RFCs) on the level of climate change, updated and adapted from WGII AR5
Ch 19, Figure 19.4 and highlighting the nature of this dependence between 0C and 2C warming above pre-industrial levels. As in the AR5, literature was used to make
expert judgements to assess the levels of global warming at which levels of impact and/or risk are undetectable (white), moderate (yellow), high (red) or very high (purple).
The colour scheme thus indicates the additional risks due to climate change. The transition from red to purple, introduced for the first time in AR4, is defined by very high risk
of severe impacts and the presence of significant irreversibility, or persistence of climate-related hazards combined with a limited ability to adapt due to the nature of the
hazard or impact. Comparison of the increase of risk across RFCs indicates the relative sensitivity of RFCs to increases in GMST. As was done previously, this assessment takes
autonomous adaptation into account, as well as limits to adaptation (RFC 1, 3, 5) independently of development pathway. The rate and timing of impacts were taken into
account in assessing RFC 1 and 5. The levels of risk illustrated reflect the judgements of the Ch 3 authors. RFC1 Unique and threatened systems: ecological and human
systems that have restricted geographic ranges constrained by climate related conditions and have high endemism or other distinctive properties. Examples include coral reefs,
the Arctic and its indigenous people, mountain glaciers and biodiversity hotspots. RFC2 Extreme weather events: risks/impacts to human health, livelihoods, assets and
ecosystems from extreme weather events such as heatwaves, heavy rain, drought and associated wildfires, and coastal flooding. RFC3 Distribution of impacts: risks/impacts
that disproportionately affect particular groups due to uneven distribution of physical climate change hazards, exposure or vulnerability. RFC4 Global aggregate impacts:
global monetary damage, global scale degradation and loss of ecosystems and biodiversity. RFC5 Large-scale singular events: are relatively large, abrupt and sometimes
irreversible changes in systems that are caused by global warming. Examples include disintegration of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. The grey bar represents the range
of GMST for the most recent decade: 2006-2015.

New literature since AR5 has provided a closer focus on the comparative
levels of risk to coral reefs at 1.5C versus 2C of global warming. As
assessed in Section 3.4.4 and Box 3.4, reaching 2C will increase the
frequency of mass coral bleaching and mortality to a point at which it
will result in the total loss of coral reefs from the world's tropical and
subtropical regions. Restricting overall warming to 1.5C will still see
a downward trend in average coral cover (70-90% decline by midcentury) but will prevent the total loss of coral reefs projected with
warming of 2C (Frieler et al., 2013). The remaining reefs at 1.5C will
also benefit from increasingly stable ocean conditions by the mid-tolate 21st century. Limiting global warming to 1.5C during the course
of the century may, therefore, open the window for many ecosystems
to adapt or reassort geographically. This indicates a transition in risk
in this system from high to very high (high confidence) at 1.5C of
warming and contributes to a lowering of the transition from high to
very high (Figure 3.21) in this RFC1 compared to in AR5. Further details
of risk transitions for ocean systems are described in Figure 3.18.
Substantial losses of Arctic Ocean summer ice were projected in
WGI AR5 for global warming of 1.6C, with a nearly ice-free Arctic
Ocean being projected for global warming of more than 2.6C.
Since AR5, the importance of a threshold between 1C and 2C has
been further emphasized in the literature, with sea ice projected to
persist throughout the year for a global warming of less than 1.5C,
254

yet chances of an ice-free Arctic during summer being high at 2C of
warming (Section 3.3.8). Less of the permafrost in the Arctic is projected
to thaw under 1.5C of warming (17-44%) compared with under 2C
(28-53%) (Section 3.3.5.2; Chadburn et al., 2017), which is expected
to reduce risks to both social and ecological systems in the Arctic. This
indicates a transition in the risk in this system from high to very high
between 1.5C and 2C of warming and contributes to a lowering of
the transition from high to very high in this RFC1 compared to in AR5.
AR5 identified a large number of threatened systems, including mountain
ecosystems, highly biodiverse tropical wet and dry forests, deserts,
freshwater systems and dune systems. These include Mediterranean
areas in Europe, Siberian, tropical and desert ecosystems in Asia,
Australian rainforests, the Fynbos and succulent Karoo areas of South
Africa, and wetlands in Ethiopia, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In all
these systems, impacts accrue with greater warming and impacts at 2C
are expected to be greater than those at 1.5C (medium confidence).
One study since AR5 has shown that constraining global warming to
1.5C would maintain the functioning of prairie pothole ecosystems
in North America in terms of their productivity and biodiversity, whilst
warming of 2C would not do so (Johnson et al., 2016). The large
proportion of insects projected to lose over half their range at 2C of
warming (25%) compared to at 1.5C (9%) also suggests a significant
loss of functionality in these threatened systems at 2C of warming,

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

owing to the critical role of insects in nutrient cycling, pollination,
detritivory and other important ecosystem processes (Section 3.4.3).
Unique and threatened systems in small island states and in systems
fed by glacier meltwater were also considered to contribute to this
RFC in AR5, but there is little new information about these systems
that pertains to 1.5C or 2C of global warming. Taken together, the
evidence suggests that the transition from high to very high risk in
unique and threatened systems occurs at a lower level of warming,
between 1.5C and 2C (high confidence), than in AR5, where this
transition was located at 2.6C. The transition from moderate to high
risk relocates very slightly from 1.6C to 1.5C (high confidence). There
is also high confidence in the location of the transition from low to
moderate risk below present-day global temperatures.

3.5.2.2

RFC 2 - Extreme weather events

Reduced risks in terms of the likelihood of occurrence of extreme
weather events are discussed in this sub-subsection for 1.5C as
compared to 2C of global warming, for those extreme events where
evidence is currently available based on the assessments of Section 3.3.
AR5 assigned a moderate level of risk from extreme weather events at
recent temperatures (1986-2005) owing to the attribution of heat and
precipitation extremes to climate change, and a transition to high risk
beginning below 1.6C of global warming based on the magnitude,
likelihood and timing of projected changes in risk associated with
extreme events, indicating more severe and widespread impacts.
The AR5 analysis already suggested a significant benefit of limiting
warming to 1.5C, as doing so might keep risks closer to the moderate
level. New literature since AR5 has provided greater confidence in a
reduced level of risks due to extreme weather events at 1.5C versus
2C of warming for some types of extremes (Section 3.3 and below;
Figure 3.21).
Temperature: It is expected that further increases in the number of
warm days/nights and decreases in the number of cold days/nights,
and an increase in the overall temperature of hot and cold extremes
would occur under 1.5C of global warming relative to pre-industrial
levels (high confidence) compared to under the present-day climate
(1C of warming), with further changes occurring towards 2C of
global warming (Section 3.3). As assessed in Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2,
impacts of 0.5C of global warming can be identified for temperature
extremes at global scales, based on observations and the analysis of
climate models. At 2C of global warming, it is likely that temperature
increases of more than 2C would occur over most land regions in
terms of extreme temperatures (up to 4C-6C depending on region
and considered extreme index) (Section 3.3.2, Table 3.2). Regional
increases in temperature extremes can be robustly limited if global
warming is constrained to 1.5C, with regional warmings of up to
3C-4.5C (Section 3.3.2, Table 3.2). Benefits obtained from this
general reduction in extremes depend to a large extent on whether the
lower range of increases in extremes at 1.5C is sufficient for critical
thresholds to be exceeded, within the context of wide-ranging aspects
such as crop yields, human health and the sustainability of ecosystems.
Heavy precipitation: AR5 assessed trends in heavy precipitation
for land regions where observational coverage was sufficient for

Chapter 3

assessment. It concluded with medium confidence that anthropogenic
forcing has contributed to a global-scale intensification of heavy
precipitation over the second half of the 20th century, for a global
warming of approximately 0.5C (Section 3.3.3). A recent observationbased study likewise showed that a 0.5C increase in global mean
temperature has had a detectable effect on changes in precipitation
extremes at the global scale (Schleussner et al., 2017), thus suggesting
that there would be detectable differences in heavy precipitation at
1.5C and 2C of global warming. These results are consistent with
analyses of climate projections, although they also highlight a large
amount of regional variation in the sensitivity of changes in heavy
precipitation (Section 3.3.3).
Droughts: When considering the difference between precipitation and
evaporation (P-E) as a function of global temperature changes, the
subtropics generally display an overall trend towards drying, whilst the
northern high latitudes display a robust response towards increased
wetting (Section 3.3.4, Figure 3.12). Limiting global mean temperature
increase to 1.5C as opposed to 2C could substantially reduce the risk
of reduced regional water availability in some regions (Section 3.3.4).
Regions that are projected to benefit most robustly from restricted
warming include the Mediterranean and southern Africa (Section
3.3.4).
Fire: Increasing evidence that anthropogenic climate change has
already caused significant increases in fire area globally (Section
3.4.3) is in line with projected fire risks. These risks are projected to
increase further under 1.5C of global warming relative to the present
day (Section 3.4.3). Under 1.2C of global warming, fire frequency
has been estimated to increase by over 37.8% of global land areas,
compared to 61.9% of global land areas under 3.5C of warming. For
in-depth discussion and uncertainty estimates, see Meehl et al. (2007),
Moritz et al. (2012) and Romero-Lankao et al. (2014).
Regarding extreme weather events (RFC2), the transition from
moderate to high risk is located between 1C and 1.5C of global
warming (Figure 3.21), which is very similar to the AR5 assessment but
is assessed with greater confidence (medium confidence). The impact
literature contains little information about the potential for human
society to adapt to extreme weather events, and hence it has not been
possible to locate the transition from high to very high risk within the
context of assessing impacts at 1.5C and 2C of global warming.
There is thus low confidence in the level at which global warming could
lead to very high risks associated with extreme weather events in the
context of this report.

3.5.2.3

RFC 3 - Distribution of impacts

Risks due to climatic change are unevenly distributed and are
generally greater at lower latitudes and for disadvantaged people and
communities in countries at all levels of development. AR5 located
the transition from undetectable to moderate risk below recent
temperatures, owing to the detection and attribution of regionally
differentiated changes in crop yields (medium to high confidence;
Figure 3.20), and new literature has continued to confirm this finding.
Based on the assessment of risks to regional crop production and
water resources, AR5 located the transition from moderate to high risk
255

3

Chapter 3

3

between 1.6C and 2.6C above pre-industrial levels. Cross-Chapter
Box 6 in this chapter highlights that at 2C of warming, new literature
shows that risks of food shortage are projected to emerge in the African
Sahel, the Mediterranean, central Europe, the Amazon, and western and
southern Africa, and that these are much larger than the corresponding
risks at 1.5C. This suggests a transition from moderate to high risk of
regionally differentiated impacts between 1.5C and 2C above preindustrial levels for food security (medium confidence) (Figure 3.20).
Reduction in the availability of water resources at 2C is projected to
be greater than 1.5C of global warming, although changes in socioeconomics could have a greater influence (Section 3.4.2), with larger
risks in the Mediterranean (Box 3.2); estimates of the magnitude of the
risks remain similar to those cited in AR5. Globally, millions of people
may be at risk from sea level rise (SLR) during the 21st century (Hinkel
et al., 2014; Hauer et al., 2016), particularly if adaptation is limited. At
2C of warming, more than 90% of global coastlines are projected to
experience SLR greater than 0.2 m, suggesting regional differences in
the risks of coastal flooding. Regionally differentiated multi-sector risks
are already apparent at 1.5C of warming, being more prevalent where
vulnerable people live, predominantly in South Asia (mostly Pakistan,
India and China), but these risks are projected to spread to sub-Saharan
Africa, the Middle East and East Asia as temperature rises, with the
world's poorest people disproportionately impacted at 2C of warming
(Byers et al., 2018). The hydrological impacts of climate change in
Europe are projected to increase in spatial extent and intensity across
increasing global warming levels of 1.5C, 2C and 3C (Donnelly et
al., 2017). Taken together, a transition from moderate to high risk is
now located between 1.5C and 2C above pre-industrial levels, based
on the assessment of risks to food security, water resources, drought,
heat exposure and coastal submergence (high confidence; Figure 3.21).

3.5.2.4

RFC 4 - Global aggregate impacts

Oppenheimer et al. (2014) explained the inclusion of non-economic
metrics related to impacts on ecosystems and species at the global
level, in addition to economic metrics in global aggregate impacts.
The degradation of ecosystem services by climate change and ocean
acidification have generally been excluded from previous global
aggregate economic analyses.
Global economic impacts: WGII AR5 found that overall global
aggregate impacts become moderate at 1C-2C of warming, and the
transition to moderate risk levels was therefore located at 1.6C above
pre-industrial levels. This was based on the assessment of literature
using model simulations which indicated that the global aggregate
economic impact will become significantly negative between 1C and
2C of warming (medium confidence), whilst there will be a further
increase in the magnitude and likelihood of aggregate economic risks
at 3C of warming (low confidence).
Since AR5, three studies have emerged using two entirely different
approaches which indicate that economic damages are projected to
be higher by 2100 if warming reaches 2C than if it is constrained
to 1.5C. The study by Warren et al. (2018c) used the integrated
assessment model PAGE09 to estimate that avoided global economic
damages of 22% (10-26%) accrue from constraining warming to
1.5C rather than 2C, 90% (77-93%) from 1.5C rather than 3.66C,
256

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

and 87% (74-91%) from 2C rather than 3.66C. In the second
study, Pretis et al. (2018) identified several regions where economic
damages are projected to be greater at 2C compared to 1.5C of
warming, further estimating that projected damages at 1.5C remain
similar to today's levels of economic damage. The third study, by M.
Burke et al. (2018) used an empirical, statistical approach and found
that limiting warming to 1.5C instead of 2C would save 1.5-2.0%
of the gross world product (GWP) by mid-century and 3.5% of the
GWP by end-of-century (see Figure 2A in M. Burke et al., 2018).
Based on a 3% discount rate, this corresponds to 8.1-11.6 trillion
USD and 38.5 trillion USD in avoided damages by mid- and end-ofcentury, respectively, agreeing closely with the estimate by Warren et
al. (2018c) of 15 trillion USD. Under the no-policy baseline scenario,
temperature rises by 3.66C by 2100, resulting in a global gross
domestic product (GDP) loss of 2.6% (5-95% percentile range 0.5-
8.2%), compared with 0.3% (0.1-0.5%) by 2100 under the 1.5C
scenario and 0.5% (0.1-1.0%) in the 2C scenario. Limiting warming
to 1.5C rather than 2C by 2060 has also been estimated to result
in co-benefits of 0.5-0.6% of the world GDP, owing to reductions in
air pollution (Shindell et al., 2018), which is similar to the avoided
damages identified for the USA (Box 3.6).
Two studies focusing only on the USA found that economic damages
are projected to be higher by 2100 if warming reaches 2C than if it
is constrained to 1.5C. Hsiang et al. (2017) found a mean difference
of 0.35% GDP (range 0.2-0.65%), while Yohe (2017) identified a GDP
loss of 1.2% per degree of warming, hence approximately 0.6% for half
a degree. Further, the avoided risks compared to a no-policy baseline
are greater in the 1.5C case (4%, range 2-7%) compared to the 2C
case (3.5%, range 1.8-6.5%). These analyses suggest that the point
at which global aggregates of economic impacts become negative is
below 2C (medium confidence), and that there is a possibility that it
is below 1.5C of warming.
Oppenheimer et al. (2014) noted that the global aggregated damages
associated with large-scale singular events has not been explored, and
reviews of integrated modelling exercises have indicated a potential
underestimation of global aggregate damages due to the lack of
consideration of the potential for these events in many studies. Since
AR5, further analyses of the potential economic consequences of
triggering these large-scale singular events have indicated a two to
eight fold larger economic impact associated with warming of 3C
than estimated in most previous analyses, with the extent of increase
depending on the number of events incorporated. Lemoine and Traeger
(2016) included only three known singular events whereas Y. Cai et al.
(2016) included five.
Biome shifts, species range loss, increased risks of species
extinction and risks of loss of ecosystem functioning and
services: 13% (range 8-20%) of Earth's land area is projected to
undergo biome shifts at 2C of warming compared to approximately
7% at 1.5C (medium confidence) (Section 3.4.3; Warszawski et al.,
2013), implying a halving of biome transformations. Overall levels of
species loss at 2C of warming are similar to values found in previous
studies for plants and vertebrates (Warren et al., 2013, 2018a), but
insects have been found to be more sensitive to climate change, with
18% (6-35%) projected to lose over half their range at 2C of warming

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

compared to 6% (1-18%) under 1.5C of warming, corresponding
to a difference of 66% (Section 3.4.3). The critical role of insects in
ecosystem functioning therefore suggests that there will be impacts
on global ecosystem functioning already at 2C of warming, whilst
species that lose large proportions of their range are considered to
be at increased risk of extinction (Section 3.4.3.3). Since AR5, new
literature has indicated that impacts on marine fish stocks and fisheries
are lower under 1.5C-2C of global warming relative to pre-industrial
levels compared to under higher warming scenarios (Section 3.4.6),
especially in tropical and polar systems.
In AR5, the transition from undetectable to moderate impacts was
considered to occur between 1.6C and 2.6C of global warming
reflecting impacts on the economy and on biodiversity globally, whereas
high risks were associated with 3.6C of warming to reflect the high
risks to biodiversity and accelerated effects on the global economy.
New evidence suggests moderate impacts on the global aggregate
economy and global biodiversity by 1.5C of warming, suggesting a
lowering of the temperature level for the transition to moderate risk
to 1.5C (Figure 3.21). Further, recent literature points to higher risks
than previously assessed for the global aggregate economy and global
biodiversity by 2C of global warming, suggesting that the transition
to a high risk level is located between 1.5C and 2.5C of warming
(Figure 3.21), as opposed to at 3.6C as previously assessed (medium
confidence).

3.5.2.5

RFC 5 - Large-scale singular events

Large-scale singular events are components of the global Earth system
that are thought to hold the risk of reaching critical tipping points
under climate change, and that can result in or be associated with
major shifts in the climate system. These components include:
* the cryosphere: West Antarctic ice sheet, Greenland ice sheet
* the thermohaline circulation: slowdown of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC)
* the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) as a global mode of
climate variability
* role of the Southern Ocean in the global carbon cycle
AR5 assessed that the risks associated with these events become
moderate between 0.6C and 1.6C above pre-industrial levels, based
on early warning signs, and that risk was expected to become high
between 1.6C and 4.6C based on the potential for commitment to
large irreversible sea level rise from the melting of land-based ice sheets
(low to medium confidence). The increase in risk between 1.6C and
2.6C above pre-industrial levels was assessed to be disproportionately
large. New findings since AR5 are described in detail below.
Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets and marine ice sheet
instability (MISI): Various feedbacks between the Greenland ice
sheet and the wider climate system, most notably those related to
the dependence of ice melt on albedo and surface elevation, make
irreversible loss of the ice sheet a possibility. Church et al. (2013)
assessed this threshold to be at 2C of warming or higher levels relative
to pre-industrial temperature. Robinson et al. (2012) found a range for
this threshold of 0.8C-3.2C (95% confidence). The threshold of global

Chapter 3

temperature increase that may initiate irreversible loss of the West
Antarctic ice sheet and marine ice sheet instability (MISI) is estimated
to lie be between 1.5C and 2C. The time scale for eventual loss of the
ice sheets varies between millennia and tens of millennia and assumes
constant surface temperature forcing during this period. If temperature
were to decline subsequently the ice sheets might regrow, although
the amount of cooling required is likely to be highly dependent on the
duration and rate of the previous retreat. The magnitude of global sea
level rise that could occur over the next two centuries under 1.5C-2C
of global warming is estimated to be in the order of several tenths of a
metre according to most studies (low confidence) (Schewe et al., 2011;
Church et al., 2013; Levermann et al., 2014; Marzeion and Levermann,
2014; Furst et al., 2015; Golledge et al., 2015), although a smaller
number of investigations (Joughin et al., 2014; Golledge et al., 2015;
DeConto and Pollard, 2016) project increases of 1-2 m. This body of
evidence suggests that the temperature range of 1.5C-2C may be
regarded as representing moderate risk, in that it may trigger MISI in
Antarctica or irreversible loss of the Greenland ice sheet and it may be
associated with sea level rise by as much as 1-2 m over a period of
two centuries.
Thermohaline circulation (slowdown of AMOC): It is more likely
than not that the AMOC has been weakening in recent decades,
given the detection of cooling of surface waters in the North Atlantic
and evidence that the Gulf Stream has slowed since the late 1950s
(Rahmstorf et al., 2015b; Srokosz and Bryden, 2015; Caesar et al.,
2018). There is limited evidence linking the recent weakening of the
AMOC to anthropogenic warming (Caesar et al., 2018). It is very likely
that the AMOC will weaken over the 21st century. Best estimates and
ranges for the reduction based on CMIP5 simulations are 11% (1-24%)
in RCP2.6 and 34% (12-54%) in RCP8.5 (AR5). There is no evidence
indicating significantly different amplitudes of AMOC weakening for
1.5C versus 2C of global warming, or of a shutdown of the AMOC at
these global temperature thresholds. Associated risks are classified as
low to moderate.
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO): Extreme El Nino events are
associated with significant warming of the usually cold eastern Pacific
Ocean, and they occur about once every 20 years (Cai et al., 2015). Such
events reorganize the distribution of regions of organized convection
and affect weather patterns across the globe. Recent research indicates
that the frequency of extreme El Nino events increases linearly with the
global mean temperature, and that the number of such events might
double (one event every ten years) under 1.5C of global warming (G.
Wang et al., 2017). This pattern is projected to persist for a century after
stabilization at 1.5C, thereby challenging the limits to adaptation, and
thus indicates high risk even at the 1.5C threshold. La Nina event
(the opposite or balancing event to El Nino) frequency is projected to
remain similar to that of the present day under 1.5C-2C of global
warming.
Role of the Southern Ocean in the global carbon cycle: The critical
role of the Southern Ocean as a net sink of carbon might decline under
global warming, and assessing this effect under 1.5C compared to
2C of global warming is a priority. Changes in ocean chemistry (e.g.,
oxygen content and ocean acidification), especially those associated
with the deep sea, are associated concerns (Section 3.3.10).
257

3

Chapter 3

For large-scale singular events (RFC5), moderate risk is now located
at 1C of warming and high risk is located at 2.5C (Figure 3.21), as
opposed to at 1.6C (moderate risk) and around 4C (high risk) in
AR5, because of new observations and models of the West Antarctic
ice sheet (medium confidence), which suggests that the ice sheet
may be in the early stages of marine ice sheet instability (MISI).
Very high risk is assessed as lying above 5C because the growing
literature on process-based projections of the West Antarctic ice sheet
predominantly supports the AR5 assessment of an MISI contribution of
several additional tenths of a metre by 2100.

3.5.3

3

Regional Economic Benefit Analysis for the 1.5C
versus 2C Global Goals

This section reviews recent literature that has estimated the economic
benefits of constraining global warming to 1.5C compared to 2C.
The focus here is on evidence pertaining to specific regions, rather
than on global aggregated benefits (Section 3.5.2.4). At 2C of global
warming, lower economic growth is projected for many countries than
at 1.5C of global warming, with low-income countries projected to
experience the greatest losses (low to medium confidence) (M. Burke
et al., 2018; Pretis et al., 2018). A critical issue for developing countries
in particular is that advantages in some sectors are projected to be
offset by increasing mitigation costs (Rogelj et al., 2013; M. Burke et
al., 2018), with food production being a key factor. That is, although
restraining the global temperature increase to 2C is projected to
reduce crop losses under climate change relative to higher levels of
warming, the associated mitigation costs may increase the risk of
hunger in low-income countries (low confidence) (Hasegawa et al.,
2016). It is likely that the even more stringent mitigation measures
required to restrict global warming to 1.5C (Rogelj et al., 2013) will
further increase these mitigation costs and impacts. International
trade in food might be a key response measure for alleviating hunger
in developing countries under 1.5C and 2C stabilization scenarios
(IFPRI, 2018).
Although warming is projected to be the highest in the Northern
Hemisphere under 1.5C or 2C of global warming, regions in
the tropics and Southern Hemisphere subtropics are projected to
experience the largest impacts on economic growth (low to medium
confidence) (Gallup et al., 1999; M. Burke et al., 2018; Pretis et al.,
2018). Despite the uncertainties associated with climate change
projections and econometrics (e.g., M. Burke et al., 2018), it is more
likely than not that there will be large differences in economic
growth under 1.5C and 2C of global warming for developing
versus developed countries (M. Burke et al., 2018; Pretis et al.,
2018). Statistically significant reductions in gross domestic product
(GDP) per capita growth are projected across much of the African
continent, Southeast Asia, India, Brazil and Mexico (low to medium
confidence). Countries in the western parts of tropical Africa are
projected to benefit most from restricting global warming to 1.5C,
as opposed to 2C, in terms of future economic growth (Pretis et al.,
2018). An important reason why developed countries in the tropics
and subtropics are projected to benefit substantially from restricting
global warming to 1.5C is that present-day temperatures in these
regions are above the threshold thought to be optimal for economic
production (M. Burke et al., 2015b, 2018).
258

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

The world's largest economies are also projected to benefit from
restricting warming to 1.5C as opposed to 2C (medium confidence),
with the likelihood of such benefits being realized estimated at
76%, 85% and 81% for the USA, China and Japan, respectively (M.
Burke et al., 2018). Two studies focusing only on the USA found that
economic damages are projected to be higher by 2100 if warming
reaches 2C than if it is constrained to 1.5C. Yohe (2017) found a
mean difference of 0.35% GDP (range 0.2-0.65%), while Hsiang
et al. (2017) identified a GDP loss of 1.2% per degree of warming,
hence approximately 0.6% for half a degree. Overall, no statistically
significant changes in GDP are projected to occur over most of the
developed world under 1.5C of global warming in comparison to
present-day conditions, but under 2C of global warming impacts on
GDP are projected to be generally negative (low confidence) (Pretis
et al., 2018).
A caveat to the analyses of Pretis et al. (2018) and M. Burke et al.
(2018) is that the effects of sea level rise were not included in the
estimations of damages or future economic growth, implying a potential
underestimation of the benefits of limiting warming to 1.5C for the
case where significant sea level rise is avoided at 1.5C but not at 2C.

3.5.4

Reducing Hotspots of Change for 1.5C and 2C
of Global Warming

This subsection integrates Sections 3.3 and 3.4 in terms of climatechange-induced hotspots that occur through interactions across the
physical climate system, ecosystems and socio-economic human
systems, with a focus on the extent to which risks can be avoided or
reduced by achieving the 1.5C global warming goal (as opposed to
the 2C goal). Findings are summarized in Table 3.6.

3.5.4.1

Arctic sea ice

Ice-free Arctic Ocean summers are very likely at levels of global
warming higher than 2C (Notz and Stroeve, 2016; Rosenblum and
Eisenman, 2016; Screen and Williamson, 2017; Niederdrenk and
Notz, 2018). Some studies even indicate that the entire Arctic Ocean
summer period will become ice free under 2C of global warming,
whilst others more conservatively estimate this probability to be in the
order of 50% (Section 3.3.8; Sanderson et al., 2017). The probability
of an ice-free Arctic in September at 1.5C of global warming is low
and substantially lower than for the case of 2C of global warming
(high confidence) (Section 3.3.8; Screen and Williamson, 2017; Jahn,
2018; Niederdrenk and Notz, 2018). There is, however, a single
study that questions the validity of the 1.5C threshold in terms of
maintaining summer Arctic Ocean sea ice (Niederdrenk and Notz,
2018). In contrast to summer, little ice is projected to be lost during
winter for either 1.5C or 2C of global warming (medium confidence)
(Niederdrenk and Notz, 2018). The losses in sea ice at 1.5C and
2C of warming will result in habitat losses for organisms such as
seals, polar bears, whales and sea birds (e.g., Larsen et al., 2014).
There is high agreement and robust evidence that photosynthetic
species will change because of sea ice retreat and related changes
in temperature and radiation (Section 3.4.4.7), and this is very likely
to benefit fisheries productivity in the Northern Hemisphere spring
bloom system (Section 3.4.4.7).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.5.4.2

Arctic land regions

In some Arctic land regions, the warming of cold extremes and the
increase in annual minimum temperature at 1.5C are stronger than
the global mean temperature increase by a factor of two to three,
meaning 3C-4.5C of regional warming at 1.5C of global warming
(e.g., northern Europe in Supplementary Material 3.SM, Figure 3.SM.5
see also Section 3.3.2.2 and Seneviratne et al., 2016). Moreover, over
much of the Arctic, a further increase of 0.5C in the global surface
temperature, from 1.5C to 2C, may lead to further temperature
increases of 2C-2.5C (Figure 3.3). As a consequence, biome (major
ecosystem type) shifts are likely in the Arctic, with increases in fire
frequency, degradation of permafrost, and tree cover likely to occur at
1.5C of warming and further amplification of these changes expected
under 2C of global warming (e.g., Gerten et al., 2013; Bring et al.,
2016). Rising temperatures, thawing permafrost and changing weather
patterns are projected to increasingly impact people, infrastructure and
industries in the Arctic (W.N. Meier et al., 2014) with these impacts
larger at 2C than at 1.5C of warming (medium confidence).

3.5.4.3

Alpine regions

Alpine regions are generally regarded as climate change hotspots
given that rich biodiversity has evolved in their cold and harsh climate,
but with many species consequently being vulnerable to increases in
temperature. Under regional warming, alpine species have been found
to migrate upwards on mountain slopes (Reasoner and Tinner, 2009),
an adaptation response that is obviously limited by mountain height
and habitability. Moreover, many of the world's alpine regions are
important from a water security perspective through associated glacier
melt, snow melt and river flow (see Section 3.3.5.2 for a discussion of
these aspects). Projected biome shifts are likely to be severe in alpine
regions already at 1.5C of warming and to increase further at 2C
(Gerten et al., 2013, Figure 1b; B. Chen et al., 2014).

3.5.4.4

Southeast Asia

Southeast Asia is a region highly vulnerable to increased flooding in
the context of sea level rise (Arnell et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2016,
2018a). Risks from increased flooding are projected to rise from 1.5C
to 2C of warming (medium confidence), with substantial increases
projected beyond 2C (Arnell et al., 2016). Southeast Asia displays
statistically significant differences in projected changes in heavy
precipitation, runoff and high flows at 1.5C versus 2C of warming,
with stronger increases occurring at 2C (Section 3.3.3; Wartenburger
et al., 2017; Doll et al., 2018; Seneviratne et al., 2018c); thus, this region
is considered a hotspot in terms of increases in heavy precipitation
between these two global temperature levels (medium confidence)
(Schleussner et al., 2016b; Seneviratne et al., 2016). For Southeast Asia,
2C of warming by 2040 could lead to a decline by one-third in per
capita crop production associated with general decreases in crop yields
(Nelson et al., 2010). However, under 1.5C of warming, significant
risks for crop yield reduction in the region are avoided (Schleussner et
al., 2016b). These changes pose significant risks for poor people in both
rural regions and urban areas of Southeast Asia (Section 3.4.10.1), with
these risks being larger at 2C of global warming compared to 1.5C
(medium confidence).

Chapter 3

3.5.4.5

Southern Europe and the Mediterranean

The Mediterranean is regarded as a climate change hotspot, both in
terms of projected stronger warming of the regional land-based hot
extremes compared to the mean global temperature increase (e.g.,
Seneviratne et al., 2016) and in terms of of robust increases in the
probability of occurrence of extreme droughts at 2C vs 1.5C global
warming (Section 3.3.4). Low river flows are projected to decrease in
the Mediterranean under 1.5C of global warming (Marx et al., 2018),
with associated significant decreases in high flows and floods (Thober
et al., 2018), largely in response to reduced precipitation. The median
reduction in annual runoff is projected to almost double from about
9% (likely range 4.5-15.5%) at 1.5C to 17% (likely range 8-25%)
at 2C (Schleussner et al., 2016b). Similar results were found by Doll
et al. (2018). Overall, there is high confidence that strong increases in
dryness and decreases in water availability in the Mediterranean and
southern Europe would occur from 1.5C to 2C of global warming. Sea
level rise is expected to be lower for 1.5C versus 2C, lowering risks
for coastal metropolitan agglomerations. The risks (assuming current
adaptation) related to water deficit in the Mediterranean are high for
global warming of 2C but could be substantially reduced if global
warming were limited to 1.5C (Section 3.3.4; Guiot and Cramer, 2016;
Schleussner et al., 2016b; Donnelly et al., 2017).

3.5.4.6

West Africa and the Sahel

West Africa and the Sahel are likely to experience increases in the
number of hot nights and longer and more frequent heatwaves
even if the global temperature increase is constrained to 1.5C, with
further increases expected at 2C of global warming and beyond
(e.g., Weber et al., 2018). Moreover, daily rainfall intensity and runoff
is expected to increase (low confidence) towards 2C and higher
levels of global warming (Schleussner et al., 2016b; Weber et al.,
2018), with these changes also being relatively large compared to
the projected changes at 1.5C of warming. Moreover, increased risks
are projected in terms of drought, particularly for the pre-monsoon
season (Sylla et al., 2015), with both rural and urban populations
affected, and more so at 2C of global warming as opposed to 1.5C
(Liu et al., 2018). Based on a World Bank (2013) study for sub-Saharan
Africa, a 1.5C warming by 2030 might reduce the present maize
cropping areas by 40%, rendering these areas no longer suitable
for current cultivars. Substantial negative impacts are also projected
for sorghum suitability in the western Sahel (Laderach et al., 2013;
Sultan and Gaetani, 2016). An increase in warming to 2C by 2040
would result in further yield losses and damages to crops (i.e., maize,
sorghum, wheat, millet, groundnut and cassava). Schleussner et al.
(2016b) found consistently reduced impacts on crop yield for West
Africa under 2C compared to 1.5C of global warming. There is
medium confidence that vulnerabilities to water and food security in
the African Sahel will be higher at 2C compared to 1.5C of global
warming (Cheung et al., 2016a; Betts et al., 2018), and at 2C these
vulnerabilities are expected to be worse (high evidence) (Sultan and
Gaetani, 2016; Lehner et al., 2017; Betts et al., 2018; Byers et al.,
2018; Rosenzweig et al., 2018). Under global warming of more than
2C, the western Sahel might experience the strongest drying and
experience serious food security issues (Ahmed et al., 2015; Parkes
et al., 2018).
259

3

Chapter 3

3.5.4.7

Southern Africa

The southern African region is projected to be a climate change hotspot
in terms of both hot extremes (Figures 3.5 and 3.6) and drying (Figure
3.12). Indeed, temperatures have been rising in the subtropical regions
of southern Africa at approximately twice the global rate over the last
five decades (Engelbrecht et al., 2015). Associated elevated warming
of the regional land-based hot extremes has occurred (Section 3.3;
Seneviratne et al., 2016). Increases in the number of hot nights, as
well as longer and more frequent heatwaves, are projected even if the
global temperature increase is constrained to 1.5C (high confidence),
with further increases expected at 2C of global warming and beyond
(high confidence) (Weber et al., 2018).

3

Moreover, southern Africa is likely to generally become drier with
reduced water availability under low mitigation (Niang et al., 2014;
Engelbrecht et al., 2015; Karl et al., 2015; James et al., 2017), with
this particular risk being prominent under 2C of global warming and
even under 1.5C (Gerten et al., 2013). Risks are significantly reduced,
however, under 1.5C of global warming compared to under higher
levels (Schleussner et al., 2016b). There are consistent and statistically
significant increases in projected risks of increased meteorological
drought in southern Africa at 2C versus 1.5C of warming (medium
confidence). Despite the general rainfall reductions projected for
southern Africa, daily rainfall intensities are expected to increase over
much of the region (medium confidence), and increasingly so with
higher levels of global warming. There is medium confidence that
livestock in southern Africa will experience increased water stress
under both 1.5C and 2C of global warming, with negative economic
consequences (e.g., Boone et al., 2018). The region is also projected
to experience reduced maize, sorghum and cocoa cropping area
suitability, as well as yield losses under 1.5C of warming, with further
decreases occurring towards 2C of warming (World Bank, 2013).
Generally, there is high confidence that vulnerability to decreases in
water and food availability is reduced at 1.5C versus 2C for southern
Africa (Betts et al., 2018), whilst at 2C these are expected to be higher
(high confidence) (Lehner et al., 2017; Betts et al., 2018; Byers et al.,
2018; Rosenzweig et al., 2018).

3.5.4.8

Tropics

Worldwide, the largest increases in the number of hot days are
projected to occur in the tropics (Figure 3.7). Moreover, the largest
differences in the number of hot days for 1.5C versus 2C of global
warming are projected to occur in the tropics (Mahlstein et al., 2011).
In tropical Africa, increases in the number of hot nights, as well as
longer and more frequent heatwaves, are projected under 1.5C of
global warming, with further increases expected under 2C of global
warming (Weber et al., 2018). Impact studies for major tropical cereals
reveal that yields of maize and wheat begin to decline with 1C to 2C
of local warming in the tropics. Schleussner et al. (2016b) project that
constraining warming to 1.5C rather than 2C would avoid significant
risks of tropical crop yield declines in West Africa, Southeast Asia, and
Central and South America. There is limited evidence and thus low
confidence that these changes may result in significant population
displacement from the tropics to the subtropics (e.g., Hsiang and Sobel,
2016).
260

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.5.4.9

Small islands

It is widely recognized that small islands are very sensitive to climate
change impacts such as sea level rise, oceanic warming, heavy
precipitation, cyclones and coral bleaching (high confidence) (Nurse et
al., 2014; Ourbak and Magnan, 2017). Even at 1.5C of global warming,
the compounding impacts of changes in rainfall, temperature, tropical
cyclones and sea level are likely to be significant across multiple
natural and human systems. There are potential benefits to small
island developing states (SIDS) from avoided risks at 1.5C versus
2C, especially when coupled with adaptation efforts. In terms of sea
level rise, by 2150, roughly 60,000 fewer people living in SIDS will be
exposed in a 1.5C world than in a 2C world (Rasmussen et al., 2018).
Constraining global warming to 1.5C may significantly reduce water
stress (by about 25%) compared to the projected water stress at 2C,
for example in the Caribbean region (Karnauskas et al., 2018), and may
enhance the ability of SIDS to adapt (Benjamin and Thomas, 2016). Up
to 50% of the year is projected to be very warm in the Caribbean at
1.5C, with a further increase by up to 70 days at 2C versus 1.5C
(Taylor et al., 2018). By limiting warming to 1.5C instead of 2C in
2050, risks of coastal flooding (measured as the flood amplification
factors for 100-year flood events) are reduced by 20-80% for SIDS
(Rasmussen et al., 2018). A case study of Jamaica with lessons for
other Caribbean SIDS demonstrated that the difference between 1.5C
and 2C is likely to challenge livestock thermoregulation, resulting in
persistent heat stress for livestock (Lallo et al., 2018).

3.5.4.10 Fynbos and shrub biomes
The Fynbos and succulent Karoo biomes of South Africa are
threatened systems that were assessed in AR5. Similar shrublands
exist in the semi-arid regions of other continents, with the SonoraMojave creosotebush-white bursage desert scrub ecosystem in the
USA being a prime example. Impacts accrue across these systems
with greater warming, with impacts at 2C likely to be greater than
those at 1.5C (medium confidence). Under 2C of global warming,
regional warming in drylands is projected to be 3.2C-4C, and under
1.5C of global warming, mean warming in drylands is projected to
still be about 3C. The Fynbos biome in southwestern South Africa
is vulnerable to the increasing impact of fires under increasing
temperatures and drier winters (high confidence). The Fynbos biome
is projected to lose about 20%, 45% and 80% of its current suitable
climate area relative to its present-day area under 1C, 2C and
3C of warming, respectively (Engelbrecht and Engelbrecht, 2016),
demonstrating the value of climate change mitigation in protecting
this rich centre of biodiversity.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Table 3.6 | Emergence and intensity of climate change hotspots under different degrees of global warming.
Region and/or
Phenomenon

Arctic sea ice

Arctic land regions

Alpine regions

Southeast Asia

Mediterranean

West Africa and
the Sahel

Warming of 1.5C or less

The risk of an ice-free Arctic in summer is about 50%
or higher

The Arctic is very likely to be ice free in summer

Habitat losses for organisms such as polar bears,
whales, seals and sea birds

Habitat losses for organisms such as polar bears,
whales,seals and sea birds may be critical if
summers are ice free

Critical habitat losses for organisms such as
polar bears, whales, seals and sea birds

Benefits for Arctic fisheries

Benefits for Arctic fisheries

Benefits for Arctic fisheries

Cold extremes warm by a factor of 2-3, reaching
up to 4.5C (high confidence)

Cold extremes warm by as much as 8C
(high confidence)

Drastic regional warming is very likely

Biome shifts in the tundra and permafrost
deterioration are likely

Larger intrusions of trees and shrubs in the tundra
than under 1.5C of warming are likely; larger
but constrained losses in permafrost are likely

A collapse in permafrost may occur (low
confidence); a drastic biome shift from tundra
to boreal forest is possible (low confidence)

Severe shifts in biomes are likely

Even more severe shifts are likely

Critical losses in alpine habitats are likely

Risks for increased flooding related to sea level rise

Higher risks of increased flooding related
to sea level rise (medium confidence)

Substantial increases in risks related to flooding
from sea level rise

Increases in heavy precipitation events

Stronger increases in heavy precipitation events
(medium confidence)

Substantial increase in heavy precipitation
and high-flow events

Significant risks of crop yield reductions are avoided

One-third decline in per capita crop production
(medium confidence)

Substantial reductions in crop yield

Increase in probability of extreme
drought (medium confidence)

Robust increase in probability of extreme
drought (medium confidence)

Medium confidence in reduction in runoff
of about 9% (likely range 4.5-15.5%)

Medium confidence in further reductions
(about 17%) in runoff (likely range 8-28%)

Robust and large increases in extreme
drought. Substantial reductions in precipitation
and in runoff (medium confidence)

Risk of water deficit (medium confidence)

Higher risks of water deficit (medium confidence)

Very high risks of water deficit (medium confidence)

Increases in the number of hot nights and longer
and more frequent heatwaves are likely

Further increases in number of hot nights and
longer and more frequent heatwaves are likely

Substantial increases in the number of hot nights
and heatwave duration and frequency (very likely)

Reduced maize and sorghum production is likely,
with area suitable for maize production reduced
by as much as 40%

Negative impacts on maize and sorghum production
likely larger than at 1.5C; medium confidence
that vulnerabilities to food security in the African
Sahel will be higher at 2C compared to 1.5C

Negative impacts on crop yield may result in major
regional food insecurities (medium confidence)

Increased risks of undernutrition

Higher risks of undernutrition

High risks of undernutrition

Reductions in water availability (medium confidence)

Larger reductions in rainfall and water
availability (medium confidence)

Large reductions in rainfall and water
availability (medium confidence)

Increases in number of hot nights and longer and
more frequent heatwaves (high confidence)

Further increases in number of hot nights and
longer and more frequent heatwaves (high
confidence), associated increases in risks of
increased mortality from heatwaves compared
to 1.5C warming (high confidence)

Drastic increases in the number of hot nights, hot
days and heatwave duration and frequency to
impact substantially on agriculture, livestock and
human health and mortality (high confidence)

High risk of undernutrition in communities
dependent on dryland agriculture and livestock

Higher risks of undernutrition in communities
dependent on dryland agriculture and livestock

Very high risks of undernutrition in communities
dependent on dryland agriculture and livestock

Increases in the number of hot days and hot nights
as well as longer and more frequent heatwaves
(high confidence)

The largest increase in hot days under 2C compared
to 1.5C is projected for the tropics.

Oppressive temperatures and accumulated
heatwave duration very likely to directly impact
human health, mortality and productivity

Risks to tropical crop yields in West Africa,
Southeast Asia and Central and South America
are significantly less than under 2C of warming

Risks to tropical crop yields in West Africa,
Southeast Asia and Central and South America
could be extensive

Substantial reductions in crop yield very likely

Land of 60,000 less people exposed by 2150 on SIDS
compared to impacts under 2C of global warming

Tens of thousands of people displaced owing to
inundation of SIDS

Risks for coastal flooding reduced by 20-80%
for SIDS compared to 2C of global warming

High risks for coastal flooding

Substantial and widespread impacts
through inundation of SIDS, coastal flooding,
freshwater stress, persistent heat stress and
loss of most coral reefs (very likely)

Freshwater stress reduced by 25%

Freshwater stress reduced by 25% compared to
2C of global warming

High risks of increased mortality from heatwaves

Small islands

Fynbos biome

Warming of 2C-3C

Arctic summer sea ice is likely to be maintained

Southern Africa

Tropics

Warming of 1.5C-2C

Freshwater stress from projected aridity
Increase in the number of warm days for SIDS
in the tropics

Further increase of about 70 warm days per year

Persistent heat stress in cattle avoided

Persistent heat stress in cattle in SIDS

Loss of 70-90% of coral reefs

Loss of most coral reefs and weaker remaining
structures owing to ocean acidification

About 30% of suitable climate area lost
(medium confidence)

Increased losses (about 45%) of suitable climate
area (medium confidence)

Up to 80% of suitable climate area lost
(medium confidence)

261

3

Chapter 3

3.5.5

Avoiding Regional Tipping Points by Achieving
More Ambitious Global Temperature Goals

Tipping points refer to critical thresholds in a system that, when exceeded,
can lead to a significant change in the state of the system, often with an
understanding that the change is irreversible. An understanding of the
sensitivities of tipping points in the physical climate system, as well as in
ecosystems and human systems, is essential for understanding the risks
associated with different degrees of global warming. This subsection
reviews tipping points across these three areas within the context
of the different sensitivities to 1.5C versus 2C of global warming.
Sensitivities to less ambitious global temperature goals are also briefly
reviewed. Moreover, an analysis is provided of how integrated risks
across physical, natural and human systems may accumulate to lead
to the exceedance of thresholds for particular systems. The emphasis in
this section is on the identification of regional tipping points and their
sensitivity to 1.5C and 2C of global warming, whereas tipping points
in the global climate system, referred to as large-scale singular events,
were already discussed in Section 3.5.2. A summary of regional tipping
points is provided in Table 3.7.

3.5.5.1

3

Arctic sea ice

Collins et al. (2013) discussed the loss of Artic sea ice in the context
of potential tipping points. Climate models have been used to assess
whether a bifurcation exists that would lead to the irreversible loss
of Arctic sea ice (Armour et al., 2011; Boucher et al., 2012; Ridley et
al., 2012) and to test whether the summer sea ice extent can recover
after it has been lost (Schroder and Connolley, 2007; Sedlaek et al.,
2011; Tietsche et al., 2011). These studies did not find evidence of
bifurcation or indicate that sea ice returns within a few years of its loss,
leading Collins et al. (2013) to conclude that there is little evidence
for a tipping point in the transition from perennial to seasonal ice
cover. No evidence has been found for irreversibility or tipping points,
suggesting that year-round sea ice will return given a suitable climate
(medium confidence) (Schroder and Connolley, 2007; Sedlaek et al.,
2011; Tietsche et al., 2011).

3.5.5.2

Tundra

Tree growth in tundra-dominated landscapes is strongly constrained by
the number of days with mean air temperature above 0C. A potential
tipping point exists where the number of days below 0C decreases
to the extent that the tree fraction increases significantly. Tundradominated landscapes have warmed more than the global average
over the last century (Settele et al., 2014), with associated increases
in fires and permafrost degradation (Bring et al., 2016; DeBeer et al.,
2016; Jiang et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016). These processes facilitate
conditions for woody species establishment in tundra areas, and for
the eventual transition of the tundra to boreal forest. The number of
investigations into how the tree fraction may respond in the Arctic to
different degrees of global warming is limited, and studies generally
indicate that substantial increases will likely occur gradually (e.g.,
Lenton et al., 2008). Abrupt changes are only plausible at levels of
warming significantly higher than 2C (low confidence) and would
occur in conjunction with a collapse in permafrost (Drijfhout et al.,
2015).
262

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.5.5.3

Permafrost

Widespread thawing of permafrost potentially makes a large carbon
store (estimated to be twice the size of the atmospheric store; Dolman
et al., 2010) vulnerable to decomposition, which could lead to further
increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide and methane and hence to
further global warming. This feedback loop between warming and the
release of greenhouse gas from thawing tundra represents a potential
tipping point. However, the carbon released to the atmosphere from
thawing permafrost is projected to be restricted to 0.09-0.19 Gt C yr-1
at 2C of global warming and to 0.08-0.16 Gt C yr-1 at 1.5C (E.J.
Burke et al., 2018), which does not indicate a tipping point (medium
confidence). At higher degrees of global warming, in the order of
3C, a different type of tipping point in permafrost may be reached.
A single model projection (Drijfhout et al., 2015) suggested that
higher temperatures may induce a smaller ice fraction in soils in the
tundra, leading to more rapidly warming soils and a positive feedback
mechanism that results in permafrost collapse (low confidence). The
disparity between the multi-millennial time scales of soil carbon
accumulation and potentially rapid decomposition in a warming
climate implies that the loss of this carbon to the atmosphere would
be essentially irreversible (Collins et al., 2013).

3.5.5.4

Asian monsoon

At a fundamental level, the pressure gradient between the Indian Ocean
and Asian continent determines the strength of the Asian monsoon. As
land masses warm faster than the oceans, a general strengthening of
this gradient, and hence of monsoons, may be expected under global
warming (e.g., Lenton et al., 2008). Additional factors such as changes
in albedo induced by aerosols and snow-cover change may also affect
temperature gradients and consequently pressure gradients and the
strength of the monsoon. In fact, it has been estimated that an increase
of the regional land mass albedo to 0.5 over India would represent a
tipping point resulting in the collapse of the monsoon system (Lenton
et al., 2008). The overall impacts of the various types of radiative
forcing under different emissions scenarios are more subtle, with a
weakening of the monsoon north of about 25N in East Asia but a
strengthening south of this latitude projected by Jiang and Tian (2013)
under high and modest emissions scenarios. Increases in the intensity
of monsoon precipitation are likely under low mitigation (AR5). Given
that scenarios of 1.5C or 2C of global warming would include a
substantially smaller radiative forcing than those assessed in the study
by Jiang and Tian (2013), there is low confidence regarding changes in
monsoons at these low global warming levels, as well as regarding the
differences between responses at 1.5C versus 2C of warming.

3.5.5.5

West African monsoon and the Sahel

Earlier work has identified 3C of global warming as the tipping point
leading to a significant strengthening of the West African monsoon and
subsequent wettening (and greening) of the Sahel and Sahara (Lenton
et al., 2008). AR5 (Niang et al., 2014), as well as more recent research
through the Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment for Africa
(CORDEX-AFRICA), provides a more uncertain view, however, in terms
of the rainfall futures of the Sahel under low mitigation futures. Even
if a wetter Sahel should materialize under 3C of global warming (low

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

confidence), it should be noted that there would be significant offsets
in the form of strong regional warming and related adverse impacts
on crop yield, livestock mortality and human health under such low
mitigation futures (Engelbrecht et al., 2015; Sylla et al., 2016; Weber
et al., 2018).

3.5.5.6

Rainforests

A large portion of rainfall over the world's largest rainforests is
recirculated (e.g., Lenton et al., 2008), which raises the concern that
deforestation may trigger a threshold in reduced forest cover, leading
to pronounced forest dieback. For the Amazon, this deforestation
threshold has been estimated to be 40% (Nobre et al., 2016). Global
warming of 3C-4C may also, independent of deforestation, represent
a tipping point that results in a significant dieback of the Amazon
forest, with a key forcing mechanism being stronger El Nino events
bringing more frequent droughts to the region (Nobre et al., 2016).
Increased fire frequencies under global warming may interact with and
accelerate deforestation, particularly during periods of El Nino-induced
droughts (Lenton et al., 2008; Nobre et al., 2016). Global warming of
3C is projected to reduce the extent of tropical rainforest in Central
America, with biomass being reduced by about 40%, which can lead
to a large replacement of rainforest by savanna and grassland (Lyra et
al., 2017). Overall, modelling studies (Huntingford et al., 2013; Nobre
et al., 2016) and observational constraints (Cox et al., 2013) suggest
that pronounced rainforest dieback may only be triggered at 3C-4C
(medium confidence), although pronounced biomass losses may occur
at 1.5C- 2C of global warming.

3.5.5.7

Boreal forests

Boreal forests are likely to experience stronger local warming than the
global average (WGII AR5; Collins et al., 2013). Increased disturbance
from fire, pests and heat-related mortality may affect, in particular, the
southern boundary of boreal forests (medium confidence) (Gauthier
et al., 2015), with these impacts accruing with greater warming and
thus impacts at 2C would be expected to be greater than those at
1.5C (medium confidence). A tipping point for significant dieback of
the boreal forests is thought to exist, where increased tree mortality
would result in the creation of large regions of open woodlands
and grasslands, which would favour further regional warming and
increased fire frequencies, thus inducing a powerful positive feedback
mechanism (Lenton et al., 2008; Lenton, 2012). This tipping point has
been estimated to exist between 3C and 4C of global warming
(low confidence) (Lucht et al., 2006; Kriegler et al., 2009), but given
the complexities of the various forcing mechanisms and feedback
processes involved, this is thought to be an uncertain estimate.

3.5.5.8

Heatwaves, unprecedented heat and human health

Chapter 3

in the occurrence of deadly heatwaves in cities if urban heat island
effects are considered, with impacts being similar at 1.5C and 2C but
substantially larger than under the present climate (Matthews et al.,
2017). At 1.5C of warming, twice as many megacities (such as Lagos,
Nigeria, and Shanghai, China) than at present are likely to become heat
stressed, potentially exposing more than 350 million more people to
deadly heat stress by 2050. At 2C of warming, Karachi (Pakistan) and
Kolkata (India) could experience conditions equivalent to their deadly
2015 heatwaves on an annual basis (medium confidence). These
statistics imply a tipping point in the extent and scale of heatwave
impacts. However, these projections do not integrate adaptation to
projected warming, for instance cooling that could be achieved with
more reflective roofs and urban surfaces in general (Akbari et al., 2009;
Oleson et al., 2010).

3.5.5.9

Agricultural systems: key staple crops

A large number of studies have consistently indicated that maize crop
yield will be negatively affected under increased global warming, with
negative impacts being higher at 2C of warming than at 1.5C (e.g.,
Niang et al., 2014; Schleussner et al., 2016b; J. Huang et al., 2017;
Iizumi et al., 2017). Under 2C of global warming, losses of 8-14%
are projected in global maize production (Bassu et al., 2014). Under
global warming of more than 2C, regional losses are projected to
be about 20% if they co-occur with reductions in rainfall (Lana et al.,
2017). These changes may be classified as incremental rather than
representing a tipping point. Large-scale reductions in maize crop yield,
including the potential collapse of this crop in some regions, may exist
under 3C or more of global warming (low confidence) (e.g., Thornton
et al., 2011).

3.5.5.10 Agricultural systems: livestock in the tropics and
subtropics
The potential impacts of climate change on livestock (Section 3.4.6),
in particular the direct impacts through increased heat stress, have
been less well studied than impacts on crop yield, especially from
the perspective of critical thresholds being exceeded. A case study
from Jamaica revealed that the difference in heat stress for livestock
between 1.5C and 2C of warming is likely to exceed the limits for
normal thermoregulation and result in persistent heat stress for these
animals (Lallo et al., 2018). It is plausible that this finding holds for
livestock production in both tropical and subtropical regions more
generally (medium confidence) (Section 3.4.6). Under 3C of global
warming, significant reductions in the areas suitable for livestock
production could occur (low confidence), owing to strong increases in
regional temperatures in the tropics and subtropics (high confidence).
Thus, regional tipping points in the viability of livestock production may
well exist, but little evidence quantifying such changes exists.

Increases in ambient temperature are linearly related to hospitalizations
and deaths once specific thresholds are exceeded (so there is not a
tipping point per se). It is plausible that coping strategies will not
be in place for many regions, with potentially significant impacts on
communities with low adaptive capacity, effectively representing the
occurrence of a local/regional tipping point. In fact, even if global
warming is restricted to below 2C, there could be a substantial increase
263

3

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Table 3.7 | Summary of enhanced risks in the exceedance of regional tipping points under different global temperature goals.
Tipping point

Arctic sea ice

Tundra

Warming of 1.5C or less

Asian monsoon

West African monsoon
and the Sahel

Arctic is very likely to be ice free in summer

Sea ice changes reversible under suitable climate
restoration

Sea ice changes reversible under suitable climate
restoration

Sea ice changes reversible under suitable climate
restoration

Decrease in number of growing degree days
below 0C

Further decreases in number of growing degree
days below 0C

Abrupt increases in tree cover are unlikely

Abrupt increased in tree cover are unlikely

Potential for an abrupt increase in tree fraction
(low confidence)

17-44% reduction in permafrost

28-53% reduction in permafrost

Potential for permafrost collapse (low confidence)

Approximately 2 million km more
permafrost maintained than under 2C of
global warming (medium confidence)
Irreversible loss of stored carbon

Irreversible loss of stored carbon

Low confidence in projected changes

Low confidence in projected changes

Increases in the intensity of
monsoon precipitation likely

Uncertain changes; unlikely that a tipping point is
reached

Uncertain changes; unlikely that tipping point is
reached

Strengthening of monsoon with
wettening and greening of the Sahel
and Sahara (low confidence)
Negative associated impacts through increases
in extreme temperature events

Reduced biomass, deforestation and fire
increases pose uncertain risks to forest dieback

3

Warming of up to 3C

The risk of an ice-free Arctic in summer is about
50% or higher

2

Permafrost

Warming of 1.5C-2C

Arctic summer sea ice is likely to be maintained

Rainforests

Larger biomass reductions than under 1.5C of
warming; deforestation and fire increases pose
uncertain risk to forest dieback

Reduced extent of tropical rainforest in Central
America and large replacement of rainforest
by savanna and grassland
Potential tipping point leading to pronounced
forest dieback (medium confidence)

Boreal forests

Heatwaves, unprecedented
heat and human health

Increased tree mortality at southern boundary of
boreal forest (medium confidence)

Further increases in tree mortality at southern
boundary of boreal forest (medium confidence)

Potential tipping point at 3C-4C for significant
dieback of boreal forest (low confidence)

Substantial increase in occurrence of potentially
deadly heatwaves (likely)

Substantial increase in potentially deadly
heatwaves (likely)

Substantial increase in potentially deadly
heatwaves very likely

More than 350 million more people exposed to
deadly heat by 2050 under a midrange
population growth scenario (likely)

Annual occurrence of heatwaves similar to the
deadly 2015 heatwaves in India and Pakistan
(medium confidence)

Global maize crop reductions of about 10%

Larger reductions in maize crop production than
under 1.5C of about 15%

Agricultural systems:
key staple crops
Livestock in the tropics
and subtropics

Drastic reductions in maize crop globally
and in Africa (high confidence)
Potential tipping point for collapse of maize
crop in some regions (low confidence)

Increased heat stress

Onset of persistent heat stress
(medium confidence)

Persistent heat stress likely

Box 3.6 | Economic Damages from Climate Change
Balancing the costs and benefits of mitigation is challenging because estimating the value of climate change damages depends on
multiple parameters whose appropriate values have been debated for decades (for example, the appropriate value of the discount rate)
or that are very difficult to quantify (for example, the value of non-market impacts; the economic effects of losses in ecosystem services;
and the potential for adaptation, which is dependent on the rate and timing of climate change and on the socio-economic content). See
Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 2 for the definition of the social cost of carbon and for a discussion of the economics of 1.5C-consistent
pathways and the social cost of carbon, including the impacts of inequality on the social cost of carbon.
Global economic damages of climate change are projected to be smaller under warming of 1.5C than 2C in 2100 (Warren et al.,
2018c). The mean net present value of the costs of damages from warming in 2100 for 1.5C and. 2C (including costs associated
with climate change-induced market and non-market impacts, impacts due to sea level rise, and impacts associated with large-scale
discontinuities) are $54 and $69 trillion, respectively, relative to 1961-1990.

264

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Box 3.6 (continued)

Values of the social cost of carbon vary when tipping points are included. The social cost of carbon in the default setting of the Dynamic
Integrated Climate-Economy (DICE) model increases from $15 tCO2-1 to $116 (range 50-166) tCO2-1 when large-scale singularities or
`tipping elements' are incorporated (Y. Cai et al., 2016; Lemoine and Traeger, 2016). Lemoine and Traeger (2016) included optimization
calculations that minimize welfare impacts resulting from the combination of climate change risks and climate change mitigation costs,
showing that welfare is minimized if warming is limited to 1.5C. These calculations excluded the large health co-benefits that accrue
when greenhouse gas emissions are reduced (Section 3.4.7.1; Shindell et al., 2018).
The economic damages of climate change in the USA are projected to be large (Hsiang et al., 2017; Yohe, 2017). Hsiang et al. (2017)
shows that the USA stand to lose -0.1 to 1.7% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at 1.5C warming. Yohe (2017) calculated transient
temperature trajectories from a linear relationship with contemporaneous cumulative emissions under a median no-policy baseline
trajectory that brings global emissions to roughly 93 GtCO2 yr-1 by the end of the century (Fawcett et al., 2015), with 1.75C per 1000
GtCO2 as the median estimate. Associated aggregate economic damages in decadal increments through the year 2100 are estimated
in terms of the percentage loss of GDP at the median, 5th percentile and 95th percentile transient temperature (Hsiang et al., 2017).
The results for the baseline no-policy case indicate that economic damages along median temperature change and median damages
(median-median) reach 4.5% of GDP by 2100, with an uncertainty range of 2.5% and 8.5% resulting from different combinations of
temperature change and damages. Avoided damages from achieving a 1.5C temperature limit along the median-median case are
nearly 4% (range 2-7%) by 2100. Avoided damages from achieving a 2C temperature limit are only 3.5% (range 1.8-6.5%). Avoided
damages from achieving 1.5C versus 2C are modest at about 0.35% (range 0.20-0.65%) by 2100. The values of achieving the two
temperature limits do not diverge significantly until 2040, when their difference tracks between 0.05 and 0.13%; the differences
between the two temperature targets begin to diverge substantially in the second half of the century.

3
3.6

Implications of Different 1.5C and 2C
Pathways

This section provides an overview on specific aspects of the mitigation
pathways considered compatible with 1.5C of global warming. Some
of these aspects are also addressed in more detail in Cross-Chapter
Boxes 7 and 8 in this chapter.

3.6.1

Gradual versus Overshoot in 1.5C Scenarios

All 1.5C scenarios from Chapter 2 include some overshoot above
1.5C of global warming during the 21st century (Chapter 2 and CrossChapter Box 8 in this chapter). The level of overshoot may also depend
on natural climate variability. An overview of possible outcomes of
1.5C-consistent mitigation scenarios for changes in the physical
climate at the time of overshoot and by 2100 is provided in CrossChapter Box 8 on `1.5C warmer worlds'. Cross-Chapter Box 8 also
highlights the implications of overshoots.

3.6.2
3.6.2.1

Non-CO2 Implications and Projected Risks of
Mitigation Pathways
Risks arising from land-use changes
in mitigation pathways

In mitigation pathways, land-use change is affected by many different
mitigation options. First, mitigation of non-CO2 emissions from
agricultural production can shift agricultural production between
regions via trade of agricultural commodities. Second, protection of
carbon-rich ecosystems such as tropical forests constrains the area
for agricultural expansion. Third, demand-side mitigation measures,

such as less consumption of resource-intensive commodities (animal
products) or reductions in food waste, reduce pressure on land (Popp
et al., 2017; Rogelj et al., 2018). Finally, carbon dioxide removal
(CDR) is a key component of most, but not all, mitigation pathways
presented in the literature to date which constrain warming to 1.5C
or 2C. Carbon dioxide removal measures that require land include
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), afforestation and
reforestation (AR), soil carbon sequestration, direct air capture, biochar
and enhanced weathering (see Cross-Chapter Box 7 in this chapter).
These potential methods are assessed in Section 4.3.7.
In cost-effective integrated assessment modelling (IAM) pathways
recently developed to be consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C,
use of CDR in the form of BECCS and AR are fundamental elements
(Chapter 2; Popp et al., 2017; Hirsch et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018;
Seneviratne et al., 2018c). The land-use footprint of CDR deployment
in 1.5C-consistent pathways can be substantial (Section 2.3.4, Figure
2.11), even though IAMs predominantly rely on second-generation
biomass and assume future productivity increases in agriculture.
A body of literature has explored potential consequences of large-scale
use of CDR. In this case, the corresponding land footprint by the end
of the century could be extremely large, with estimates including: up
to 18% of the land surface being used (Wiltshire and Davies-Barnard,
2015); vast acceleration of the loss of primary forest and natural
grassland (Williamson, 2016) leading to increased greenhouse gas
emissions (P. Smith et al., 2013, 2015); and potential loss of up to 10%
of the current forested lands to biofuels (Yamagata et al., 2018). Other
estimates reach 380-700 Mha or 21-64% of current arable cropland
(Section 4.3.7). Boysen et al. (2017) found that in a scenario in which
emissions reductions were sufficient only to limit warming to 2.5C,
265

Chapter 3

use of CDR to further limit warming to 1.7C would result in the
conversion of 1.1-1.5 Gha of land - implying enormous losses of both
cropland and natural ecosystems. Newbold et al. (2015) found that
biodiversity loss in the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)2.6
scenario could be greater than that in RCP4.5 and RCP6, in which there
is more climate change but less land-use change. Risks to biodiversity
conservation and agricultural production are therefore projected to
result from large-scale bioenergy deployment pathways (P. Smith et
al., 2013; Tavoni and Socolow, 2013). One study explored an extreme
mitigation strategy encouraging biofuel expansion sufficient to limit
warming to 1.5C and found that this would be more disruptive to land
use and crop prices than the impacts of a 2C warmer world which
has a larger climate signal and lower mitigation requirement (Ruane
et al., 2018). However, it should again be emphasized that many of the
pathways explored in Chapter 2 of this report follow strategies that
explore how to reduce these issues. Chapter 4 provides an assessment
of the land footprint of various CDR technologies (Section 4.3.7).

3

The degree to which BECCS has these large land-use footprints
depends on the source of the bioenergy used and the scale at which
BECCS is deployed. Whether there is competition with food production
and biodiversity depends on the governance of land use, agricultural
intensification, trade, demand for food (in particular meat), feed and
timber, and the context of the whole supply chain (Section 4.3.7,
Fajardy and Mac Dowell, 2017; Booth, 2018; Sterman et al., 2018).
The more recent literature reviewed in Chapter 2 explores pathways
which limit warming to 2C or below and achieve a balance between
sources and sinks of CO2 by using BECCS that relies on secondgeneration (or even third-generation) biofuels, changes in diet or more
generally, management of food demand, or CDR options such as forest
restoration (Chapter 2; Bajelj et al., 2014). Overall, this literature
explores how to reduce the issues of competition for land with food
production and with natural ecosystems (in particular forests) (CrossChapter Box 1 in Chapter 1; van Vuuren et al., 2009; Haberl et al.,
2010, 2013; Bajelj et al., 2014; Daioglou et al., 2016; Fajardy and Mac
Dowell, 2017).
Some IAMs manage this transition by effectively protecting carbon
stored on land and focusing on the conversion of pasture area
into both forest area and bioenergy cropland. Some IAMs explore
1.5C-consistent pathways with demand-side measures such as dietary
changes and efficiency gains such as agricultural changes (Sections
2.3.4 and 2.4.4), which lead to a greatly reduced CDR deployment and
consequently land-use impacts (van Vuuren et al., 2018). In reality,
however, whether this CDR (and bioenergy in general) has large
adverse impacts on environmental and societal goals depends in large
part on the governance of land use (Section 2.3.4; Obersteiner et al.,
2016; Bertram et al., 2018; Humpenoder et al., 2018).
Rates of sequestration of 3.3 GtC ha-1 require 970 Mha of afforestation
and reforestation (Smith et al., 2015). Humpenoder et al. (2014)
estimated that in least-cost pathways afforestation would cover 2800
Mha by the end of the century to constrain warming to 2C. Hence,
the amount of land considered if least-cost mitigation is implemented
by afforestation and reforestation could be up to three to five
times greater than that required by BECCS, depending on the forest
266

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

management used. However, not all of the land footprint of CDR is
necessarily to be in competition with biodiversity protection. Where
reforestation is the restoration of natural ecosystems, it benefits both
carbon sequestration and conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem
services (Section 4.3.7) and can contribute to the achievement of
the Aichi targets under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
(Leadley et al., 2016). However, reforestation is often not defined in
this way (Section 4.3.8; Stanturf et al., 2014) and the ability to deliver
biodiversity benefits is strongly dependent on the precise nature
of the reforestation, which has different interpretations in different
contexts and can often include agroforestry rather than restoration
of pristine ecosystems (Pistorious and Kiff, 2017). However, `natural
climate solutions', defined as conservation, restoration, and improved
land management actions that increase carbon storage and/or avoid
greenhouse gas emissions across global forests, wetlands, grasslands
and agricultural lands, are estimated to have the potential to provide
37% of the cost-effective CO2 mitigation needed by southern Europe
and the Mediterranean by 2030 - in order to have a >66% chance of
holding warming to below 2C (Griscom et al., 2017).
Any reductions in agricultural production driven by climate change
and/or land management decisions related to CDR may (e.g., Nelson
et al., 2014a; Dalin and Rodriguez-Iturbe, 2016) or may not (Muratori
et al., 2016) affect food prices. However, these studies did not consider
the deployment of second-generation (instead of first-generation)
bioenergy crops, for which the land footprint can be much smaller.
Irrespective of any mitigation-related issues, in order for ecosystems
to adapt to climate change, land use would also need to be carefully
managed to allow biodiversity to disperse to areas that become
newly climatically suitable for it (Section 3.4.1) and to protect the
areas where the future climate will still remain suitable. This implies
a need for considerable expansion of the protected area network
(Warren et al., 2018b), either to protect existing natural habitat or
to restore it (perhaps through reforestation, see above). At the same
time, adaptation to climate change in the agricultural sector (Rippke
et al., 2016) can require transformational as well as new approaches
to land-use management; in order to meet the rising food demand
of a growing human population, it is projected that additional
land will need to be brought into production unless there are large
increases in agricultural productivity (Tilman et al., 2011). However,
future rates of deforestation may be underestimated in the existing
literature (Mahowald et al., 2017a), and reforestation may therefore
be associated with significant co-benefits if implemented to restore
natural ecosystems (high confidence).

3.6.2.2

Biophysical feedbacks on regional climate
associated with land-use changes

Changes in the biophysical characteristics of the land surface are known
to have an impact on local and regional climates through changes in
albedo, roughness, evapotranspiration and phenology, which can lead
to a change in temperature and precipitation. This includes changes in
land use through agricultural expansion/intensification (e.g., Mueller
et al., 2016), reforestation/revegetation endeavours (e.g., Feng et al.,
2016; Sonntag et al., 2016; Bright et al., 2017) and changes in land
management (e.g., Luyssaert et al., 2014; Hirsch et al., 2017) that can

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Figure 3.22 | Regional temperature scaling with carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration (ppm) from 1850 to 2099 for two different regions defined in the Special Report on
Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SREX) for central Europe (CEU) (a) and central North America (CNA) (b). Solid
lines correspond to the regional average annual maximum daytime temperature (TXx) anomaly, and dashed lines correspond to the global mean temperature anomaly, where
all temperature anomalies are relative to 1850-1870 and units are degrees Celsius. The black line in all panels denotes the three-member control ensemble mean, with the grey
shaded regions corresponding to the ensemble range. The coloured lines represent the three-member ensemble means of the experiments corresponding to albedo +0.02 (cyan),
albedo +0.04 (purple), albedo + 0.08 (orange), albedo +0.10 (red), irrigation (blue), and irrigation with albedo +0.10 (green). Adapted from Hirsch et al. (2017).

involve double cropping (e.g., Jeong et al., 2014; Mueller et al., 2015;
Seifert and Lobell, 2015), irrigation (e.g., Lobell et al., 2009; Sacks et
al., 2009; Cook et al., 2011; Qian et al., 2013; de Vrese et al., 2016;
Pryor et al., 2016; Thiery et al., 2017), no-till farming and conservation
agriculture (e.g., Lobell et al., 2006; Davin et al., 2014), and wood
harvesting (e.g., Lawrence et al., 2012). Hence, the biophysical impacts
of land-use changes are an important topic to assess in the context of
low-emissions scenarios (e.g., van Vuuren et al., 2011b), in particular
for 1.5C warming levels (see also Cross-Chapter Box 7 in this chapter).
The magnitude of the biophysical impacts is potentially large for
temperature extremes. Indeed, changes induced both by modifications
in moisture availability and irrigation and by changes in surface albedo
tend to be larger (i.e., stronger cooling) for hot extremes than for mean
temperatures (e.g., Seneviratne et al., 2013; Davin et al., 2014; Wilhelm
et al., 2015; Hirsch et al., 2017; Thiery et al., 2017). The reasons for
reduced moisture availability are related to a strong contribution of
moisture deficits to the occurrence of hot extremes in mid-latitude
regions (Mueller and Seneviratne, 2012; Seneviratne et al., 2013). In
the case of surface albedo, cooling associated with higher albedo (e.g.,
in the case of no-till farming) is more effective at cooling hot days
because of the higher incoming solar radiation for these days (Davin
et al., 2014). The overall effect of either irrigation or albedo has been
found to be at the most in the order of about 1C-2C regionally for
temperature extremes. This can be particularly important in the context
of low-emissions scenarios because the overall effect is in this case
of similar magnitude to the response to the greenhouse gas forcing
(Figure 3.22; Hirsch et al., 2017; Seneviratne et al., 2018a,c).
In addition to the biophysical feedbacks from land-use change and land
management on climate, there are potential consequences for particular

ecosystem services. This includes climate change-induced changes in
crop yield (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; van der Velde et al., 2012;
Asseng et al., 2013, 2015; Butler and Huybers, 2013; Lobell et al., 2014)
which may be further exacerbated by competing demands for arable
land between reforestation mitigation activities, crop growth for BECCS
(Chapter 2), increasing food production to support larger populations,
and urban expansion (see review by Smith et al., 2010). In particular,
some land management practices may have further implications for
food security, for instance throughincreases or decreases in yield when
tillage is ceased in some regions (Pittelkow et al., 2014).
We note that the biophysical impacts of land use in the context of
mitigation pathways constitute an emerging research topic. This
topic, as well as the overall role of land-use change in climate change
projections and socio-economic pathways, will be addressed in depth
in the upcoming IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land Use
due in 2019.

3.6.2.3

Atmospheric compounds (aerosols and methane)

There are multiple pathways that could be used to limit anthropogenic
climate change, and the details of the pathways will influence the
impacts of climate change on humans and ecosystems. Anthropogenicdriven changes in aerosols cause important modifications to the
global climate (Bindoff et al., 2013a; Boucher et al., 2013b; P. Wu et
al., 2013; Sarojini et al., 2016; H. Wang et al., 2016). Enforcement of
strict air quality policies may lead to a large decrease in cooling aerosol
emissions in the next few decades. These aerosol emission reductions
may cause a warming comparable to that resulting from the increase
in greenhouse gases by mid-21st century under low CO2 pathways
(Kloster et al., 2009; Acosta Navarro et al., 2017). Further background
267

3

Chapter 3

is provided in Sections 2.2.2 and 2.3.1; Cross Chapter Box 1 in Chapter
1). Because aerosol effects on the energy budget are regional, strong
regional changes in precipitation from aerosols may occur if aerosol
emissions are reduced for air quality reasons or as a co-benefit from
switches to sustainable energy sources (H. Wang et al., 2016). Thus,
regional impacts, especially on precipitation, are very sensitive to
1.5C-consistent pathways (Z. Wang et al., 2017).
Pathways which rely heavily on reductions in methane (CH4) instead
of CO2 will reduce warming in the short term because CH4 is such a
stronger and shorter-lived greenhouse gas than CO2, but will lead
to stronger warming in the long term because of the much longer
residence time of CO2 (Myhre et al., 2013; Pierrehumbert, 2014). In
addition, the dominant loss mechanism for CH4 is atmospheric photooxidation. This conversion modifies ozone formation and destruction in
the troposphere and stratosphere, therefore modifying the contribution
of ozone to radiative forcing, as well as feedbacks on the oxidation
rate of methane itself (Myhre et al., 2013). Focusing on pathways and
policies which both improve air quality and reduce impacts of climate

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

change can provide multiple co-benefits (Shindell et al., 2017). These
pathways are discussed in detail in Sections 4.3.7 and 5.4.1 and in
Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5.
Atmospheric aerosols and gases can also modify the land and ocean
uptake of anthropogenic CO2; some compounds enhance uptake while
others reduce it (Section 2.6.2; Ciais et al., 2013). While CO2 emissions
tend to encourage greater uptake of carbon by the land and the
ocean (Ciais et al., 2013), CH4 emissions can enhance ozone pollution,
depending on nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds and other
organic species concentrations, and ozone pollution tends to reduce
land productivity (Myhre et al., 2013; B. Wang et al., 2017). Aside from
inhibiting land vegetation productivity, ozone may also alter the CO2,
CH4 and nitrogen (N2O) exchange at the land-atmosphere interface
and transform the global soil system from a sink to a source of
carbon (B. Wang et al., 2017). Aerosols and associated nitrogen-based
compounds tend to enhance the uptake of CO2 in land and ocean
systems through deposition of nutrients and modification of climate
(Ciais et al., 2013; Mahowald et al., 2017b).

Cross-Chapter Box 7 | Land-Based Carbon Dioxide Removal in Relation to 1.5C of Global Warming

3

Lead Authors:
Rachel Warren (United Kingdom), Marcos Buckeridge (Brazil), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Markku Kanninen (Finland), Joeri Rogelj
(Austria/Belgium), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Raphael Slade (United Kingdom)
Climate and land form a complex system characterized by multiple feedback processes and the potential for non-linear responses to
perturbation. Climate determines land cover and the distribution of vegetation, affecting above- and below-ground carbon stocks.
At the same time, land cover influences global climate through altered biogeochemical processes (e.g., atmospheric composition
and nutrient flow into oceans), and regional climate through changing biogeophysical processes including albedo, hydrology,
transpiration and vegetation structure (Forseth, 2010).
Greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes related to land use are reported in the `agriculture, forestry and other land use' sector (AFOLU) and
comprise about 25% (about 10-12 GtCO2eq yr-1) of anthropogenic GHG emissions (P. Smith et al., 2014). Reducing emissions from
land use, as well as land-use change, are thus an important component of low-emissions mitigation pathways (Clarke et al., 2014),
particularly as land-use emissions can be influenced by human actions such as deforestation, afforestation, fertilization, irrigation,
harvesting, and other aspects of cropland, grazing land and livestock management (Paustian et al., 2006; Griscom et al., 2017;
Houghton and Nassikas, 2018).
In the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, the vast majority of scenarios assessed with a 66% or better chance of limiting global warming
to 2C by 2100 included carbon dioxide removal (CDR) - typically about 10 GtCO2 yr-1 in 2100 or about 200-400 GtCO2 over
the course of the century (Smith et al., 2015; van Vuuren et al., 2016). These integrated assessment model (IAM) results were
predominately achieved by using bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) and/or afforestation and reforestation (AR).
Virtually all scenarios that limit either peak or end-of-century warming to 1.5C also use land-intensive CDR technologies (Rogelj
et al., 2015; Holz et al., 2017; Kriegler et al., 2017; Fuss et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018). Again, AR (Sections 2.3 and 4.3.7)
and BECCS (Sections 4.3.2. and 4.3.7) predominate. Other CDR options, such as the application of biochar to soil, soil carbon
sequestration, and enhanced weathering (Section 4.3.7) are not yet widely incorporated into IAMs, but their deployment would also
necessitate the use of land and/or changes in land management.
Integrated assessment models provide a simplified representation of land use and, with only a few exceptions, do not include
biophysical feedback processes (e.g., albedo and evapotranspiration effects) (Kreidenweis et al., 2016) despite the importance of
these processes for regional climate, in particular hot extremes (Section 3.6.2.2; Seneviratne et al., 2018c). The extent, location and
impacts of large-scale land-use change described by existing IAMs can also be widely divergent, depending on model structure,
scenario parameters, modelling objectives and assumptions (including regarding land availability and productivity) (Prestele et

268

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Cross-Chapter Box 7 (continued)

al., 2016; Alexander et al., 2017; Popp et al., 2017; Seneviratne et al., 2018c). Despite these limitations, IAM scenarios effectively
highlight the extent and nature of potential land-use transitions implicit in limiting warming to 1.5C.
Cross-Chapter Box 7 Table 1 presents a comparison of the five CDR options assessed in this report. This illustrates that if BECCS
and AR were to be deployed at a scale of 12 GtCO2 yr-1 in 2100, for example, they would have a substantial land and water
footprint. Whether this footprint would result in adverse impacts, for example on biodiversity or food production, depends on the
existence and effectiveness of measures to conserve land carbon stocks, limit the expansion of agriculture at the expense of natural
ecosystems, and increase agriculture productivity (Bonsch et al., 2016; Obersteiner et al., 2016; Bertram et al., 2018; Humpenoder et
al., 2018). In comparison, the land and water footprints of enhanced weathering, soil carbon sequestration and biochar application
are expected to be far less per GtCO2 sequestered. These options may offer potential co-benefits by providing an additional source of
nutrients or by reducing N2O emissions, but they are also associated with potential side effects. Enhanced weathering would require
massive mining activity, and providing feedstock for biochar would require additional land, even though a proportion of the required
biomass is expected to come from residues (Woolf et al., 2010; Smith, 2016). For the terrestrial CDR options, permanence and
saturation are important considerations, making their viability and long-term contributions to carbon reduction targets uncertain.
The technical, political and social feasibility of scaling up and implementing land-intensive CDR technologies (Cross-Chapter Box 3
in Chapter 1) is recognized to present considerable potential barriers to future deployment (Boucher et al., 2013a; Fuss et al., 2014,
2018; Anderson and Peters, 2016; Vaughan and Gough, 2016; Williamson, 2016; Minx et al., 2017, 2018; Nemet et al., 2018; Strefler
et al., 2018; Vaughan et al., 2018). To investigate the implications of restricting CDR options should these barriers prove difficult to
overcome, IAM studies (Section 2.3.4) have developed scenarios that limit - either implicitly or explicitly - the use of BECCS and
bioenergy (Krey et al., 2014; Bauer et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018) or the use of BECCS and afforestation (Strefler et al., 2018).
Alternative strategies to limit future reliance on CDR have also been examined, including increased electrification, agricultural
intensification, behavioural change, and dramatic improvements in energy and material efficiency (Bauer et al., 2018; Grubler et
al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018). Somewhat counterintuitively, scenarios that seek to limit the deployment of BECCs may result in
increased land use, through greater deployment of bioenergy, and afforestation (Chapter 2, Box 2.1; Krey et al., 2014; Krause et al.,
2017; Bauer et al., 2018; Rogelj et al., 2018). Scenarios aiming to minimize the total human land footprint (including land for food,
energy and climate mitigation) also result in land-use change, for example by increasing agricultural efficiency and dietary change
(Grubler et al., 2018).

3

The impacts of changing land use are highly context, location and scale dependent (RobledoAbad et al., 2017). The supply of
biomass for CDR (e.g., energy crops) has received particular attention. The literature identifies regional examples of where the use
of land to produce biofuels might be sustainably increased (Jaiswal et al., 2017), where biomass markets could contribute to the
provision of ecosystem services (Dale et al., 2017), and where bioenergy could increase the resilience of production systems and
contribute to rural development (Kline et al., 2017). However, studies of global biomass potential provide only limited insight into
the local feasibility of supplying large quantities of biomass on a global scale (Slade et al., 2014). Concerns about large-scale use
of biomass for CDR include a range of potential consequences including greatly increased demand for freshwater use, increased
competition for land, loss of biodiversity and/or impacts on food security (Section 3.6.2.1; Heck et al., 2018). The short- versus longterm carbon impacts of substituting biomass for fossil fuels, which are largely determined by feedstock choice, also remain a source
of contention (Schulze et al., 2012; Jonker et al., 2014; Booth, 2018; Sterman et al., 2018).
Afforestation and reforestation can also present trade-offs between biodiversity, carbon sequestration and water use, and these
strategies have a higher land footprint per tonne of CO2 removed (Cunningham, 2015; Naudts et al., 2016; Smith et al., 2018).
For example, changing forest management to strategies favouring faster growing species, greater residue extraction and shorter
rotations may have a negative impact on biodiversity (de Jong et al., 2014). In contrast, reforestation of degraded land with native
trees can have substantial benefits for biodiversity (Section 3.6). Despite these constraints, the potential for increased carbon
sequestration through improved land stewardship measures is considered to be substantial (Griscom et al., 2017).
Evaluating the synergies and trade-offs between mitigation and adaptation actions, resulting land and climate impacts, and the
myriad issues related to land-use governance will be essential to better understand the future role of CDR technologies. This topic
will be addressed further in the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) due to be published in 2019.
Cross-Chapter Box 7 (continued next page)

269

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Cross-Chapter Box 7 (continued)

Key messages:
Cost-effective strategies to limit peak or end-of-century warming to 1.5C all include enhanced GHG removals in the AFOLU sector
as part of their portfolio of measures (high confidence).
Large-scale deployment of land-based CDR would have far-reaching implications for land and water availability (high confidence).
This may impact food production, biodiversity and the provision of other ecosystem services (high confidence).
The impacts of deploying land-based CDR at large scales can be reduced if a wider portfolio of CDR options is deployed, and if
increased mitigation effort focuses on strongly limiting demand for land, energy and material resources, including through lifestyle
and dietary changes (medium confidence).
Afforestation and reforestation may be associated with significant co-benefits if implemented appropriately, but they feature large
land and water footprints if deployed at large scales (medium confidence).
Cross-Chapter Box 7, Table 1 | Comparison of land-based carbon removal options.
Sources: a assessed ranges by Fuss et al. (2018), see Figures in Section 4.3.7 for full literature range; b based on the 2100 estimate for mean potentials by Smith et
al. (2015). Note that biophysical impacts of land-based CDR options besides albedo changes (e.g., through changes in evapotranspiration related to irrigation or
land cover/use type) are not displayed.

3

Option

BECCS

Afforestation
& reforestation

Enhanced
weathering

Potentials a

Cost a

Required
land b

Required
water b

Impact on
nutrients b

Impact on
albedo b

Saturation
and permanence a

GtCO2 y-1

$ tCO2-1

Mha GtCO2-1

km3 GtCO2-1

Mt N, P, K y-1

No units

No units

Variable

Variable; depends on source
of biofuel (higher albedo for
crops than for forests) and
on land management (e.g.,
no-till farming for crops)

0.5-5

100-200

31-58

60

Saturation of forests;
vulnerable to disturbance;
post-AR forest
management essential

0.5-3.6

5-50

80

92

0.5

Negative, or reduced GHG
benefit where not negative

2-4

50-200

3

0.4

0

0

Saturation of soil; residence
time from months to
geological timescale

N: 8.2,
P: 2.7,
K: 19.1

0.08-0.12

Mean residence times
between decades to
centuries, depending on
soil type, management and
environmental conditions

0

Soil sinks saturate and can
reverse if poor management
practices resume

Biochar

0.3-2

30-120

16-100

0

Soil carbon
sequestration

2.3-5

0-100

0

0

3.6.3

Implications Beyond the End of the Century

3.6.3.1

Sea ice

Sea ice is often cited as a tipping point in the climate system (Lenton,
2012). Detailed modelling of sea ice (Schroder and Connolley, 2007;
Sedlaek et al., 2011; Tietsche et al., 2011), however, suggests that
summer sea ice can return within a few years after its artificial removal
270

Long-term governance of
storage; limits on rates of
bioenergy production and
carbon sequestration

N: 21.8,
P: 5.5,
K: 4.1

for climates in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Further studies
(Armour et al., 2011; Boucher et al., 2012; Ridley et al., 2012) modelled
the removal of sea ice by raising CO2 concentrations and studied
subsequent regrowth by lowering CO2. These studies suggest that
changes in Arctic sea ice are neither irreversible nor exhibit bifurcation
behaviour. It is therefore plausible that the extent of Arctic sea ice may
quickly re-equilibrate to the end-of-century climate under an overshoot
scenario.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

3.6.3.2

Sea level

Policy decisions related to anthropogenic climate change will have a
profound impact on sea level, not only for the remainder of this century
but for many millennia to come (Clark et al., 2016). On these long time
scales, 50 m of sea level rise (SLR) is possible (Clark et al., 2016). While it
is virtually certain that sea level will continue to rise well beyond 2100,
the amount of rise depends on future cumulative emissions (Church et
al., 2013) as well as their profile over time (Bouttes et al., 2013; Mengel
et al., 2018). Marzeion et al. (2018) found that 28-44% of present-day
glacier volume is unsustainable in the present-day climate and that it
would eventually melt over the course of a few centuries, even if there
were no further climate change. Some components of SLR, such as
thermal expansion, are only considered reversible on centennial time
scales (Bouttes et al., 2013; Zickfeld et al., 2013), while the contribution
from ice sheets may not be reversible under any plausible future
scenario (see below).
Based on the sensitivities summarized by Levermann et al. (2013), the
contributions of thermal expansion (0.20-0.63 m C-1) and glaciers
(0.21 m C-1 but falling at higher degrees of warming mostly because
of the depletion of glacier mass, with a possible total loss of about
0.6 m) amount to 0.5-1.2 m and 0.6-1.7 m in 1.5C and 2C warmer
worlds, respectively. The bulk of SLR on greater than centennial time
scales will therefore be caused by contributions from the continental
ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, whose existence is threatened
on multi-millennial time scales.
For Greenland, where melting from the ice sheet's surface is important,
a well-documented instability exists where the surface of a thinning
ice sheet encounters progressively warmer air temperatures that
further promote melting and thinning. A useful indicator associated
with this instability is the threshold at which annual mass loss from
the ice sheet by surface melt exceeds mass gain by snowfall. Previous
estimates put this threshold at about 1.9C to 5.1C above preindustrial temperatures (Gregory and Huybrechts, 2006). More recent
analyses, however, suggest that this threshold sits between 0.8C
and 3.2C, with a best estimate at 1.6C (Robinson et al., 2012). The
continued decline of the ice sheet after this threshold has been passed
is highly dependent on the future climate and varies between about
80% loss after 10,000 years to complete loss after as little as 2000
years (contributing about 6 m to SLR). Church et al. (2013) were unable
to quantify a likely range for this threshold. They assigned medium
confidence to a range greater than 2C but less than 4C, and had
low confidence in a threshold of about 1C. There is insufficient new
literature to change this assessment.
The Antarctic ice sheet, in contrast, loses the mass gained by snowfall
as outflow and subsequent melt to the ocean, either directly from the
underside of floating ice shelves or indirectly by the melting of calved
icebergs. The long-term existence of this ice sheet will also be affected
by a potential instability (the marine ice sheet instability, MISI), which
links outflow (or mass loss) from the ice sheet to water depth at the
grounding line (i.e., the point at which grounded ice starts to float and
becomes an ice shelf) so that retreat into deeper water (the bedrock
underlying much of Antarctica slopes downwards towards the centre
of the ice sheet) leads to further increases in outflow and promotes

Chapter 3

yet further retreat (Schoof, 2007). More recently, a variant on this
mechanism was postulated in which an ice cliff forms at the grounding
line and retreats rapidly though fracture and iceberg calving (DeConto
and Pollard, 2016). There is a growing body of evidence (Golledge et
al., 2015; DeConto and Pollard, 2016) that large-scale retreat may be
avoided in emissions scenarios such as Representative Concentration
Pathway (RCP)2.6 but that higher-emissions RCP scenarios could lead
to the loss of the West Antarctic ice sheet and sectors in East Antarctica,
although the duration (centuries or millennia) and amount of mass loss
during such a collapse is highly dependent on model details and no
consensus exists yet. Schoof (2007) suggested that retreat may be
irreversible, although a rigorous test has yet to be made. In this context,
overshoot scenarios, especially of higher magnitude or longer duration,
could increase the risk of such irreversible retreat.
Church et al. (2013) noted that the collapse of marine sectors of the
Antarctic ice sheet could lead to a global mean sea level (GMSL) rise
above the likely range, and that there was medium confidence that this
additional contribution `would not exceed several tenths of a metre
during the 21st century'.
The multi-centennial evolution of the Antarctic ice sheet has been
considered in papers by DeConto and Pollard (2016) and Golledge et
al. (2015). Both suggest that RCP2.6 is the only RCP scenario leading
to long-term contributions to GMSL of less than 1.0 m. The long-term
committed future of Antarctica and the GMSL contribution at 2100
are complex and require further detailed process-based modelling;
however, a threshold in this contribution may be located close to 1.5C
to 2C of global warming.
In summary, there is medium confidence that a threshold in the longterm GMSL contribution of both the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets
lies around 1.5C to 2C of global warming relative to pre-industrial;
however, the GMSL associated with these two levels of global warming
cannot be differentiated on the basis of the existing literature.

3.6.3.3

Permafrost

The slow rate of permafrost thaw introduces a lag between the
transient degradation of near-surface permafrost and contemporary
climate, so that the equilibrium response is expected to be 25-38%
greater than the transient response simulated in climate models (Slater
and Lawrence, 2013). The long-term, equilibrium Arctic permafrost loss
to global warming was analysed by Chadburn et al. (2017). They used
an empirical relation between recent mean annual air temperatures
and the area underlain by permafrost coupled to Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) stabilization projections
to 2300 for RCP2.6 and RCP4.5. Their estimate of the sensitivity of
permafrost to warming is 2.9-5.0 million km2 C-1 (1 standard deviation
confidence interval), which suggests that stabilizing climate at 1.5C as
opposed to 2C would reduce the area of eventual permafrost loss by
1.5 to 2.5 million km2 (stabilizing at 56-83% as opposed to 43-72% of
1960-1990 levels). This work, combined with the assessment of Collins
et al. (2013) on the link between global warming and permafrost loss,
leads to the assessment that permafrost extent would be appreciably
greater in a 1.5C warmer world compared to in a 2C warmer world
(low to medium confidence).
271

3

Chapter 3

3.7

Knowledge Gaps

Most scientific literature specific to global warming of 1.5C is only
just emerging. This has led to differences in the amount of information
available and gaps across the various sections of this chapter. In
general, the number of impact studies that specifically focused on
1.5C lags behind climate-change projections in general, due in part to
the dependence of the former on the latter. There are also insufficient
studies focusing on regional changes, impacts and consequences at
1.5C and 2C of global warming.
The following gaps have been identified with respect to tools,
methodologies and understanding in the current scientific literature
specific to Chapter 3. The gaps identified here are not comprehensive
but highlight general areas for improved understanding, especially
regarding global warming at 1.5C compared to 2C and higher levels.

3.7.1

3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

*

The distinct impacts of different overshoot scenarios, depending
on (i) the peak temperature of the overshoot, (ii) the length of the
overshoot period, and (iii) the associated rate of change in global
temperature over the time period of the overshoot.

3.7.2.2
*

Critical thresholds for extreme events (e.g., drought and inundation)
between 1.5C and 2C of warming for different climate models
and projections. All aspects of storm intensity and frequency as a
function of climate change, especially for 1.5C and 2C warmer
worlds, and the impact of changing storminess on storm surges,
damage, and coastal flooding at regional and local scales.

*

The timing and implications of the release of stored carbon in
Arctic permafrost in a 1.5C warmer world and for climate
stabilization by the end of the century.

*

Antarctic ice sheet dynamics, global sea level, and links between
seasonal and year-long sea ice in both polar regions.

Gaps in Methods and Tools

*

Regional and global climate model simulations for low-emissions
scenarios such as a 1.5C warmer world.

*

Robust probabilistic models which separate the relatively small
signal between 1.5C versus 2C from background noise, and
which handle the many uncertainties associated with nonlinearities, innovations, overshoot, local scales, and latent or
lagging responses in climate.

3.7.2.3

*

Physical and chemical characteristics of a 1.5C
warmer world

Projections of risks under a range of climate and development
pathways required to understand how development choices
affect the magnitude and pattern of risks, and to provide better
estimates of the range of uncertainties.

*

More complex and integrated socio-ecological models for predicting
the response of terrestrial as well as coastal and oceanic ecosystems
to climate and models which are more capable of separating climate
effects from those associated with human activities.

*

Tools for informing local and regional decision-making, especially
when the signal is ambiguous at 1.5C and/or reverses sign at
higher levels of global warming.

Terrestrial and freshwater systems

*

The dynamics between climate change, freshwater resources and
socio-economic impacts for lower levels of warming.

*

How the health of vegetation is likely to change, carbon storage in
plant communities and landscapes, and phenomena such as the
fertilization effect.

*

The risks associated with species' maladaptation in response to
climatic changes (e.g., effects of late frosts). Questions associated
with issues such as the consequences of species advancing their
spring phenology in response to warming, as well as the interaction
between climate change, range shifts and local adaptation in a
1.5C warmer world.

*

The biophysical impacts of land use in the context of mitigation
pathways.

3.7.2.4

Ocean Systems

3.7.2

Gaps in Understanding

*

Deep sea processes and risks to deep sea habitats and ecosystems.

3.7.2.1

Earth systems and 1.5C of global warming

*

How changes in ocean chemistry in a 1.5C warmer world,
including decreasing ocean oxygen content, ocean acidification
and changes in the activity of multiple ion species, will affect
natural and human systems.

*

How ocean circulation is changing towards 1.5C and 2C warmer
worlds, including vertical mixing, deep ocean processes, currents,
and their impacts on weather patterns at regional to local scales.

*

The impacts of changing ocean conditions at 1.5C and 2C of
warming on foodwebs, disease, invading species, coastal protection,
fisheries and human well-being, especially as organisms modify

*

*

272

The cumulative effects of multiple stresses and risks (e.g.,
increased storm intensity interacting with sea level rise and the
effect on coastal people; feedbacks on wetlands due to climate
change and human activities).
Feedbacks associated with changes in land use/cover for lowemissions scenarios, for example feedback from changes in
forest cover, food production, biofuel production, bio-energy with
carbon capture and storage (BECCS), and associated unquantified
biophysical impacts.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

for natural and human systems, within cities and in interaction
with surrounding areas. For example, current projections do not
integrate adaptation to projected warming by considering cooling
that could be achieved through a combination of revised building
codes, zoning and land use to build more reflective roofs and
urban surfaces that reduce urban heat island effects.

their biogeographical ranges within a changing ocean.
*

Specific linkages between food security and changing coastal and
ocean resources.

3.7.2.5

Human systems

*

The impacts of global and regional climate change at 1.5C on
food distribution, nutrition, poverty, tourism, coastal infrastructure
and public health, particularly for developing nations.

*

Implications of climate change at 1.5C on livelihoods and
poverty, as well as on rural communities, indigenous groups and
marginalized people.

*

Health and well-being risks in the context of socio-economic
and climate change at 1.5C, especially in key areas such as
occupational health, air quality and infectious disease.

*

The changing levels of risk in terms of extreme events, including
storms and heatwaves, especially with respect to people being
displaced or having to migrate away from sensitive and exposed
systems such as small islands, low-lying coasts and deltas.

*

Micro-climates at urban/city scales and their associated risks

3

273

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Cross-Chapter Box 8 | 1.5C Warmer Worlds
Lead Authors:
Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Roland Seferian (France), Myles R. Allen (United Kingdom), Marcos
Buckeridge (Brazil), Kristie L. Ebi (United States of America), Ove Hoegh-Guldberg (Australia), Richard J. Millar (United Kingdom),
Antony J. Payne (United Kingdom), Petra Tschakert (Australia), Rachel Warren (United Kingdom)

Contributing Authors:
Neville Ellis (Australia), Richard Wartenburger (Germany/Switzerland)

Introduction
The Paris Agreement includes goals of stabilizing global mean surface temperature (GMST) well below 2C and 1.5C above preindustrial levels in the longer term. There are several aspects, however, that remain open regarding what a `1.5C warmer world'
could be like, in terms of mitigation (Chapter 2) and adaptation (Chapter 4), as well as in terms of projected warming and associated
regional climate change (Chapter 3), which are overlaid on anticipated and differential vulnerabilities (Chapter 5). Alternative
`1.5C warmer worlds' resulting from mitigation and adaptation choices, as well as from climate variability (climate
`noise'), can be vastly different, as highlighted in this Cross-Chapter Box. In addition, the range of models underlying 1.5C
projections can be substantial and needs to be considered.

Key questions7:

3

*

What is a 1.5C global mean warming, how is it measured, and what temperature increase does it imply for
single locations and at specific times? Global mean surface temperature (GMST) corresponds to the globally averaged
temperature of Earth derived from point-scale ground observations or computed in climate models (Chapters 1 and 3). Global
mean surface temperature is additionally defined over a given time frame, for example averaged over a month, a year, or
multiple decades. Because of climate variability, a climate-based GMST typically needs to be defined over several decades
(typically 20 or 30 years; Chapter 3, Section 3.2). Hence, whether or when global warming reaches 1.5C depends to some
extent on the choice of pre-industrial reference period, whether 1.5C refers to total or human-induced warming, and which
variables and coverage are used to define GMST change (Chapter 1). By definition, because GMST is an average in time and
space, there will be locations and time periods in which 1.5C of warming is exceeded, even if the global mean warming is at
1.5C. In some locations, these differences can be particularly large (Cross-Chapter Box 8, Figure 1).

*

What is the impact of different climate models for projected changes in climate at 1.5C of global warming?
The range between single model simulations of projected regional changes at 1.5C GMST increase can be substantial for
regional responses (Chapter 3, Section 3.3). For instance, for the warming of cold extremes in a 1.5C warmer world, some
model simulations project a 3C warming while others project more than 6C of warming in the Arctic land areas (CrossChapter Box 8, Figure 2). For hot temperature extremes in the contiguous United States, the range of model simulations
includes temperatures lower than pre-industrial values (-0.3C) and a warming of 3.5C (Cross-Chapter Box 8, Figure 2). Some
regions display an even larger range (e.g., 1C-6C regional warming in hot extremes in central Europe at 1.5C of warming;
Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2). This large spread is due to both modelling uncertainty and internal climate variability.
While the range is large, it also highlights risks that can be avoided with near certainty in a 1.5C warmer world compared
to worlds at higher levels of warming (e.g., an 8C warming of cold extremes in the Arctic is not reached at 1.5C of global
warming in the multimodel ensemble but could happen at 2C of global warming; Cross-Chapter Box 8, Figure 2). Inferred
projected ranges of regional responses (mean value, minimum and maximum) for different mitigation scenarios from Chapter
2 are displayed in Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 1.

*

What is the impact of emissions pathways with, versus without, an overshoot? All mitigation pathways projecting less
than 1.5C of global warming over or at the end of the 21st century include some probability of overshooting 1.5C. These
pathways include some periods with warming stronger than 1.5C in the course of the coming decades and/or some probability
of not reaching 1.5C (Chapter 2, Section 2.2). This is inherent to the difficulty of limiting global warming to 1.5C, given that
we are already very close to this warming level. The implications of overshooting are large for risks to natural and human

7

274

Part of this discussion is based on Seneviratne et al. (2018b).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)

3

Cross-Chapter Box 8, Figure 1 | Range of projected realized temperatures at 1.5C of global warming (due to stochastic noise and model-based spread).
Temperatures with a 25% chance of occurrence at any location within a 10-year time frame are shown, corresponding to GMST anomalies of 1.5C (Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) multimodel ensemble). The plots display the 25th percentile (Q25, left) and 75th percentile (Q75, right) values of mean
temperature (Tmean), yearly maximum daytime temperature (TXx) and yearly minimum night-time temperature (TNn), sampled from all time frames with GMST
anomalies of 1.5C in Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)8.5 model simulations of the CMIP5 ensemble. From Seneviratne et al. (2018b).

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued next page)

275

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)

Global mean temperature anomaly relative to pre-industrial conditions (C)

Cross-Chapter Box 8, Figure 2 | Spread of projected multimodel changes in minimum annual night-time temperature (TNn) in Arctic land (left) and in maximum
annual daytime temperature (TXx) in the contiguous United States as a function of mean global warming in climate simulations. The multimodel range (due to
model spread and internal climate variability) is indicated in red shading (minimum and maximum value based on climate model simulations). The multimodel
mean value is displayed with solid red and blue lines for two emissions pathways (blue: Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)4.5; red: RCP8.5). The dashed
red line indicates projections for a 1.5C warmer world. The dashed black line displays the 1:1 line. The figure is based on Figure 3 of Seneviratne et al. (2016).

3

systems, especially if the temperature at peak warming is high, because some risks may be long lasting and irreversible, such
as the loss of some ecosystems (Chapter 3, Box 3.4). The chronology of emissions pathways and their implied warming is also
important for the more slowly evolving parts of the Earth system, such as those associated with sea level rise. In addition, for
several types of risks the rate of change may be most relevant (Loarie et al., 2009; LoPresti et al., 2015), with potentially large
risks occurring in the case of a rapid rise to overshooting temperatures, even if a decrease to 1.5C may be achieved at the end
of the 21st century or later. On the other hand, if overshoot is to be minimized, the remaining equivalent CO2 budget available
for emissions has to be very small, which implies that large, immediate and unprecedented global efforts to mitigate GHGs are
required (Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 1; Chapter 4).

276

*

What is the probability of reaching 1.5C of global warming if emissions compatible with 1.5C pathways are
followed? Emissions pathways in a `prospective scenario' (see Chapter 1, Section 1.2.3, and Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1
on `Scenarios and pathways') compatible with 1.5C of global warming are determined based on their probability of reaching
1.5C by 2100 (Chapter 2, Section 2.1), given current knowledge of the climate system response. These probabilities cannot
be quantified precisely but are typically 50-66% in 1.5C-consistent pathways (Section 1.2.3). This implies a one-in-two to
one-in-three probability that global warming would exceed 1.5C even under a 1.5C-consistent pathway, including some
possibility that global warming would be substantially over this value (generally about 5-10% probability; see Cross-Chapter
Box 8, Table 1 and Seneviratne et al., 2018b). These alternative outcomes need to be factored into the decision-making process.
To address this issue, `adaptive' mitigation scenarios have been proposed in which emissions are continually adjusted to
achieve a temperature goal (Millar et al., 2017). The set of dimensions involved in mitigation options (Chapter 4) is complex
and need system-wide approaches to be successful. Adaptive scenarios could be facilitated by the global stocktake mechanism
established in the Paris Agreement, and thereby transfer the risk of higher-than-expected warming to a risk of faster-thanexpected mitigation efforts. However, there are some limits to the feasibility of such approaches because some investments, for
example in infrastructure, are long term and also because the actual departure from an aimed pathway will need to be detected
against the backdrop of internal climate variability, typically over several decades (Haustein et al., 2017; Seneviratne et al.,
2018b). Avoiding impacts that depend on atmospheric composition as well as GMST (Baker et al., 2018) would also require
limits on atmospheric CO2 concentrations in the event of a lower-than-expected GMST response.

*

How can the transformation towards a 1.5C warmer world be implemented? This can be achieved in a variety of
ways, such as decarbonizing the economy with an emphasis on demand reductions and sustainable lifestyles, or, alternatively,
with an emphasis on large-scale technological solutions, amongst many other options (Chapter 2, Sections 2.3 and 2.4;
Chapter 4, Sections 4.1 and 4.4.4). Different portfolios of mitigation measures come with distinct synergies and trade-offs with
respect to other societal objectives. Integrated solutions and approaches are required to achieve multiple societal objectives
simultaneously (see Chapter 4, Section 4.5.4 for a set of synergies and trade-offs).

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)

*

What determines risks and opportunities in a 1.5C warmer world? The risks to natural, managed and human systems in
a 1.5C warmer world will depend not only on uncertainties in the regional climate that results from this level of warming, but
also very strongly on the methods that humanity uses to limit global warming to 1.5C. This is particularly the case for natural
ecosystems and agriculture (see Cross-Chapter Box 7 in this chapter and Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). The risks to human systems
will also depend on the magnitude and effectiveness of policies and measures implemented to increase resilience to the risks
of climate change and on development choices over coming decades, which will influence the underlying vulnerabilities and
capacities of communities and institutions for responding and adapting.

*

Which aspects are not considered, or only partly considered, in the mitigation scenarios from Chapter 2? These
include biophysical impacts of land use, water constraints on energy infrastructure, and regional implications of choices of
specific scenarios for tropospheric aerosol concentrations or the modulation of concentrations of short-lived climate forcers,
that is, greenhouse gases (Chapter 3, Section 3.6.3). Such aspects of development pathways need to be factored into
comprehensive assessments of the regional implications of mitigation and adaptation measures. On the other hand, some of
these aspects are assessed in Chapter 4 as possible options for mitigation and adaptation to a 1.5C warmer world.

*

Are there commonalities to all alternative 1.5C warmer worlds? Human-driven warming linked to CO2 emissions is nearly
irreversible over time frames of 1000 years or more (Matthews and Caldeira, 2008; Solomon et al., 2009). The GSMT of the Earth
responds to the cumulative amount of CO2 emissions. Hence, all 1.5C stabilization scenarios require both net CO2 emissions and
multi-gas CO2-forcing-equivalent emissions to be zero at some point (Chapter 2, Section 2.2). This is also the case for stabilization
scenarios at higher levels of warming (e.g., at 2C); the only difference is the projected time at which the net CO2 budget is zero.

3

Hence, a transition to decarbonization of energy use is necessary in all scenarios. It should be noted that all scenarios
of Chapter 2 include approaches for carbon dioxide removal (CDR) in order to achieve the net zero CO2 emissions budget.
Most of these use carbon capture and storage (CCS) in addition to reforestation, although to varying degrees (Chapter
4, Section 4.3.7). Some potential pathways to 1.5C of warming in 2100 would minimize the need for CDR (Obersteiner et
al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2018). Taking into account the implementation of CDR, the CO2-induced warming by 2100 is
determined by the difference between the total amount of CO2 generated (that can be reduced by early decarbonization) and
the total amount permanently stored out of the atmosphere, for example by geological sequestration (Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7).
*

What are possible storylines of `warmer worlds' at 1.5C versus higher levels of global warming? Cross-Chapter Box
8, Table 2 features possible storylines based on the scenarios of Chapter 2, the impacts of Chapters 3 and 5, and the options of
Chapter 4. These storylines are not intended to be comprehensive of all possible future outcomes. Rather, they are intended as
plausible scenarios of alternative warmer worlds, with two storylines that include stabilization at 1.5C (Scenario 1) or close to
1.5C (Scenario 2), and one storyline missing this goal and consequently only including reductions of CO2 emissions and efforts
towards stabilization at higher temperatures (Scenario 3).

Summary:
There is no single `1.5C warmer world'. Impacts can vary strongly for different worlds characterized by a 1.5C global
warming. Important aspects to consider (besides the changes in global temperature) are the possible occurrence
of an overshoot and its associated peak warming and duration, how stabilization of the increase in global surface
temperature at 1.5C could be achieved, how policies might be able to influence the resilience of human and natural
systems, and the nature of regional and subregional risks.
The implications of overshooting are large for risks to natural and human systems, especially if the temperature at peak warming
is high, because some risks may be long lasting and irreversible, such as the loss of some ecosystems. In addition, for several types
of risks, the rate of change may be most relevant, with potentially large risks occurring in the case of a rapid rise to overshooting
temperatures, even if a decrease to 1.5C may be achieved at the end of the 21st century or later. If overshoot is to be minimized, the
remaining equivalent CO2 budget available for emissions has to be very small, which implies that large, immediate and unprecedented
global efforts to mitigate GHGs are required.
The time frame for initiating major mitigation measures is essential in order to reach a 1.5C (or even a 2C) global stabilization
of climate warming (see consistent cumulative CO2 emissions up to peak warming in Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 1). If mitigation
pathways are not rapidly activated, much more expensive and complex adaptation measures will have to be taken to avoid the
impacts of higher levels of global warming on the Earth system.
Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued next page)
277

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)
Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 1 | Different worlds resulting from 1.5C and 2C mitigation (prospective) pathways, including 66% (probable) best-case outcome,
and 5% worst-case outcome, based on Chapter 2 scenarios and Chapter 3 assessments of changes in regional climate. Note that the pathway characteristics
estimates are based on computations with the MAGICC model (Meinshausen et al., 2011) consistent with the set-up used in AR5 WGIII (Clarke et al., 2014),
but are uncertain and will be subject to updates and adjust-ments (see Chapter 2 for details). Updated from Seneviratne et al. (2018b).
B1.5_LOS (below 1.5C
with low overshoot)
with 2/3 probable
best-case outcomea

B1.5_LOS (below 1.5C
with low overshoot)
with 1/20 worst-case
outcomeb

L20 (lower than 2C)
with 2/3 probable
best-case outcomea

L20 (lower than 2C)
with 1/20 worst-case
outcomeb

General characteristics
of pathway

Overshoot > 1.5C in 21st centuryc

Yes (51/51)

Yes (51/51)

Yes (72/72)

Yes (72/72)

Overshoot > 2C in 21st century

No (0/51)

Yes (37/51)

No (72/72)

Yes (72/72)

Cumulative CO2 emissions up to peak
warming (relative to 2016)d [GtCO2]

610-760

590-750

1150-1460

1130-1470

Cumulative CO2 emissions up to
2100 (relative to 2016)d [GtCO2]
Years of global net zero CO2 emissions

Possible climate range at peak
warming (regional+global)
Possible climate range
in 2100 (regional+global)

1030-1440

19-23

31-38

2055-2066

2082-2090

Global GHG emissions in 2030d [GtCO2 y-1]
d

3

170-560

Global mean temperature
anomaly at peak warming

1.7C (1.66C-1.72C)

2.05C (2.00C-2.09C)

2.11C (2.05C-2.17C)

2.67C (2.59C-2.76C)

Warming in the Arctice (TNnf)

4.93C (4.36, 5.52)

6.02C (5.12, 6.89)

6.24C (5.39, 7.21)

7.69C (6.69, 8.93)

Warming in Central North Americae (TXxg)

2.65C (1.92, 3.15)

3.11C (2.37, 3.63)

3.18C (2.50, 3.71)

4.06C (3.35, 4.63)

Warming in Amazon regione (TXx)

2.55C (2.23, 2.83)

3.07C (2.74, 3.46)

3.16C (2.84, 3.57)

4.05C (3.62, 4.46)

Drying in the Mediterranean region

-1.11 (-2.24, -0.41)

-1.28 (-2.44, -0.51)

-1.38 (-2.58, -0.53)

-1.56 (-3.19, -0.67)

Increase in heavy precipitation eventse in Southern Asiai

9.94% (6.76, 14.00)

11.94% (7.52, 18.86)

12.68% (7.71, 22.39)

19.67% (11.56, 27.24)

Global mean temperature
warming in 2100

1.46C (1.41C-1.51C)

1.87C (1.81C-1.94C)

2.06C (1.99C-2.15C)

2.66C (2.56C-2.76C)

e,h

Warming in the Arcticj (TNn)

4.28C (3.71, 4.77)

5.50C (4.74, 6.21)

6.08C (5.20, 6.94)

7.63C (6.66, 8.90)

Warming in Central North Americaj (TXx)

2.31C (1.56, 2.66)

2.83C (2.03, 3.49)

3.12C (2.38, 3.67)

4.06C (3.33, 4.59)

Warming in Amazon regionj (TXx)

2.22C (2.00, 2.45)

2.76C (2.50, 3.07)

3.10C (2.75, 3.49)

4.03C (3.62, 4.45)

Drying in the Mediterranean region

-0.95 (-1.98, -0.30)

-1.10 (-2.17, -0.51)

-1.26 (-2.43, -0.52)

-1.55 (-3.17, -0.67)

Increase in heavy precipitation events
in Southern Asiaj

8.38% (4.63, 12.68)

10.34% (6.64, 16.07)

12.02% (7.41, 19.62)

19.72% (11.34, 26.95)

j

Notes:
a) 66th percentile for global temperature (that is, 66% likelihood of being at or below values)
b) 95th percentile for global temperature (that is, 5% likelihood of being at or above values)
c) All 1.5C scenarios include a substantial probability of overshooting above 1.5C global warming before returning to 1.5C.
d) Interquartile range (25th percentile, q25, and 75th percentile, q75)
e) The regional projections in these rows provide the median and the range [q25, q75] associated with the median global temperature outcomes of the considered mitigation
scenarios at peak warming.
f) TNn: Annual minimum night-time temperature
g) TXx: Annual maximum day-time temperature
h) Indicates drying of soil moisture expressed in units of standard deviations of pre-industrial climate (1861-1880) variability (where -1 is dry; -2 is severely dry; and -3 is very
severely dry);
i) Rx5day: the annual maximum consecutive 5-day precipitation.
j) As for footnote e, but for the regional responses associated with the median global temperature outcomes of the considered mitigation scenarios in 2100

278

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)
Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 2 | Storylines of possible worlds resulting from different mitigation options. The storylines build upon Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table
1 and the assessments of Chapters 1-5. Only a few of the many possible storylines were chosen and they are presented for illustrative purposes.
Scenario 1 [one possible storyline
among best-case scenarios]:
Mitigation:
early move to decarbonization,
decarbonization designed to minimize
land footprint, coordination and
rapid action of the world's nations
towards 1.5C goal by 2100
Internal climate variability:
probable (66%) best-case outcome for
global and regional climate responses

In 2020, strong participation and support for the Paris Agreement and its ambitious goals for reducing CO2 emissions
by an almost unanimous international community led to a time frame for net zero emissions that is compatible with
halting global warming at 1.5C by 2100.
There is strong participation in all major world regions at the national, state and/or city levels. Transport is strongly decarbonized
through a shift to electric vehicles, with more cars with electric than combustion engines being sold by 2025 (Chapter 2, Section
2.4.3; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.3). Several industry-sized plants for carbon capture and storage are installed and tested in the 2020s
(Chapter 2, Section 2.4.2; Chapter 4, Sections 4.3.4 and 4.3.7). Competition for land between bioenergy cropping, food production,
and biodiversity conservation is minimized by sourcing bioenergy for carbon capture and storage from agricultural wastes, algae
and kelp farms (Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). Agriculture is intensified in countries with coordinated
planning associated with a drastic decrease in food waste (Chapter 2, Section 2.4.4; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). This leaves many
natural ecosystems relatively intact, supporting continued provision of most ecosystem services, although relocation of species
towards higher latitudes and elevations still results in changes in local biodiversity in many regions, particularly in mountain,
tropical, coastal and Arctic ecosystems (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.3). Adaptive measures such as the establishment of corridors for
the movement of species and parts of ecosystems become a central practice within conservation management (Chapter 3, Section
3.4.3; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). The movement of species presents new challenges for resource management as novel ecosystems,
as well as pests and disease, increase (Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3). Crops are grown on marginal land, no-till agriculture is
deployed, and large areas are reforested with native trees (Chapter 2, Section 2.4.4; Chapter 3, Section 3.6.2; Cross-Chapter Box
7 in Chapter 3; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). Societal preference for healthy diets reduces meat consumption and associated GHG
emissions (Chapter 2, Section 2.4.4; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2; Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3).
By 2100, global mean temperature is on average 0.5C warmer than it was in 2018 (Chapter 1, Section 1.2.1). Only a minor
temperature overshoot occurs during the century (Chapter 2, Section 2.2). In mid-latitudes, frequent hot summers and precipitation
events tend to be more intense (Chapter 3, Section 3.3). Coastal communities struggle with increased inundation associated
with rising sea levels and more frequent and intense heavy rainfall (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.9; Chapter 4, Section
4.3.2; Chapter 5, Box 5.3 and Section 5.3.2; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5), and some respond by moving, in many cases
with consequences for urban areas. In the tropics, in particular in megacities, there are frequent deadly heatwaves whose risks
are reduced by proactive adaptation (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.1 and 3.4.8; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.8), overlaid on a suite of
development challenges and limits in disaster risk management (Chapter 4, Section 4.3.3; Chapter 5, Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2;
Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). Glaciers extent decreases in most mountainous areas (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.5 and 3.5.4).
Reduced Arctic sea ice opens up new shipping lanes and commercial corridors (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.8; Chapter 4, Box 4.3).
Small island developing states (SIDS), as well as coastal and low-lying areas, have faced significant changes but have largely
persisted in most regions (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.9 and 3.5.4, Box 3.5). The Mediterranean area becomes drier (Chapter 3,
Section 3.3.4 and Box 3.2) and irrigation of crops expands, drawing the water table down in many areas (Chapter 3, Section
3.4.6). The Amazon is reasonably well preserved, through avoided risk of droughts (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.4 and 3.4.3; Chapter
4, Box 4.3) and reduced deforestation (Chapter 2, Section 2.4.4; Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2), and
the forest services are working with the pattern observed at the beginning of the 21st century (Chapter 4, Box 4.3). While some
climate hazards become more frequent (Chapter 3, Section 3.3), timely adaptation measures help reduce the associated risks
for most, although poor and disadvantaged groups continue to experience high climate risks to their livelihoods and well-being
(Chapter 5, Section 5.3.1; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5; Chapter 3, Boxes 3.4 and 3.5; Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3).
Summer sea ice has not completely disappeared from the Arctic (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.4.7) and coral reefs, having been driven to
a low level (10-30% of levels in 2018), have partially recovered by 2100 after extensive dieback (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.4.10 and
Box 3.4). The Earth system, while warmer, is still recognizable compared to the 2000s, and no major tipping points are reached
(Chapter 3, Section 3.5.2.5). Crop yields remain relatively stable (Chapter 3, Section 3.4). Aggregate economic damage of climate
change impacts is relatively small, although there are some local losses associated with extreme weather events (Chapter 3,
Section 3.5; Chapter 4). Human well-being remains overall similar to that in 2020 (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.2).

Scenario 2 [one possible storyline
among mid-case scenarios]:
Mitigation:
delayed action (ambitious targets
reached only after warmer decade
in the 2020s due to internal climate
variability), overshoot at 2C, decrease
towards 1.5C afterward, no efforts to
minimize the land and water footprints
of bioenergy
Internal climate variability:
10% worst-case outcome (2020s)
followed by normal internal climate
variability

3

The international community continues to largely support the Paris Agreement and agrees in 2020 on reduction
targets for CO2 emissions and time frames for net zero emissions. However, these targets are not ambitious enough
to reach stabilization at 2C of warming, let alone 1.5C.
In the 2020s, internal climate variability leads to higher warming than projected, in a reverse development to what
happened in the so-called `hiatus' period of the 2000s. Temperatures are regularly above 1.5C of warming, although
radiative forcing is consistent with a warming of 1.2C or 1.3C. Deadly heatwaves in major cities (Chicago, Kolkata, Beijing,
Karachi, Sao Paulo), droughts in southern Europe, southern Africa and the Amazon region, and major flooding in Asia, all
intensified by the global and regional warming (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4 and 3.4.8; Cross-Chapter
Box 11 in Chapter 4), lead to increasing levels of public unrest and political destabilization (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.1). An
emergency global summit in 2025 moves to much more ambitious climate targets. Costs for rapidly phasing out fossil fuel use and
infrastructure, while rapidly expanding renewables to reduce emissions, are much higher than in Scenario 1, owing to a failure to
support economic measures to drive the transition (Chapter 4). Disruptive technologies become crucial to face up to the adaptation
measures needed (Chapter 4, Section 4.4.4).

279

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)
Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 2 (continued)
Scenario 2 [one possible storyline
among mid-case scenarios]:
Mitigation:
delayed action (ambitious targets
reached only after warmer decade
in the 2020s due to internal climate
variability), overshoot at 2C, decrease
towards 1.5C afterward, no efforts to
minimize the land and water footprints
of bioenergy
Internal climate variability:
10% worst-case outcome (2020s)
followed by normal internal
climate variability

Temperature peaks at 2C of warming by the middle of the century before decreasing again owing to intensive implementation
of bioenergy plants with carbon capture and storage (Chapter 2), without efforts to minimize the land and water footprint of
bioenergy production (Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3). Reaching 2C of warming for several decades eliminates or severely
damages key ecosystems such as coral reefs and tropical forests (Chapter 3, Section 3.4). The elimination of coral reef ecosystems
and the deterioration of their calcified frameworks, as well as serious losses of coastal ecosystems such as mangrove forests and
seagrass beds (Chapter 3, Boxes 3.4 and 3.5, Sections 3.4.4.10 and 3.4.5), leads to much reduced levels of coastal defence from
storms, winds and waves. These changes increase the vulnerability and risks facing communities in tropical and subtropical regions,
with consequences for many coastal communities (Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). These impacts are being amplified by
steadily rising sea levels (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.9) and intensifying storms (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.4.3). The intensive area required
for the production of bioenergy, combined with increasing water stress, puts pressure on food prices (Cross-Chapter Box 6 in
Chapter 3), driving elevated rates of food insecurity, hunger and poverty (Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2; Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter
3; Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4). Crop yields decline significantly in the tropics, leading to prolonged famines in some African
countries (Chapter 3, Section 3.4; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). Food trumps environment in terms of importance in most countries, with
the result that natural ecosystems decrease in abundance, owing to climate change and land-use change (Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
Chapter 3). The ability to implement adaptive action to prevent the loss of ecosystems is hindered under the circumstances and
is consequently minimal (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.6 and 3.4.4.10). Many natural ecosystems, in particular in the Mediterranean,
are lost because of the combined effects of climate change and land-use change, and extinction rates increase greatly (Chapter
3, Section 3.4 and Box 3.2).
By 2100, warming has decreased but is still stronger than 1.5C, and the yields of some tropical crops are recovering (Chapter
3, Section 3.4.3). Several of the remaining natural ecosystems experience irreversible climate change-related damages whilst
others have been lost to land-use change, with very rapid increases in the rate of species extinctions (Chapter 3, Section 3.4;
Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3; Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4). Migration, forced displacement, and loss of identity are
extensive in some countries, reversing some achievements in sustainable development and human security (Chapter 5, Section
5.3.2). Aggregate economic impacts of climate change damage are small, but the loss in ecosystem services creates large economic
losses (Chapter 4, Sections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3). The health and well-being of people generally decrease from 2020, while the levels of
poverty and disadvantage increase considerably (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.1).

3

Scenario 3 [one possible storyline
among worst-case scenarios]:

In 2020, despite past pledges, the international support for the Paris Agreement starts to wane. In the years that
follow, CO2 emissions are reduced at the local and national level but efforts are limited and not always successful.

Mitigation:
uncoordinated action, major
actions late in the 21st century,
3C of warming in 2100

Radiative forcing increases and, due to chance, the most extreme events tend to happen in less populated regions and thus do not
increase global concerns. Nonetheless, there are more frequent heatwaves in several cities and less snow in mountain resorts in
the Alps, Rockies and Andes (Chapter 3, Section 3.3). Global warming of 1.5C is reached by 2030 but no major changes in policies
occur. Starting with an intense El Nino-La Nina phase in the 2030s, several catastrophic years occur while global warming starts
to approach 2C. There are major heatwaves on all continents, with deadly consequences in tropical regions and Asian megacities,
especially for those ill-equipped for protecting themselves and their communities from the effects of extreme temperatures
(Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.1, 3.3.2 and 3.4.8). Droughts occur in regions bordering the Mediterranean Sea, central North America,
the Amazon region and southern Australia, some of which are due to natural variability and others to enhanced greenhouse gas
forcing (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.4; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2; Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4). Intense flooding occurs in highlatitude and tropical regions, in particular in Asia, following increases in heavy precipitation events (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.3).
Major ecosystems (coral reefs, wetlands, forests) are destroyed over that period (Chapter 3, Section 3.4), with massive disruption
to local livelihoods (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.2 and Box 5.3; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). An unprecedented drought leads
to large impacts on the Amazon rainforest (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.4 and 3.4), which is also affected by deforestation (Chapter 2).
A hurricane with intense rainfall and associated with high storm surges (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.6) destroys a large part of Miami.
A two-year drought in the Great Plains in the USA and a concomitant drought in eastern Europe and Russia decrease global crop
production (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.4), resulting in major increases in food prices and eroding food security. Poverty levels increase
to a very large scale, and the risk and incidence of starvation increase considerably as food stores dwindle in most countries; human
health suffers (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.6.1; Chapter 4, Sections 4.3.2 and 4.4.3; Chapter 5, Section 5.2.1).

Internal climate variability:
unusual (ca. 10%) best-case scenario
for one decade, followed by normal
internal climate variability

There are high levels of public unrest and political destabilization due to the increasing climatic pressures, resulting in some
countries becoming dysfunctional (Chapter 4, Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2). The main countries responsible for the CO2 emissions
design rapidly conceived mitigation plans and try to install plants for carbon capture and storage, in some cases without sufficient
prior testing (Chapter 4, Section 4.3.6). Massive investments in renewable energy often happen too late and are uncoordinated;
energy prices soar as a result of the high demand and lack of infrastructure. In some cases, demand cannot be met, leading
to further delays. Some countries propose to consider sulphate-aerosol based Solar Radiation Modification (SRM) (Chapter 4,
Section 4.3.8); however, intensive international negotiations on the topic take substantial time and are inconclusive because of
overwhelming concerns about potential impacts on monsoon rainfall and risks in case of termination (Cross-Chapter Box 10 in
Chapter 5). Global and regional temperatures continue to increase strongly while mitigation solutions are being developed and
implemented.

280

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Cross-Chapter Box 8 (continued)
Cross-Chapter Box 8, Table 2 (continued)
Scenario 3 [one possible storyline
among worst-case scenarios]:
Mitigation:
uncoordinated action, major
actions late in the 21st century,
3C of warming in 2100
Internal climate variability:
unusual (ca. 10%) best-case scenario
for one decade, followed by normal
internal climate variability

Global mean warming reaches 3C by 2100 but is not yet stabilized despite major decreases in yearly CO2 emissions, as a net zero
CO2 emissions budget could not yet be achieved and because of the long lifetime of CO2 concentrations (Chapters 1, 2 and 3).
The world as it was in 2020 is no longer recognizable, with decreasing life expectancy, reduced outdoor labour productivity, and
lower quality of life in many regions because of too frequent heatwaves and other climate extremes (Chapter 4, Section 4.3.3).
Droughts and stress on water resources renders agriculture economically unviable in some regions (Chapter 3, Section 3.4; Chapter
4, Section 4.3.2) and contributes to increases in poverty (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.1; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). Progress on
the sustainable development goals is largely undone and poverty rates reach new highs (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.3). Major conflicts
take place (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.9.6; Chapter 5, Section 5.2.1). Almost all ecosystems experience irreversible impacts, species
extinction rates are high in all regions, forest fires escalate, and biodiversity strongly decreases, resulting in extensive losses to
ecosystem services. These losses exacerbate poverty and reduce quality of life (Chapter 3, Section 3.4; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2).
Life for many indigenous and rural groups becomes untenable in their ancestral lands (Chapter 4, Box 4.3; Cross-Chapter Box 12
in Chapter 5). The retreat of the West Antarctic ice sheet accelerates (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3 and 3.6), leading to more rapid sea
level rise (Chapter 3, Section 3.3.9; Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2). Several small island states give up hope of survival in their locations
and look to an increasingly fragmented global community for refuge (Chapter 3, Box 3.5; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5).
Aggregate economic damages are substantial, owing to the combined effects of climate changes, political instability, and losses
of ecosystem services (Chapter 4, Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2; Chapter 3, Box 3.6 and Section 3.5.2.4). The general health and wellbeing of people is substantially reduced compared to the conditions in 2020 and continues to worsen over the following decades
(Chapter 5, Section 5.2.3).

3

281

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 3.1 | What are the Impacts of 1.5C and 2C of Warming?
Summary: The impacts of climate change are being felt in every inhabited continent and in the oceans. However,
they are not spread uniformly across the globe, and different parts of the world experience impacts differently.
An average warming of 1.5C across the whole globe raises the risk of heatwaves and heavy rainfall events,
amongst many other potential impacts. Limiting warming to 1.5C rather than 2C can help reduce these risks,
but the impacts the world experiences will depend on the specific greenhouse gas emissions `pathway' taken.
The consequences of temporarily overshooting 1.5C of warming and returning to this level later in the century,
for example, could be larger than if temperature stabilizes below 1.5C. The size and duration of an overshoot
will also affect future impacts.
Human activity has warmed the world by about 1C since pre-industrial times, and the impacts of this warming
have already been felt in many parts of the world. This estimate of the increase in global temperature is the
average of many thousands of temperature measurements taken over the world's land and oceans. Temperatures
are not changing at the same speed everywhere, however: warming is strongest on continents and is particularly
strong in the Arctic in the cold season and in mid-latitude regions in the warm season. This is due to selfamplifying mechanisms, for instance due to snow and ice melt reducing the reflectivity of solar radiation at the
surface, or soil drying leading to less evaporative cooling in the interior of continents. This means that some parts
of the world have already experienced temperatures greater than 1.5C above pre-industrial levels.
Extra warming on top of the approximately 1C we have seen so far would amplify the risks and associated
impacts, with implications for the world and its inhabitants. This would be the case even if the global warming
is held at 1.5C, just half a degree above where we are now, and would be further amplified at 2C of global
warming. Reaching 2C instead of 1.5C of global warming would lead to substantial warming of extreme hot
days in all land regions. It would also lead to an increase in heavy rainfall events in some regions, particularly in
the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, potentially raising the risk of flooding. In addition, some regions,
such as the Mediterranean, are projected to become drier at 2C versus 1.5C of global warming. The impacts of
any additional warming would also include stronger melting of ice sheets and glaciers, as well as increased sea
level rise, which would continue long after the stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations.

3

Change in climate means and extremes have knock-on effects for the societies and ecosystems living on the
planet. Climate change is projected to be a poverty multiplier, which means that its impacts are expected to make
the poor poorer and the total number of people living in poverty greater. The 0.5C rise in global temperatures
that we have experienced in the past 50 years has contributed to shifts in the distribution of plant and animal
species, decreases in crop yields and more frequent wildfires. Similar changes can be expected with further rises
in global temperature.
Essentially, the lower the rise in global temperature above pre-industrial levels, the lower the risks to human
societies and natural ecosystems. Put another way, limiting warming to 1.5C can be understood in terms of
`avoided impacts' compared to higher levels of warming. Many of the impacts of climate change assessed in this
report have lower associated risks at 1.5C compared to 2C.
Thermal expansion of the ocean means sea level will continue to rise even if the increase in global temperature
is limited to 1.5C, but this rise would be lower than in a 2C warmer world. Ocean acidification, the process by
which excess CO2 is dissolving into the ocean and increasing its acidity, is expected to be less damaging in a world
where CO2 emissions are reduced and warming is stabilized at 1.5C compared to 2C. The persistence of coral
reefs is greater in a 1.5C world than that of a 2C world, too.
The impacts of climate change that we experience in future will be affected by factors other than the change
in temperature. The consequences of 1.5C of warming will additionally depend on the specific greenhouse gas
emissions `pathway' that is followed and the extent to which adaptation can reduce vulnerability. This IPCC
Special Report uses a number of `pathways' to explore different possibilities for limiting global warming to
1.5C above pre-industrial levels. One type of pathway sees global temperature stabilize at, or just below, 1.5C.
Another sees global temperature temporarily exceed 1.5C before declining later in the century (known as an
`overshoot' pathway).
(continued on next page)

282

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

Chapter 3

Such pathways would have different associated impacts, so it is important to distinguish between them for
planning adaptation and mitigation strategies. For example, impacts from an overshoot pathway could be larger
than impacts from a stabilization pathway. The size and duration of an overshoot would also have consequences
for the impacts the world experiences. For instance, pathways that overshoot 1.5C run a greater risk of passing
through `tipping points', thresholds beyond which certain impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures
are brought back down later on. The collapse of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets on the time scale of
centuries and millennia is one example of a tipping point.

FAQ3.1:Impact of 1.5C and 2.0C global warming

Temperature rise is not uniform across the world. Some regions will experience greater increases in the temperature of
hot days and cold nights than others.
+ 1.5C: Change in average temperature of hottest days

+ 2.0C: Change in average temperature of hottest days

3
+ 1.5C: Change in average temperature of coldest nights

+ 2.0C: Change in average temperature of coldest nights

C
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

3.0

4.0

6.0

8.0

10.0

FAQ 3.1, Figure 1 | Temperature change is not uniform across the globe. Projected changes are shown for the average temperature of the annual hottest day (top)
and the annual coldest night (bottom) with 1.5C of global warming (left) and 2C of global warming (right) compared to pre-industrial levels.

283

Chapter 3

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems

References

3

Aalto, J., S. Harrison, and M. Luoto, 2017: Statistical modelling predicts almost
complete loss of major periglacial processes in Northern Europe by 2100.
Nature Communications, 1-8, doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00669-3.
Abatzoglou, J.T. and A.P. Williams, 2016: Impact of anthropogenic climate change
on wildfire across western US forests. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 113(42), 11770-11775, doi:10.1073/pnas.1607171113.
Abebe, A. et al., 2016: Growth, yield and quality of maize with elevated
atmospheric carbon dioxide and temperature in north-west India. Agriculture,
Ecosystems & Environment, 218, 66-72,
doi:10.1016/j.agee.2015.11.014.
Acharya, S.S. and M.K. Panigrahi, 2016: Eastward shift and maintenance of
Arabian Sea oxygen minimum zone: Understanding the paradox. Deep-Sea
Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 115, 240-252,
doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2016.07.004.
Acosta Navarro, J. et al., 2017: Future Response of Temperature and Precipitation
to Reduced Aerosol Emissions as Compared with Increased Greenhouse Gas
Concentrations. Journal of Climate, 30, 939-954,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0466.1.
Adams, C., T. Ide, J. Barnett, and A. Detges, 2018: Sampling bias in climate-conflict
research. Nature Climate Change, 8(3), 200-203,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0068-2.
Adger, W.N. et al., 2014: Human Security. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 755-791.
AghaKouchak, A., L. Cheng, O. Mazdiyasni, and A. Farahmand, 2014: Global
warming and changes in risk of concurrent climate extremes: Insights from the
2014 California drought. Geophysical Research Letters, 41(24), 8847-8852,
doi:10.1002/2014gl062308.
AghaKouchak, A., D. Feldman, M. Hoerling, T. Huxman, and J. Lund, 2015: Water
and climate: Recognize anthropogenic drought. Nature, 524(7566), 409-411,
doi:10.1038/524409a.
Aguilera, R., R. Marce, and S. Sabater, 2015: Detection and attribution of global
change effects on river nutrient dynamics in a large Mediterranean basin.
Biogeosciences, 12, 4085-4098, doi:10.5194/bg-12-4085-2015.
Ahlstrom, A., G. Schurgers, A. Arneth, and B. Smith, 2012: Robustness and
uncertainty in terrestrial ecosystem carbon response to CMIP5 climate change
projections. Environmental Research Letters, 7(4), 044008,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/7/4/044008.
Ahmed, K.F., G. Wang, M. Yu, J. Koo, and L. You, 2015: Potential impact of climate
change on cereal crop yield in West Africa. Climatic Change, 133(2), 321-334,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1462-7.
Ainsworth, C.H. et al., 2011: Potential impacts of climate change on Northeast
Pacific marine foodwebs and fisheries. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 68(6),
1217-1229, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsr043.
Akbari, H., S. Menon, and A. Rosenfeld, 2009: Global cooling: Increasing worldwide urban albedos to offset CO2. Climatic Change, 94(3-4), 275-286,
doi:10.1007/s10584-008-9515-9.
Albert, S. et al., 2017: Heading for the hills: climate-driven community relocations
in the Solomon Islands and Alaska provide insight for a 1.5C future. Regional
Environmental Change, 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1256-8.
Albright, R. et al., 2016: Ocean acidification: Linking science to management
solutions using the Great Barrier Reef as a case study. Journal of Environmental
Management, 182, 641-650, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.07.038.
Alexander, P. et al., 2017: Assessing uncertainties in land cover projections. Global
Change Biology, 23(2), 767-781, doi:10.1111/gcb.13447.
Alfieri, L., F. Dottori, R. Betts, P. Salamon, and L. Feyen, 2018: Multi-Model Projections
of River Flood Risk in Europe under Global Warming. Climate, 6(1), 6,
doi:10.3390/cli6010006.
Alfieri, L. et al., 2017: Global projections of river flood risk in a warmer world.
Earth's Future, 5(2), 171-182, doi:10.1002/2016ef000485.
Allen, R., A. Foggo, K. Fabricius, A. Balistreri, and J.M. Hall-Spencer, 2017: Tropical
CO2 seeps reveal the impact of ocean acidification on coral reef invertebrate
recruitment. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 124(2), 607-613,
doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.12.031.

284

Almer, C., J. Laurent-Lucchetti, and M. Oechslin, 2017: Water scarcity and rioting:
Disaggregated evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 86, 193-209,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2017.06.002.
Alongi, D.M., 2008: Mangrove forests: Resilience, protection from tsunamis, and
responses to global climate change. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science,
76(1), 1-13, doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2007.08.024.
Alongi, D.M., 2015: The Impact of Climate Change on Mangrove Forests. Current
Climate Change Reports, 1(1), 30-39, doi:10.1007/s40641-015-0002-x.
Altieri, A.H. and K.B. Gedan, 2015: Climate change and dead zones. Global Change
Biology, 21(4), 1395-1406, doi:10.1111/gcb.12754.
Altieri, A.H. et al., 2017: Tropical dead zones and mass mortalities on coral reefs.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(14), 3660-3665,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1621517114.
Alvarez-Filip, L., N.K. Dulvy, J.A. Gill, I.M. Cote, and A.R. Watkinson, 2009: Flattening
of Caribbean coral reefs: region-wide declines in architectural complexity.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 276(1669), 3019-3025,
doi:10.1098/rspb.2009.0339.
Anderegg, W.R.L. et al., 2015: Tropical nighttime warming as a dominant driver of
variability in the terrestrial carbon sink. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 112(51), 15591-15596, doi:10.1073/pnas.1521479112.
Anderson, K. and G. Peters, 2016: The trouble with negative emissions. Science,
354(6309), 182-183, doi:10.1126/science.aah4567.
Andre, C., D. Boulet, H. Rey-Valette, and B. Rulleau, 2016: Protection by
hard defence structures or relocation of assets exposed to coastal risks:
Contributions and drawbacks of cost-benefit analysis for long-term adaptation
choices to climate change. Ocean and Coastal Management, 134, 173-182,
doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.10.003.
Andre, G., B. Engel, P.B.M. Berentsen, T.V. Vellinga, and A.G.J.M. Oude Lansink,
2011: Quantifying the effect of heat stress on daily milk yield and monitoring
dynamic changes using an adaptive dynamic model. Journal of Dairy Science,
94(9), 4502-4513, doi:10.3168/jds.2010-4139.
Anthony, K.R.N., 2016: Coral Reefs Under Climate Change and Ocean Acidification:
Challenges and Opportunities for Management and Policy. Annual Review of
Environment and Resources, 41(1), 59-81,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-085610.
Anthony, K.R.N. et al., 2015: Operationalizing resilience for adaptive coral reef
management under global environmental change. Global Change Biology,
21(1), 48-61, doi:10.1111/gcb.12700.
Araos, M. et al., 2016: Climate change adaptation planning in large cities: A
systematic global assessment. Environmental Science & Policy, 66, 375-382,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.06.009.
Arent, D.J. et al., 2014: Key economic sectors and services. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 659-708.
Argueso, D., J.P. Evans, L. Fita, and K.J. Bormann, 2014: Temperature response to
future urbanization and climate change. Climate Dynamics, 42(7-8), 2183-2199,
doi:10.1007/s00382-013-1789-6.
Argueso, D., J.P. Evans, A.J. Pitman, A. Di Luca, and A. Luca, 2015: Effects of city
expansion on heat stress under climate change conditions. PLOS ONE, 10(2),
e0117066, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117066.
Arheimer, B., C. Donnelly, and G. Lindstrom, 2017: Regulation of snow-fed rivers
affects flow regimes more than climate change. Nature Communications, 8(1),
62, doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00092-8.
Arias-Ortiz, A. et al., 2018: A marine heatwave drives massive losses from the
world's largest seagrass carbon stocks. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 338-344,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0096-y.
Arkema, K.K. et al., 2013: Coastal habitats shield people and property from sealevel rise and storms. Nature Climate Change, 3(10), 913-918,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1944.
Armour, K.C., I. Eisenman, E. Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, K.E. McCusker, and C.M.
Bitz, 2011: The reversibility of sea ice loss in a state-of-the-art climate model.
Geophysical Research Letters, 38(16), L16705,
doi:10.1029/2011gl048739.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Arnell, N.W. and B. Lloyd-Hughes, 2014: The global-scale impacts of climate change on
water resources and flooding under new climate and socio-economic scenarios.
Climatic Change, 122(1-2), 127-140, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0948-4.
Arnell, N.W., J.A. Lowe, B. Lloyd-Hughes, and T.J. Osborn, 2018: The impacts
avoided with a 1.5C climate target: a global and regional assessment.
Climatic Change, 147(1-2), 61-76, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2115-9.
Arnell, N.W. et al., 2016: Global-scale climate impact functions: the relationship
between climate forcing and impact. Climatic Change, 134(3), 475-487,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-1034-7.
Asiedu, B., J.-O. Adetola, and I. Odame Kissi, 2017a: Aquaculture in troubled
climate: Farmers' perception of climate change and their adaptation. Cogent
Food & Agriculture, 3(1), 1296400, doi:10.1080/23311932.2017.1296400.
Asiedu, B., F.K.E. Nunoo, and S. Iddrisu, 2017b: Prospects and sustainability of
aquaculture development in Ghana, West Africa. Cogent Food & Agriculture,
3(1), 1349531, doi:10.1080/23311932.2017.1349531.
Asplund, M.E. et al., 2014: Ocean acidification and host-pathogen interactions:
Blue mussels, Mytilus edulis, encountering Vibrio tubiashii. Environmental
Microbiology, 16(4), 1029-1039, doi:10.1111/1462-2920.12307.
Asseng, S. et al., 2013: Uncertainty in simulating wheat yields under climate
change. Nature Climate Change, 3(9), 827-832, doi:10.1038/nclimate1916.
Asseng, S. et al., 2015: Rising temperatures reduce global wheat production.
Nature Climate Change, 5(2), 143-147, doi:10.1038/nclimate2470.
Atkinson, A., V. Siegel, E.A. Pakhomov, M.J. Jessopp, and V. Loeb, 2009: A reappraisal of the total biomass and annual production of Antarctic krill.
Deep-Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 56(5), 727-740,
doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2008.12.007.
Auerbach, L.W. et al., 2015: Flood risk of natural and embanked landscapes on the
Ganges-Brahmaputra tidal delta plain. Nature Climate Change, 5, 153-157,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2472.
Backhaus, A., I. Martinez-Zarzoso, and C. Muris, 2015: Do climate variations
explain bilateral migration? A gravity model analysis. IZA Journal of Migration,
4(1), 3, doi:10.1186/s40176-014-0026-3.
Bader, D.A. et al., 2018: Urban Climate Science. In: Climate Change and Cities:
Second Assessment Report of the Urban Climate Change Research Network
[Rosenzweig, C., W. Solecki, P. Romero-Lankao, S. Mehrotra, S. Dhakal, and S.A.
Ibrahim (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 27-60.
Bajelj, B. et al., 2014: Importance of food-demand management for climate
mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 4(10), 924-929,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2353.
Baker, A.C., P.W. Glynn, and B. Riegl, 2008: Climate change and coral reef
bleaching: An ecological assessment of long-term impacts, recovery trends
and future outlook. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 80(4), 435-471,
doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2008.09.003.
Baker, H.S. et al., 2018: Higher CO2 concentrations increase extreme event risk in
a 1.5C world. Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 604-608,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0190-1.
Bakun, A., 1990: Global climate change and intensification of coastal ocean
upwelling. Science, 247(4939), 198-201, doi:10.1126/science.247.4939.198.
Bakun, A. et al., 2015: Anticipated Effects of Climate Change on Coastal Upwelling
Ecosystems. Current Climate Change Reports, 1(2), 85-93,
doi:10.1007/s40641-015-0008-4.
Baldwin, A. and E. Fornale, 2017: Adaptive migration: pluralising the debate on
climate change and migration. The Geographical Journal, 183(4), 322-328,
doi:10.1111/geoj.12242.
Barange, M. et al., 2014: Impacts of climate change on marine ecosystem
production in societies dependent on fisheries. Nature Climate Change, 4(3),
211-216, doi:10.1038/nclimate2119.
Barati, F. et al., 2008: Meiotic competence and DNA damage of porcine oocytes
exposed to an elevated temperature. Theriogenology, 69(6), 767-772,
doi:10.1016/j.theriogenology.2007.08.038.
Barbier, E.B., 2015: Valuing the storm protection service of estuarine and coastal
ecosystems. Ecosystem Services, 11, 32-38, doi:10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.06.010.
Barnett, J. et al., 2014: A local coastal adaptation pathway. Nature Climate
Change, 4(12), 1103-1108, doi:10.1038/nclimate2383.
Bassu, S. et al., 2014: How do various maize crop models vary in their responses
to climate change factors? Global Change Biology, 20(7), 2301-2320,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12520.
Bates, N.R. and A.J. Peters, 2007: The contribution of atmospheric acid deposition
to ocean acidification in the subtropical North Atlantic Ocean. Marine
Chemistry, 107(4), 547-558, doi:10.1016/j.marchem.2007.08.002.

Chapter 3
Bauer, N. et al., 2018: Global energy sector emission reductions and bioenergy use:
overview of the bioenergy demand phase of the EMF-33 model comparison.
Climatic Change, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2226-y.
Bayraktarov, E. et al., 2016: The cost and feasibility of marine coastal restoration.
Ecological Applications, 26(4), 1055-1074, doi:10.1890/15-1077.
Bedarff, H. and C. Jakobeit, 2017: Climate Change, Migration, and Displacement.
The Underestimated Disaster. 38 pp.
Bednarek, N., C.J. Harvey, I.C. Kaplan, R.A. Feely, and J. Moina, 2016: Pteropods
on the edge: Cumulative effects of ocean acidification, warming, and
deoxygenation. Progress in Oceanography, 145, 1-24,
doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2016.04.002.
Bednarek, N. et al., 2012: Extensive dissolution of live pteropods in the Southern
Ocean. Nature Geoscience, 5(12), 881-885, doi:10.1038/ngeo1635.
Bednarek, N. et al., 2014: Limacina helicina shell dissolution as an indicator of
declining habitat suitability owing to ocean acidification in the California
Current Ecosystem. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
281(1785), 20140123, doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.0123.
Beetham, E., P.S. Kench, and S. Popinet, 2017: Future Reef Growth Can Mitigate
Physical Impacts of Sea-Level Rise on Atoll Islands. Earth's Future, 5(10),
1002-1014, doi:10.1002/2017ef000589.
Bell, J., 2012: Planning for Climate Change and Sea Level Rise: Queensland's New
Coastal Plan. Environmental and Planning Law Journal, 29(1), 61-74,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2611478.
Bell, J. and M. Taylor, 2015: Building Climate-Resilient Food Systems for Pacific
Islands. Program Report: 2015-15, WorldFish, Penang, Malaysia, 72 pp.
Bell, J.D., J.E. Johnson, and A.J. Hobday, 2011: Vulnerability of tropical pacific
fisheries and aquaculture to climate change. Secretariat of the Pacific
Community (SPC), Noumea, New Caledonia, 925 pp.
Bell, J.D. et al., 2013: Mixed responses of tropical Pacific fisheries and aquaculture
to climate change. Nature Climate Change, 3(6), 591-599,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1838.
Bell, J.D. et al., 2018: Adaptations to maintain the contributions of small-scale
fisheries to food security in the Pacific Islands. Marine Policy, 88, 303-314,
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.019.
Bender, M.A. et al., 2010: Modeled Impact of Anthropogenic Warming on the
Frequency of Intense Atlantic Hurricanes. Science, 327(5964), 454-458,
doi:10.1126/science.1180568.
Benjamin, L. and A. Thomas, 2016: 1.5C To Stay Alive?: AOSIS and the Long Term
Temperature Goal in the Paris Agreement. IUCNAEL eJournal, 7, 122-129,
www.iucnael.org/en/documents/1324-iucn-ejournal-issue-7.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg, 1995: Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A
Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 57, 289-300,
www.jstor.org/stable/2346101.
Bertram, C. et al., 2018: Targeted policies can compensate most of the increased
sustainability risks in 1.5C mitigation scenarios. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(6), 064038, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac3ec.
Bettini, G., 2017: Where Next? Climate Change, Migration, and the (Bio)politics of
Adaptation. Global Policy, 8(S1), 33-39,
doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12404.
Betts, R.A. et al., 2015: Climate and land use change impacts on global terrestrial
ecosystems and river flows in the HadGEM2-ES Earth system model using the
representative concentration pathways. Biogeosciences, 12(5), 1317-1338,
doi:10.5194/bg-12-1317-2015.
Betts, R.A. et al., 2018: Changes in climate extremes, fresh water availability and
vulnerability to food insecurity projected at 1.5C and 2C global warming
with a higher-resolution global climate model. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
376(2119), 20160452, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0452.
Beyer, H.L. et al., 2018: Risk-sensitive planning for conserving coral reefs under
rapid climate change. Conservation Letters, e12587, doi:10.1111/conl.12587.
Bichet, A. and A. Diedhiou, 2018: West African Sahel has become wetter during the
last 30 years, but dry spells are shorter and more frequent. Climate Research,
75(2), 155-162, doi:10.3354/cr01515.
Bindoff, N.L. et al., 2013a: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change: from
Global to Regional. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner,
M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 867-952.

285

3

Chapter 3

3

Bindoff, N.L. et al., 2013b: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change: from
Global to Regional - Supplementary Material. In: Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin,
G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and
P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1-25.
Bispo, A. et al., 2017: Accounting for Carbon Stocks in Soils and Measuring GHGs
Emission Fluxes from Soils: Do We Have the Necessary Standards? Frontiers in
Environmental Science, 5, 1-12, doi:10.3389/fenvs.2017.00041.
Bittermann, K., S. Rahmstorf, R.E. Kopp, and A.C. Kemp, 2017: Global mean sealevel rise in a world agreed upon in Paris. Environmental Research Letters,
12(12), 124010, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9def.
Blankespoor, B., S. Dasgupta, and B. Laplante, 2014: Sea-Level Rise and Coastal
Wetlands. Ambio, 43(8), 996-1005, doi:10.1007/s13280-014-0500-4.
Block, P. and K. Strzepek, 2012: Power Ahead: Meeting Ethiopia's Energy Needs
Under a Changing Climate. Review of Development Economics, 16(3), 476-488,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9361.2012.00675.x.
Boehlert, B. et al., 2015: Climate change impacts and greenhouse gas mitigation
effects on US water quality. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems,
7(3), 1326-1338, doi:10.1002/2014ms000400.
Bonal, D., B. Burban, C. Stahl, F. Wagner, and B. Herault, 2016: The response of
tropical rainforests to drought - lessons from recent research and future
prospects. Annals of Forest Science, 73(1), 27-44,
doi:10.1007/s13595-015-0522-5.
Bongaerts, P., T. Ridgway, E.M. Sampayo, and O. Hoegh-Guldberg, 2010: Assessing
the `deep reef refugia' hypothesis: focus on Caribbean reefs. Coral Reefs,
29(2), 309-327, doi:10.1007/s00338-009-0581-x.
Bongaerts, P., C. Riginos, R. Brunner, N. Englebert, and S.R. Smith, 2017: Deep
reefs are not universal refuges: reseeding potential varies among coral species.
Science Advances, 3(2), e1602373, doi:10.1126/sciadv.1602373.
Bonsch, M. et al., 2016: Trade-offs between land and water requirements for
large-scale bioenergy production. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 11-24,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12226.
Bonte, M. and J.J.G. Zwolsman, 2010: Climate change induced salinisation of
artificial lakes in the Netherlands and consequences for drinking water
production. Water Research, 44(15), 4411-4424,
doi:10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.004.
Boone, R.B., R.T. Conant, J. Sircely, P.K. Thornton, and M. Herrero, 2018: Climate
change impacts on selected global rangeland ecosystem services. Global
Change Biology, 24(3), 1382-1393, doi:10.1111/gcb.13995.
Booth, M.S., 2018: Not carbon neutral: Assessing the net emissions impact
of residues burned for bioenergy. Environmental Research Letters, 13(3),
035001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaac88.
Bopp, L. et al., 2013: Multiple stressors of ocean ecosystems in the 21st century:
Projections with CMIP5 models. Biogeosciences, 10(10), 6225-6245,
doi:10.5194/bg-10-6225-2013.
Borma, L.S., C.A. Nobre, and M.F. Cardoso, 2013: 2.15 - Response of the Amazon
Tropical Forests to Deforestation, Climate, and Extremes, and the Occurrence
of Drought and Fire. In: Climate Vulnerability [Pielke, R.A. (ed.)]. Academic
Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 153-163, doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-384703-4.00228-8.
Bosello, F. and E. De Cian, 2014: Climate change, sea level rise, and coastal
disasters. A review of modeling practices. Energy Economics, 46, 593-605,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2013.09.002.
Boucher, O. et al., 2012: Reversibility in an Earth System model in response to
CO2 concentration changes. Environmental Research Letters, 7(2), 024013,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/7/2/024013.
Boucher, O. et al., 2013a: Rethinking climate engineering categorization in the
context of climate change mitigation and adaptation. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 5(1), 23-35, doi:10.1002/wcc.261.
Boucher, O. et al., 2013b: Clouds and Aerosols. In: Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin,
G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and
P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 573-657.
Bouttes, N., J.M. Gregory, and J.A. Lowe, 2013: The Reversibility of Sea Level Rise.
Journal of Climate, 26(8), 2502-2513, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00285.1.
Bouzid, M., F.J. Colon-Gonzalez, T. Lung, I.R. Lake, and P.R. Hunter, 2014: Climate
change and the emergence of vector-borne diseases in Europe: case study of
dengue fever. BMC Public Health, 14(1), 781, doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-781.

286

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Boyd, P.W., 2015: Toward quantifying the response of the oceans' biological pump
to climate change. Frontiers in Marine Science, 2, 77,
doi:10.3389/fmars.2015.00077.
Boyd, P.W., S. Sundby, and H.-O. Portner, 2014: Cross-chapter box on net primary
production in the ocean. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 133-136.
Boyd, P.W., S.T. Lennartz, D.M. Glover, and S.C. Doney, 2015: Biological ramifications
of climate-change-mediated oceanic multi-stressors. Nature Climate Change,
5(1), 71-79, doi:10.1038/nclimate2441.
Boysen, L. et al., 2017: The limits to global-warming mitigation by terrestrial
carbon removal. Earth's Future, 5(5), 463-474, doi:10.1002/2016ef000469.
Bozec, Y.-M.M., L. Alvarez-Filip, and P.J. Mumby, 2015: The dynamics of
architectural complexity on coral reefs under climate change. Global Change
Biology, 21(1), 223-235, doi:10.1111/gcb.12698.
Brathen, K., V. Gonzalez, and N. Yoccoz, 2018: Gatekeepers to the effects of
climate warming? Niche construction restricts plant community changes
along a temperature gradient. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and
Systematics, 30, 71-81, doi:10.1016/j.ppees.2017.06.005.
Breitburg, D. et al., 2018: Declining oxygen in the global ocean and coastal waters.
Science, 359(6371), eaam7240, doi:10.1126/science.aam7240.
Brigham-Grette, J. et al., 2013: Pliocene Warmth, Polar Amplification, and Stepped
Pleistocene Cooling Recorded in NE Arctic Russia. Science, 340(6139), 1421-
1427, doi:10.1126/science.1233137.
Bright, R.M. et al., 2017: Local temperature response to land cover and
management change driven by non-radiative processes. Nature Climate
Change, 7(4), 296-302, doi:10.1038/nclimate3250.
Bring, A. et al., 2016: Arctic terrestrial hydrology: A synthesis of processes,
regional effects, and research challenges. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Biogeosciences, 121(3), 621-649, doi:10.1002/2015jg003131.
Brito, B.P., L.L. Rodriguez, J.M. Hammond, J. Pinto, and A.M. Perez, 2017: Review
of the Global Distribution of Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus from 2007 to 2014.
Transboundary and Emerging Diseases, 64(2), 316-332,
doi:10.1111/tbed.12373.
Brodie, J.E. et al., 2012: Terrestrial pollutant runoff to the Great Barrier Reef: An
update of issues, priorities and management responses. Marine Pollution
Bulletin, 65(4-9), 81-100, doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.12.012.
Brown, S., R.J. Nicholls, J.A. Lowe, and J. Hinkel, 2016: Spatial variations of sealevel rise and impacts: An application of DIVA. Climatic Change, 134(3), 403-
416, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0925-y.
Brown, S. et al., 2018a: Quantifying Land and People Exposed to Sea-Level Rise
with No Mitigation and 1.5C and 2.0C Rise in Global Temperatures to Year
2300. Earth's Future, 6(3), 583-600, doi:10.1002/2017ef000738.
Brown, S. et al., 2018b: What are the implications of sea-level rise for a 1.5, 2
and 3C rise in global mean temperatures in the Ganges-BrahmaputraMeghna and other vulnerable deltas? Regional Environmental Change, 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1311-0.
Bruge, A., P. Alvarez, A. Fontan, U. Cotano, and G. Chust, 2016: Thermal Niche
Tracking and Future Distribution of Atlantic Mackerel Spawning in Response
to Ocean Warming. Frontiers in Marine Science, 3, 86,
doi:10.3389/fmars.2016.00086.
Bruno, J.F. and E.R. Selig, 2007: Regional decline of coral cover in the IndoPacific: Timing, extent, and subregional comparisons. PLOS ONE, 2(8), e711,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000711.
Brzoska, M. and C. Frohlich, 2016: Climate change, migration and violent
conflict: vulnerabilities, pathways and adaptation strategies. Migration and
Development, 5(2), 190-210, doi:10.1080/21632324.2015.1022973.
Buhaug, H., 2015: Climate-conflict research: some reflections on the way forward.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 6(3), 269-275,
doi:10.1002/wcc.336.
Buhaug, H., 2016: Climate Change and Conflict: Taking Stock. Peace Economics,
Peace Science and Public Policy, 22(4), 331-338,
doi:10.1515/peps-2016-0034.
Buhaug, H. et al., 2014: One effect to rule them all? A comment on climate and
conflict. Climatic Change, 127(3-4), 391-397,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1266-1.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Burge, C.A. et al., 2014: Climate Change Influences on Marine Infectious Diseases:
Implications for Management and Society. Annual Review of Marine Science,
6(1), 249-277, doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-010213-135029.
Burke, E.J., S.E. Chadburn, C. Huntingford, and C.D. Jones, 2018: CO2 loss by
permafrost thawing implies additional emissions reductions to limit warming
to 1.5 or 2C. Environmental Research Letters, 13(2), 024024,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa138.
Burke, E.J. et al., 2017: Quantifying uncertainties of permafrost carbon-climate
feedbacks. Biogeosciences, 14(12), 3051-3066,
doi:10.5194/bg-14-3051-2017.
Burke, L., K. Reytar, M. Spalding, and A. Perry, 2011: Reefs at risk: Revisited. World
Resources Institute, Washington DC, USA, 115 pp.
Burke, M., S.M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel, 2015a: Climate and Conflict. Annual Review of
Economics, 7(1), 577-617, doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115430.
Burke, M., S.M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel, 2015b: Global non-linear effect of
temperature on economic production. Nature, 527(7577), 235-239,
doi:10.1038/nature15725.
Burke, M., W.M. Davis, and N.S. Diffenbaugh, 2018: Large potential reduction in
economic damages under UN mitigation targets. Nature, 557(7706), 549-553,
doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0071-9.
Burrows, K. and P. Kinney, 2016: Exploring the Climate Change, Migration and
Conflict Nexus. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 13(4), 443, doi:10.3390/ijerph13040443.
Burrows, M.T. et al., 2014: Geographical limits to species-range shifts are
suggested by climate velocity. Nature, 507(7493), 492-495,
doi:10.1038/nature12976.
Butler, E.E. and P. Huybers, 2013: Adaptation of US maize to temperature
variations. Nature Climate Change, 3(1), 68-72, doi:10.1038/nclimate1585.
Buurman, J. and V. Babovic, 2016: Adaptation Pathways and Real Options Analysis:
An approach to deep uncertainty in climate change adaptation policies. Policy
and Society, 35(2), 137-150, doi:10.1016/j.polsoc.2016.05.002.
Byers, E. et al., 2018: Global exposure and vulnerability to multi-sector
development and climate change hotspots. Environmental Research Letters,
13(5), 055012, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf45.
Cacciapaglia, C. and R. van Woesik, 2015: Reef-coral refugia in a rapidly changing
ocean. Global Change Biology, 21(6), 2272-2282, doi:10.1111/gcb.12851.
Caesar, L., S. Rahmstorf, A. Robinson, G. Feulner, and V. Saba, 2018: Observed
fingerprint of a weakening Atlantic Ocean overturning circulation. Nature,
556(7700), 191-196, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0006-5.
Cai, R., S. Feng, M. Oppenheimer, and M. Pytlikova, 2016: Climate variability and
international migration: The importance of the agricultural linkage. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 79, 135-151,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2016.06.005.
Cai, W. et al., 2012: More extreme swings of the South Pacific convergence zone
due to greenhouse warming. Nature, 488(7411), 365-369,
doi:10.1038/nature11358.
Cai, W. et al., 2015: Increased frequency of extreme La Nina events under
greenhouse warming. Nature Climate Change, 5, 132-137,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2492.
Cai, W.-J. et al., 2011: Acidification of subsurface coastal waters enhanced by
eutrophication. Nature Geoscience, 4(11), 766-770, doi:10.1038/ngeo1297.
Cai, Y., T.M. Lenton, and T.S. Lontzek, 2016: Risk of multiple interacting tipping
points should encourage rapid CO2 emission reduction. Nature Climate
Change, 6(5), 520-525, doi:10.1038/nclimate2964.
Caldeira, K., 2013: Coral Bleaching: Coral `refugia' amid heating seas. Nature
Climate Change, 3(5), 444-445, doi:10.1038/nclimate1888.
Callaway, R. et al., 2012: Review of climate change impacts on marine aquaculture
in the UK and Ireland. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater
Ecosystems, 22(3), 389-421, doi:10.1002/aqc.2247.
Camargo, S.J., 2013: Global and Regional Aspects of Tropical Cyclone Activity in
the CMIP5 Models. Journal of Climate, 26(24), 9880-9902,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00549.1.
Campbell, J. and O. Warrick, 2014: Climate Change and Migration Issues in the
Pacific. United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific (UNESCAP) Pacific Office, Suva, Fiji, 34 pp.
Cao, L. and K. Caldeira, 2010: Atmospheric carbon dioxide removal: long-term
consequences and commitment. Environmental Research Letters, 5(2),
024011, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/5/2/024011.
Cao, L., K. Caldeira, and A.K. Jain, 2007: Effects of carbon dioxide and climate
change on ocean acidification and carbonate mineral saturation. Geophysical
Research Letters, 34(5), L05607, doi:10.1029/2006gl028605.

Chapter 3
Capo, E. et al., 2017: Tracking a century of changes in microbial eukaryotic diversity
in lakes driven by nutrient enrichment and climate warming. Environmental
Microbiology, 19(7), 2873-2892, doi:10.1111/1462-2920.13815.
Capron, E., A. Govin, R. Feng, B.L. Otto-Bliesner, and E.W. Wolff, 2017: Critical
evaluation of climate syntheses to benchmark CMIP6/PMIP4 127 ka Last
Interglacial simulations in the high-latitude regions. Quaternary Science
Reviews, 168, 137-150, doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2017.04.019.
Carleton, T.A. and S.M. Hsiang, 2016: Social and economic impacts of climate.
Science, 353(6304), aad9837, doi:10.1126/science.aad9837.
Carleton, T.A., S.M. Hsiang, and M. Burke, 2016: Conflict in a changing climate. The
European Physical Journal Special Topics, 225(3), 489-511,
doi:10.1140/epjst/e2015-50100-5.
Carstensen, J., J.H. Andersen, B.G. Gustafsson, and D.J. Conley, 2014: Deoxygenation
of the Baltic Sea during the last century. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 111(15), 5628-33, doi:10.1073/pnas.1323156111.
Carvalho, D., A. Rocha, M. Gomez-Gesteira, and C. Silva Santos, 2017: Potential
impacts of climate change on European wind energy resource under the
CMIP5 future climate projections. Renewable Energy, 101, 29-40,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2016.08.036.
Castillo, N., L.M. Saavedra, C.A. Vargas, C. Gallardo-Escarate, and C. Detree, 2017:
Ocean acidification and pathogen exposure modulate the immune response
of the edible mussel Mytilus chilensis. Fish and Shellfish Immunology, 70,
149-155, doi:10.1016/j.fsi.2017.08.047.
Cazenave, A. and G. Cozannet, 2014: Sea level rise and its coastal impacts. Earth's
Future, 2(2), 15-34, doi:10.1002/2013ef000188.
Cazenave, A. et al., 2014: The rate of sea-level rise. Nature Climate Change, 4(5),
358-361, doi:10.1038/nclimate2159.
Ceccarelli, S. and J.E. Rabinovich, 2015: Global Climate Change Effects on
Venezuela's Vulnerability to Chagas Disease is Linked to the Geographic
Distribution of Five Triatomine Species. Journal of Medical Entomology, 52(6),
1333-1343, doi:10.1093/jme/tjv119.
Chadburn, S.E. et al., 2017: An observation-based constraint on permafrost loss as a
function of global warming. Nature Climate Change, 1-6, doi:10.1038/nclimate3262.
Challinor, A.J. et al., 2014: A meta-analysis of crop yield under climate change and
adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 4(4), 287-291,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2153.
Chapman, A. and S. Darby, 2016: Evaluating sustainable adaptation strategies
for vulnerable mega-deltas using system dynamics modelling: Rice agriculture
in the Mekong Delta's An Giang Province, Vietnam. Science of The Total
Environment, 559, 326-338, doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.02.162.
Chapman, A.D., S.E. Darby, H.M. Hong, E.L. Tompkins, and T.P.D. Van, 2016:
Adaptation and development trade-offs: fluvial sediment deposition and the
sustainability of rice-cropping in An Giang Province, Mekong Delta. Climatic
Change, 137(3-4), 1-16, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1684-3.
Cheal, A.J., M.A. MacNeil, M.J. Emslie, and H. Sweatman, 2017: The threat to
coral reefs from more intense cyclones under climate change. Global Change
Biology, 23(4), 1511-1524, doi:10.1111/gcb.13593.
Chen, B. et al., 2014: The impact of climate change and anthropogenic activities
on alpine grassland over the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Agricultural and Forest
Meteorology, 189, 11-18, doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2014.01.002.
Chen, C., G.S. Zhou, and L. Zhou, 2014: Impacts of climate change on rice yield
in china from 1961 to 2010 based on provincial data. Journal of Integrative
Agriculture, 13(7), 1555-1564, doi:10.1016/s2095-3119(14)60816-9.
Chen, J. et al., 2017: Assessing changes of river discharge under global warming
of 1.5C and 2C in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River Basin: Approach by
using multiple- GCMs and hydrological models. Quaternary International, 453,
1-11, doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2017.01.017.
Cheung, W.W.L., R. Watson, and D. Pauly, 2013: Signature of ocean warming in
global fisheries catch. Nature, 497(7449), 365-368, doi:10.1038/nature12156.
Cheung, W.W.L., G. Reygondeau, and T.L. Frolicher, 2016a: Large benefits to marine
fisheries of meeting the 1.5C global warming target. Science, 354(6319),
1591-1594, doi:10.1126/science.aag2331.
Cheung, W.W.L. et al., 2009: Projecting global marine biodiversity impacts under
climate change scenarios. Fish and Fisheries, 10(3), 235-251,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00315.x.
Cheung, W.W.L. et al., 2010: Large-scale redistribution of maximum fisheries catch
potential in the global ocean under climate change. Global Change Biology,
16(1), 24-35, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.01995.x.
Cheung, W.W.L. et al., 2016b: Structural uncertainty in projecting global
fisheries catches under climate change. Ecological Modelling, 325, 57-66,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2015.12.018.

287

3

Chapter 3

3

Chiew, F.H.S. et al., 2014: Observed hydrologic non-stationarity in far south-eastern
Australia: Implications for modelling and prediction. Stochastic Environmental
Research and Risk Assessment, 28(1), 3-15, doi:10.1007/s00477-013-0755-5.
Chilkoti, V., T. Bolisetti, and R. Balachandar, 2017: Climate change impact
assessment on hydropower generation using multi-model climate ensemble.
Renewable Energy, 109, 510-517, doi:10.1016/j.renene.2017.02.041.
Cho, S.J. and B.A. McCarl, 2017: Climate change influences on crop mix shifts in
the United States. Scientific Reports, 7, 40845, doi:10.1038/srep40845.
Chollett, I. and P.J. Mumby, 2013: Reefs of last resort: Locating and assessing
thermal refugia in the wider Caribbean. Biological Conservation, 167(2013),
179-186, doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2013.08.010.
Chollett, I., P.J. Mumby, and J. Cortes, 2010: Upwelling areas do not guarantee
refuge for coral reefs in a warming ocean. Marine Ecology Progress Series,
416, 47-56, doi:10.2307/24875251.
Chollett, I., S. Enriquez, and P.J. Mumby, 2014: Redefining Thermal Regimes to
Design Reserves for Coral Reefs in the Face of Climate Change. PLOS ONE,
9(10), e110634, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0110634.
Christensen, J.H. et al., 2007: Regional Climate Projections. In: Climate Change
2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.
Tignor, and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 847-940.
Christensen, J.H. et al., 2013: Climate Phenomena and their Relevance for Future Regional
Climate Change. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1217-1308.
Christiansen, S.M., 2016: Introduction. In: Climate Conflicts - A Case of
International Environmental and Humanitarian Law. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 1-17, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-27945-9_1.
Chung, E.S., H.-K. Cheong, J.-H. Park, J.-H. Kim, and H. Han, 2017: Current and
Projected Burden of Disease From High Ambient Temperature in Korea.
Epidemiology, 28, S98-S105, doi:10.1097/ede.0000000000000731.
Church, J. et al., 2013: Sea level change. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
NewYork, NY, USA, pp. 1137-1216.
Chust, G., 2014: Are Calanus spp. shifting poleward in the North Atlantic? A
habitat modelling approach. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71(2), 241-253,
doi:10.1093/icesjms/fst147.
Chust, G. et al., 2014: Biomass changes and trophic amplification of plankton in a
warmer ocean. Global Change Biology, 20(7), 2124-2139, doi:10.1111/gcb.12562.
Ciais, P. et al., 2013: Carbon and Other Biogeochemical Cycles. In: Climate Change
2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels,
Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 465-570.
Cinner, J.E. et al., 2012: Vulnerability of coastal communities to key impacts of
climate change on coral reef fisheries. Global Environmental Change, 22(1),
12-20, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.09.018.
Cinner, J.E. et al., 2016: A framework for understanding climate change impacts on
coral reef social-ecological systems. Regional Environmental Change, 16(4),
1133-1146, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0832-z.
Ciscar, J.C. (ed.), 2014: Climate impacts in Europe - The JRC PESETA II project. EUR
- Scientific and Technical Research, Publications Office of the European Union,
doi:10.2791/7409.
Clark, P.U. et al., 2016: Consequences of twenty-first-century policy for multimillennial climate and sea-level change. Nature Climate Change, 6(4), 360-
369, doi:10.1038/nclimate2923.
Clarke, L.E. et al., 2014: Assessing Transformation Pathways. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 413-510.

288

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Clausen, K.K. and P. Clausen, 2014: Forecasting future drowning of coastal
waterbird habitats reveals a major conservation concern. Biological
Conservation, 171, 177-185, doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2014.01.033.
Clements, J.C. and T. Chopin, 2017: Ocean acidification and marine aquaculture
in North America: Potential impacts and mitigation strategies. Reviews in
Aquaculture, 9(4), 326341, doi:10.1111/raq.12140.
Clements, J.C., D. Bourque, J. McLaughlin, M. Stephenson, and L.A. Comeau,
2017: Extreme ocean acidification reduces the susceptibility of eastern oyster
shells to a polydorid parasite. Journal of Fish Diseases, 40(11), 1573-1585,
doi:10.1111/jfd.12626.
Collier, R.J. and K.G. Gebremedhin, 2015: Thermal Biology of Domestic Animals.
Annual Review of Animal Biosciences, 3(1), 513-532,
doi:10.1146/annurev-animal-022114-110659.
Collins, M. et al., 2013: Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments
and Irreversibility. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner,
M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 1029-1136.
Colon-Gonzalez, F.J., C. Fezzi, I.R. Lake, P.R. Hunter, and Y. Sukthana, 2013: The
Effects of Weather and Climate Change on Dengue. PLOS Neglected Tropical
Diseases, 7(11), e2503, doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0002503.
Colon-Gonzalez, F.J. et al., 2018: Limiting global-mean temperature increase to
1.5-2C could reduce the incidence and spatial spread of dengue fever in
Latin America. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(24),
6243-6248, doi:10.1073/pnas.1718945115.
Coniglio, N.D. and G. Pesce, 2015: Climate variability and international migration:
an empirical analysis. Environment and Development Economics, 20(04),
434-468, doi:10.1017/s1355770x14000722.
Conlon, K., A. Monaghan, M. Hayden, and O. Wilhelmi, 2016: Potential impacts of
future warming and land use changes on intra-urban heat exposure in Houston,
Texas. PLOS ONE, 11(2), e0148890, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148890.
Constable, A.L., 2017: Climate change and migration in the Pacific: options for
Tuvalu and the Marshall Islands. Regional Environmental Change, 17(4),
1029-1038, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1004-5.
Cook, B.I., M.J. Puma, and N.Y. Krakauer, 2011: Irrigation induced surface cooling
in the context of modern and increased greenhouse gas forcing. Climate
Dynamics, 37(7-8), 1587-1600, doi:10.1007/s00382-010-0932-x.
Cook, B.I., K.J. Anchukaitis, R. Touchan, D.M. Meko, and E.R. Cook, 2016:
Spatiotemporal drought variability in the Mediterranean over the last 900
years. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 121(5), 2060-2074,
doi:10.1002/2015jd023929.
Cooper, E.J., 2014: Warmer Shorter Winters Disrupt Arctic Terrestrial Ecosystems.
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 45, 271-295,
doi:10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-120213-091620.
Cooper, J.A.G., M.C. O'Connor, and S. McIvor, 2016: Coastal defences versus coastal
ecosystems: A regional appraisal. Marine Policy, doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2016.02.021.
Costanza, R. et al., 2014: Changes in the global value of ecosystem services.
Global Environmental Change, 26(1), 152-158,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.002.
Coumou, D. and A. Robinson, 2013: Historic and future increase in the global land
area affected by monthly heat extremes. Environmental Research Letters, 8(3),
034018, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/034018.
Cousino, L.K., R.H. Becker, and K.A. Zmijewski, 2015: Modeling the effects of
climate change on water, sediment, and nutrient yields from the Maumee River
watershed. Journal of Hydrology: Regional Studies, 4, 762-775,
doi:10.1016/j.ejrh.2015.06.017.
Cowtan, K. and R.G. Way, 2014: Coverage bias in the HadCRUT4 temperature
series and its impact on recent temperature trends. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society, 140(683), 1935-1944,
doi:10.1002/qj.2297.
Cox, P.M., R.A. Betts, C.D. Jones, S.A. Spall, and I.J. Totterdell, 2000: Acceleration
of global warming due to carbon-cycle feedbacks in a coupled climate model.
Nature, 408, 184-187, doi:10.1038/35041539.
Cox, P.M. et al., 2013: Sensitivity of tropical carbon to climate change constrained
by carbon dioxide variability. Nature, 494, 341-344,
doi:10.1038/nature11882.
Craine, J.M., A.J. Elmore, K.C. Olson, and D. Tolleson, 2010: Climate change
and cattle nutritional stress. Global Change Biology, 16(10), 2901-2911,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.02060.x.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Cramer, W. et al., 2014: Detection and Attribution of Observed Impacts. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken,
K.J. Mach, and M.D. Mastrandrea (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 979-1037.
Crosby, S.C. et al., 2016: Salt marsh persistence is threatened by predicted sealevel rise. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 181, 93-99,
doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2016.08.018.
Crowther, T.W. et al., 2016: Quantifying global soil carbon losses in response to
warming. Nature, 540(7631), 104-108, doi:10.1038/nature20150.
Croxall, J.P., 1992: Southern-Ocean Environmental-Changes - Effects on Seabird,
Seal and Whale Populations. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 338(1285), 319-328, doi:10.1098/rstb.1992.0152.
Cui, L., Z. Ge, L. Yuan, and L. Zhang, 2015: Vulnerability assessment of the coastal
wetlands in the Yangtze Estuary, China to sea-level rise. Estuarine, Coastal and
Shelf Science, 156, 42-51, doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2014.06.015.
Cunningham, S.C., 2015: Balancing the environmental benefits of reforestation in
agricultural regions. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics,
17(4), 301-317, doi:10.1016/j.ppees.2015.06.001.
d'Amour, C.B., L. Wenz, M. Kalkuhl, J.C. Steckel, and F. Creutzig, 2016:
Teleconnected food supply shocks. Environmental Research Letters, 11(3),
035007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/035007.
Dai, A., 2016: Historical and Future Changes in Streamflow and Continental
Runoff. In: Terrestrial Water Cycle and Climate Change: Natural and HumanInduced Impacts [Tang, Q. and T. Oki (eds.)]. American Geophysical Union
(AGU), Washington DC, USA, pp. 17-37, doi:10.1002/9781118971772.ch2.
Daioglou, V. et al., 2016: Projections of the availability and cost of residues from
agriculture and forestry. GCB Bioenergy, 8(2), 456-470, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12285.
Dale, V.H. et al., 2017: Status and prospects for renewable energy using wood
pellets from the southeastern United States. GCB Bioenergy, 9(8), 1296-1305,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12445.
Daliakopoulos, I.N. et al., 2017: Yield Response of Mediterranean Rangelands
under a Changing Climate. Land Degradation & Development, 28(7), 1962-
1972, doi:10.1002/ldr.2717.
Dalin, C. and I. Rodriguez-Iturbe, 2016: Environmental impacts of food trade via
resource use and greenhouse gas emissions. Environmental Research Letters,
11(3), 035012, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/035012.
Dalpadado, P. et al., 2014: Productivity in the Barents Sea - Response to recent
climate variability. PLOS ONE, 9(5), e95273,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0095273.
Dargie, G.C. et al., 2017: Age, extent and carbon storage of the central Congo Basin
peatland complex. Nature, 542(7639), 86-90, doi:10.1038/nature21048.
Dasgupta, P. et al., 2014: Rural areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 613-657.
David, C. et al., 2017: Community structure of under-ice fauna in relation to winter
sea-ice habitat properties from the Weddell Sea. Polar Biology, 40(2), 247-261,
doi:10.1007/s00300-016-1948-4.
Davin, E.L., S.I. Seneviratne, P. Ciais, A. Olioso, and T. Wang, 2014: Preferential
cooling of hot extremes from cropland albedo management. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(27), 9757-9761,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1317323111.
Dawson, R.J. et al., 2018: Urban areas in coastal zones. In: Climate Change and
Cities: Second Assessment Report of the Urban Climate Change Research
Network [Rosenzweig, C., W.D. Solecki, P. Romero-Lankao, S. Mehrotra, S.
Dhakal, and S.A. Ibrahim (eds.)]. Cambridge Univeristy Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 319-362.
de Jong, J. et al., 2014: Consequences of an increased extraction of forest biofuel
in Sweden - A synthesis from the biofuel research programme 2007-2011,
supported by Swedish Energy Agency. Summary of the synthesis report. ER
2014:09, Swedish Energy Agency, Eskilstuna, Sweden, 37 pp.
de Queiroz, A.R., L.M. Marangon Lima, J.W. Marangon Lima, B.C. da Silva, and
L.A. Scianni, 2016: Climate change impacts in the energy supply of the
Brazilian hydro-dominant power system. Renewable Energy, 99, 379-389,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2016.07.022.

Chapter 3
De Rensis, F., I. Garcia-Ispierto, and F. Lopez-Gatius, 2015: Seasonal heat stress:
Clinical implications and hormone treatments for the fertility of dairy cows.
Theriogenology, 84(5), 659-666, doi:10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.04.021.
de Sherbinin, A., 2014: Climate change hotspots mapping: what have we learned?
Climatic Change, 123(1), 23-37, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0900-7.
De Souza, A.P., J.-C. Cocuron, A.C. Garcia, A.P. Alonso, and M.S. Buckeridge,
2015: Changes in Whole-Plant Metabolism during the Grain-Filling Stage in
Sorghum Grown under Elevated CO2 and Drought. Plant Physiology, 169(3),
1755-1765, doi:10.1104/pp.15.01054.
de Vernal, A., R. Gersonde, H. Goosse, M.-S. Seidenkrantz, and E.W. Wolff, 2013:
Sea ice in the paleoclimate system: the challenge of reconstructing sea ice
from proxies - an introduction. Quaternary Science Reviews, 79, 1-8,
doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2013.08.009.
de Vrese, P., S. Hagemann, and M. Claussen, 2016: Asian irrigation, African rain:
Remote impacts of irrigation. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(8), 3737-3745,
doi:10.1002/2016gl068146.
De'ath, G., K.E. Fabricius, H. Sweatman, and M. Puotinen, 2012: The 27-year decline
of coral cover on the Great Barrier Reef and its causes. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109(44), 17995-9,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1208909109.
DeBeer, C.M., H.S. Wheater, S.K. Carey, and K.P. Chun, 2016: Recent climatic,
cryospheric, and hydrological changes over the interior of western Canada: a
review and synthesis. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 20(4), 1573-1598,
doi:10.5194/hess-20-1573-2016.
DeConto, R.M. and D. Pollard, 2016: Contribution of Antarctica to past and future
sea-level rise. Nature, 531(7596), 591-7, doi:10.1038/nature17145.
Deque, M. et al., 2017: A multi-model climate response over tropical Africa at
+2C. Climate Services, 7, 87-95, doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2016.06.002.
Deryng, D., D. Conway, N. Ramankutty, J. Price, and R. Warren, 2014: Global crop
yield response to extreme heat stress under multiple climate change futures.
Environmental Research Letters, 9(3), 034011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/3/034011.
Deutsch, C., A. Ferrel, B. Seibel, H.-O. Portner, and R.B. Huey, 2015: Climate change
tightens a metabolic constraint on marine habitats. Science, 348(6239),
1132-1135, doi:10.1126/science.aaa1605.
Di Lorenzo, E., 2015: Climate science: The future of coastal ocean upwelling.
Nature, 518(7539), 310-311, doi:10.1038/518310a.
Di Nitto, D. et al., 2014: Mangroves facing climate change: Landward migration
potential in response to projected scenarios of sea level rise. Biogeosciences,
11(3), 857-871, doi:10.5194/bg-11-857-2014.
Diaz, R.J. and R. Rosenberg, 2008: Spreading Dead Zones and Consequences for
Marine Ecosystems. Science, 321(5891), 926-929,
doi:10.1126/science.1156401.
Diedhiou, A. et al., 2018: Changes in climate extremes over West and Central
Africa at 1.5C and 2C global warming. Environmental Research Letters,
13(6), 065020, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac3e5.
Dieleman, C.M., Z. Lindo, J.W. McLaughlin, A.E. Craig, and B.A. Branfireun, 2016:
Climate change effects on peatland decomposition and porewater dissolved
organic carbon biogeochemistry. Biogeochemistry, 128(3), 385-396,
doi:10.1007/s10533-016-0214-8.
Dionisio, K.L. et al., 2017: Characterizing the impact of projected changes in climate
and air quality on human exposures to ozone. Journal of Exposure Science and
Environmental Epidemiology, 27, 260-270, doi:10.1038/jes.2016.81.
Do, H.X., S. Westra, and M. Leonard, 2017: A global-scale investigation of
trends in annual maximum streamflow. Journal of Hydrology, 552, 28-43,
doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2017.06.015.
Doll, P. et al., 2018: Risks for the global freshwater system at 1.5C and 2C global
warming. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 044038,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab792.
Dolman, A.J. et al., 2010: A Carbon Cycle Science Update Since IPCC AR4. Ambio,
39(5-6), 402-412, doi:10.1007/s13280-010-0083-7.
Doney, S., L. Bopp, and M. Long, 2014: Historical and Future Trends in Ocean
Climate and Biogeochemistry. Oceanography, 27(1), 108-119,
doi:10.5670/oceanog.2014.14.
Donk, P., E. Van Uytven, P. Willems, and M.A. Taylor, 2018: Assessment of the
potential implications of a 1.5C versus higher global temperature rise for the
Afobaka hydropower scheme in Suriname. Regional Environmental Change,
1-13, doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1339-1.
Donnelly, C. et al., 2017: Impacts of climate change on European hydrology at
1.5, 2 and 3 degrees mean global warming above preindustrial level. Climatic
Change, 143(1-2), 13-26, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1971-7.

289

3

Chapter 3

3

Donner, S.D., 2009: Coping with commitment: Projected thermal stress on coral
reefs under different future scenarios. PLOS ONE, 4(6), e5712,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005712.
Donner, S.D., W.J. Skirving, C.M. Little, M. Oppenheimer, and O. Hoegh-Guldberg,
2005: Global assessment of coral bleaching and required rates of adaptation
under climate change. Global Change Biology, 11(12), 2251-2265,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2005.01073.x.
Dosio, A., 2017: Projection of temperature and heat waves for Africa with an
ensemble of CORDEX Regional Climate Models. Climate Dynamics, 49(1),
493-519, doi:10.1007/s00382-016-3355-5.
Dosio, A. and E.M. Fischer, 2018: Will half a degree make a difference? Robust
projections of indices of mean and extreme climate in Europe under 1.5C,
2C, and 3C global warming. Geophysical Research Letters, 45, 935-944,
doi:10.1002/2017gl076222.
Dosio, A., L. Mentaschi, E.M. Fischer, and K. Wyser, 2018: Extreme heat waves
under 1.5C and 2C global warming. Environmental Research Letters, 13(5),
054006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab827.
Dove, S.G. et al., 2013: Future reef decalcification under a business-as-usual CO2
emission scenario. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(38),
15342-15347, doi:10.1073/pnas.1302701110.
Dowsett, H. et al., 2016: The PRISM4 (mid-Piacenzian) paleoenvironmental
reconstruction. Climate of the Past, 12(7), 1519-1538,
doi:10.5194/cp-12-1519-2016.
Doyon, B., D. Belanger, and P. Gosselin, 2008: The potential impact of climate
change on annual and seasonal mortality for three cities in Quebec, Canada.
International Journal of Health Geographics, 7, 23,
doi:10.1186/1476-072x-7-23.
Draper, F.C. et al., 2014: The distribution and amount of carbon in the largest
peatland complex in Amazonia. Environmental Research Letters, 9(12),
124017, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/12/124017.
Drijfhout, S. et al., 2015: Catalogue of abrupt shifts in Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change climate models. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 112(43), E5777-E5786, doi:10.1073/pnas.1511451112.
Drouet, A.S. et al., 2013: Grounding line transient response in marine ice sheet
models. The Cryosphere, 7(2), 395-406, doi:10.5194/tc-7-395-2013.
Duarte, C.M. et al., 2013: Is Ocean Acidification an Open-Ocean Syndrome?
Understanding Anthropogenic Impacts on Seawater pH. Estuaries and Coasts,
36(2), 221-236, doi:10.1007/s12237-013-9594-3.
Duke, N.C. et al., 2017: Large-scale dieback of mangroves in Australia's Gulf of
Carpentaria: A severe ecosystem response, coincidental with an unusually
extreme weather event. Marine and Freshwater Research, 68(10), 1816-1829,
doi:10.1071/mf16322.
Dunne, J.P., R.J. Stouffer, and J.G. John, 2013: Reductions in labour capacity
from heat stress under climate warming. Nature Climate Change, 3(4), 1-4,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1827.
Duputie, A., A. Rutschmann, O. Ronce, and I. Chuine, 2015: Phenological plasticity
will not help all species adapt to climate change. Global Change Biology,
21(8), 3062-3073, doi:10.1111/gcb.12914.
Durack, P.J., S.E. Wijffels, and R.J. Matear, 2012: Ocean Salinities Reveal Strong
Global Water Cycle Intensification During 1950 to 2000. Science, 336(6080),
455-458, doi:10.1126/science.1212222.
Durand, G. and F. Pattyn, 2015: Reducing uncertainties in projections of Antarctic
ice mass loss. The Cryosphere, 9(6), 2043-2055,
doi:10.5194/tc-9-2043-2015.
Durand, J.-L. et al., 2018: How accurately do maize crop models simulate the
interactions of atmospheric CO2 concentration levels with limited water supply
on water use and yield? European Journal of Agronomy, 100, 67-75,
doi:10.1016/j.eja.2017.01.002.
Dutton, A. et al., 2015: Sea-level rise due to polar ice-sheet mass loss during past
warm periods. Science, 349(6244), doi:10.1126/science.aaa4019.
Ebi, K.L., N.H. Ogden, J.C. Semenza, and A. Woodward, 2017: Detecting and
Attributing Health Burdens to Climate Change. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 125(8), 085004, doi:10.1289/ehp1509.
Ebi, K.L. et al., 2018: Health risks of warming of 1.5C, 2C, and higher, above
pre-industrial temperatures. Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063007,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac4bd.
Ekstrom, J.A. et al., 2015: Vulnerability and adaptation of US shellfisheries to ocean
acidification. Nature Climate Change, 5(3), 207-214, doi:10.1038/nclimate2508.
Elliff, C.I. and I.R. Silva, 2017: Coral reefs as the first line of defense: Shoreline
protection in face of climate change. Marine Environmental Research, 127,
148-154, doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2017.03.007.

290

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Elliott, J. et al., 2014: Constraints and potentials of future irrigation water
availability on agricultural production under climate change. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3239-3244,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222474110.
Ellison, D. et al., 2017: Trees, forests and water: Cool insights for a hot world. Global
Environmental Change, 43, 51-61, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.01.002.
Ellison, J.C., 2014: Climate Change Adaptation: Management Options for
Mangrove Areas. In: Mangrove Ecosystems of Asia: Status, Challenges and
Management Strategies [Faridah-Hanum, I., A. Latiff, K.R. Hakeem, and
M. Ozturk (eds.)]. Springer New York, New York, NY, USA, pp. 391-413,
doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-8582-7_18.
Ellsworth, D.S. et al., 2017: Elevated CO2 does not increase eucalypt forest
productivity on a low-phosphorus soil. Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 279-282,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3235.
Elsner, J.B., J.P. Kossin, and T.H. Jagger, 2008: The increasing intensity of the
strongest tropical cyclones. Nature, 455(7209), 92-95,
doi:10.1038/nature07234.
Emanuel, K., 2005: Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30
years. Nature, 436(7051), 686-688, doi:10.1038/nature03906.
Emanuel, K., 2017: A fast intensity simulator for tropical cyclone risk analysis.
Natural Hazards, 88(2), 779-796, doi:10.1007/s11069-017-2890-7.
Endres, S., L. Galgani, U. Riebesell, K.G. Schulz, and A. Engel, 2014: Stimulated
bacterial growth under elevated pCO2: Results from an off-shore mesocosm
study. PLOS ONE, 9(6), e99228, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0099228.
Engelbrecht, C.J. and F.A. Engelbrecht, 2016: Shifts in Koppen-Geiger climate zones
over southern Africa in relation to key global temperature goals. Theoretical
and Applied Climatology, 123(1-2), 247-261,
doi:10.1007/s00704-014-1354-1.
Engelbrecht, F.A., J.L. McGregor, and C.J. Engelbrecht, 2009: Dynamics of the
Conformal-Cubic Atmospheric Model projected climate-change signal over
southern Africa. International Journal of Climatology, 29(7), 1013-1033,
doi:10.1002/joc.1742.
Engelbrecht, F.A. et al., 2015: Projections of rapidly rising surface temperatures
over Africa under low mitigation. Environmental Research Letters, 10(8),
085004, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/085004.
Fabricius, K.E. et al., 2011: Losers and winners in coral reefs acclimatized to
elevated carbon dioxide concentrations. Nature Climate Change, 1(3), 165-
169, doi:10.1038/nclimate1122.
Fajardy, M. and N. Mac Dowell, 2017: Can BECCS deliver sustainable and resource
efficient negative emissions? Energy & Environmental Science, 10(6), 1389-
1426, doi:10.1039/c7ee00465f.
Fang, J.K.H., C.H.L. Schonberg, M.A. Mello-Athayde, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, and
S. Dove, 2014: Effects of ocean warming and acidification on the energy
budget of an excavating sponge. Global Change Biology, 20(4), 1043-1054,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12369.
Fang, J.K.H. et al., 2013: Sponge biomass and bioerosion rates increase under
ocean warming and acidification. Global Change Biology, 19(12), 3581-3591,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12334.
FAO, 2016: The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2016. Contributing to
food security and nutrition for all. Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 200 pp.
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO, 2017: The State of Food Security and Nutrition
in the World 2017. Building resilience for peace and food security. Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 117 pp.
Farbotko, C. and H. Lazrus, 2012: The first climate refugees? Contesting global
narratives of climate change in Tuvalu. Global Environmental Change, 22(2),
382-390, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.11.014.
Fasullo, J.T., R.S. Nerem, and B. Hamlington, 2016: Is the detection of accelerated
sea level rise imminent? Scientific Reports, 6, 1-7, doi:10.1038/srep31245.
Fawcett, A.A. et al., 2015: Can Paris pledges avert severe climate change? Science,
350(6265), 1168-1169, doi:10.1126/science.aad5761.
Faye, B. et al., 2018: Impacts of 1.5 versus 2.0C on cereal yields in the West
African Sudan Savanna. Environmental Research Letters, 13(3), 034014,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaab40.
Feely, R.A., C.L. Sabine, J.M. Hernandez-Ayon, D. Ianson, and B. Hales, 2008:
Evidence for Upwelling of Corrosive "Acidified" Water onto the Continental
Shelf. Science, 320(5882), 1490-1492,
doi:10.1126/science.1155676.
Feely, R.A. et al., 2016: Chemical and biological impacts of ocean acidification
along the west coast of North America. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science,
183, 260-270, doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2016.08.043.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Feller, I.C., D.A. Friess, K.W. Krauss, and R.R. Lewis, 2017: The state of the world's
mangroves in the 21st century under climate change. Hydrobiologia, 803(1),
1-12, doi:10.1007/s10750-017-3331-z.
Feng, X. et al., 2016: Revegetation in China's Loess Plateau is approaching
sustainable water resource limits. Nature Climate Change, 6(11), 1019-1022,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3092.
Ferrario, F. et al., 2014: The effectiveness of coral reefs for coastal hazard risk
reduction and adaptation. Nature Communications, 5, 3794,
doi:10.1038/ncomms4794.
Fine, M., H. Gildor, and A. Genin, 2013: A coral reef refuge in the Red Sea. Global
Change Biology, 19(12), 3640-3647, doi:10.1111/gcb.12356.
Fischer, D., S.M. Thomas, F. Niemitz, B. Reineking, and C. Beierkuhnlein, 2011:
Projection of climatic suitability for Aedes albopictus Skuse (Culicidae) in
Europe under climate change conditions. Global and Planetary Change, 78(1-
2), 54-64, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2011.05.008.
Fischer, D. et al., 2013: Climate change effects on Chikungunya transmission
in Europe: geospatial analysis of vector's climatic suitability and virus'
temperature requirements. International Journal of Health Geographics, 12(1),
51, doi:10.1186/1476-072x-12-51.
Fischer, E.M. and R. Knutti, 2015: Anthropogenic contribution to global occurrence
of heavy-precipitation and high-temperature extremes. Nature Climate
Change, 5(6), 560-564, doi:10.1038/nclimate2617.
Fischer, E.M., J. Sedlaek, E. Hawkins, and R. Knutti, 2014: Models agree on forced
response pattern of precipitation and temperature extremes. Geophysical
Research Letters, 41(23), 8554-8562, doi:10.1002/2014gl062018.
Fischer, H. et al., 2018: Palaeoclimate constraints on the impact of 2C
anthropogenic warming and beyond. Nature Geoscience, 11, 1-12,
doi:10.1038/s41561-018-0146-0.
Ford, J.D., 2012: Indigenous health and climate change. American Journal of Public
Health, 102(7), 1260-1266, doi:10.2105/ajph.2012.300752.
Ford, J.D., G. McDowell, and T. Pearce, 2015: The adaptation challenge in the Arctic.
Nature Climate Change, 5(12), 1046-1053, doi:10.1038/nclimate2723.
Forseth, I., 2010: Terrestrial Biomes. Nature Education Knowledge, 3(10), 11,
www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/terrestrial-biomes-13236757.
Fossheim, M. et al., 2015: Recent warming leads to a rapid borealization of
fish communities in the Arctic. Nature Climate Change, 5(7), 673-677,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2647.
Fox, N.J. et al., 2011: Predicting Impacts of Climate Change on Fasciola hepatica
Risk. PLOS ONE, 6(1), e16126, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016126.
Frank, D.C. et al., 2010: Ensemble reconstruction constraints on the global carbon
cycle sensitivity to climate. Nature, 463, 527, doi:10.1038/nature08769.
Fricko, O. et al., 2016: Energy sector water use implications of a 2C climate policy.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034011.
Frieler, K. et al., 2013: Limiting global warming to 2 C is unlikely to save most
coral reefs. Nature Climate Change, 3(2), 165-170,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1674.
Frieler, K. et al., 2015: Consistent evidence of increasing Antarctic accumulation
with warming. Nature Climate Change, 5(4), 348-352,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2574.
Frieler, K. et al., 2017: Assessing the impacts of 1.5C global warming - simulation
protocol of the Inter-Sectoral Impact Model Intercomparison Project (ISIMIP2b).
Geoscientific Model Development, 10, 4321-4345,
doi:10.5194/gmd-10-4321-2017.
Friend, A.D. et al., 2014: Carbon residence time dominates uncertainty in terrestrial
vegetation responses to future climate and atmospheric CO2. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3280-3285,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222477110.
Fronzek, S., T.R. Carter, and M. Luoto, 2011: Evaluating sources of uncertainty in
modelling the impact of probabilistic climate change on sub-arctic palsa mires.
Natural Hazards and Earth System Science, 11(11), 2981-2995,
doi:10.5194/nhess-11-2981-2011.
Frost, A.J. et al., 2011: A comparison of multi-site daily rainfall downscaling
techniques under Australian conditions. Journal of Hydrology, 408(1), 1-18,
doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2011.06.021.
Fu, X. and J. Song, 2017: Assessing the economic costs of sea level rise and
benefits of coastal protection: A spatiotemporal approach. Sustainability, 9(8),
1495, doi:10.3390/su9081495.
Furst, J.J., H. Goelzer, and P. Huybrechts, 2015: Ice-dynamic projections of the
Greenland ice sheet in response to atmospheric and oceanic warming. The
Cryosphere, 9(3), 1039-1062, doi:10.5194/tc-9-1039-2015.

Chapter 3
Fuss, S. et al., 2014: Betting on negative emissions. Nature Climate Change, 4(10),
850-853, doi:10.1038/nclimate2392.
Fuss, S. et al., 2018: Negative emissions-Part 2: Costs, potentials and side effects.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063002,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9f.
Gagne, M.-E., J.C. Fyfe, N.P. Gillett, I. Polyakov, and G.M. Flato, 2017: Aerosol-driven
increase in Arctic sea ice over the middle of the twentieth century. Geophysical
Research Letters, 44(14), 7338-7346, doi:10.1002/2016gl071941.
Galaasen, E.V. et al., 2014: Rapid Reductions in North Atlantic Deep Water During
the Peak of the Last Interglacial Period. Science, 343(6175), 1129-1132,
doi:10.1126/science.1248667.
Gallup, J.L., J.D. Sachs, and A.D. Mellinger, 1999: Geography and Economic
Development. International Regional Science Review, 22(2), 179-232,
doi:10.1177/016001799761012334.
Gang, C. et al., 2015: Projecting the dynamics of terrestrial net primary productivity
in response to future climate change under the RCP2.6 scenario. Environmental
Earth Sciences, 74(7), 5949-5959, doi:10.1007/s12665-015-4618-x.
Garcia Molinos, J. et al., 2015: Climate velocity and the future global redistribution
of marine biodiversity. Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 83-88,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2769.
Gardner, T.A., I.M. Cote, J.A. Gill, A. Grant, and A.R. Watkinson, 2005: Hurricanes
and caribbean coral reefs: Impacts, recovery patterns, and role in long-term
decline. Ecology, 86(1), 174-184, doi:10.1890/04-0141.
Garland, R.M. et al., 2015: Regional Projections of Extreme Apparent Temperature
Days in Africa and the Related Potential Risk to Human Health. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(10), 12577-12604,
doi:10.3390/ijerph121012577.
Garrabou, J. et al., 2009: Mass mortality in Northwestern Mediterranean rocky
benthic communities: Effects of the 2003 heat wave. Global Change Biology,
15(5), 1090-1103, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01823.x.
Garrard, S.L. et al., 2014: Indirect effects may buffer negative responses of seagrass
invertebrate communities to ocean acidification. Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology, 461, 31-38, doi:10.1016/j.jembe.2014.07.011.
Gasparrini, A. et al., 2015: Mortality risk attributable to high and low ambient
temperature: A multicountry observational study. The Lancet, 386(9991),
369-375, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(14)62114-0.
Gass, P., H. Hove, and P. Jo-Ellen, 2011: Review of Current and Planned Adaptation
Action: East and Southeast Asia. Adaptation Partnership, 217 pp.
Gattuso, J.-P. et al., 2014: Cross-chapter box on ocean acidification. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 129-131.
Gattuso, J.-P. et al., 2015: Contrasting futures for ocean and society from different
anthropogenic CO2 emissions scenarios. Science, 349(6243), aac4722,
doi:10.1126/science.aac4722.
Gauthier, S., P. Bernier, T. Kuuluvainen, A.Z. Shvidenko, and D.G. Schepaschenko,
2015: Boreal forest health and global change. Science, 349(6250), 819-822,
doi:10.1126/science.aaa9092.
Geisler, C. and B. Currens, 2017: Impediments to inland resettlement under
conditions of accelerated sea level rise. Land Use Policy, 66, 322-330,
doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.03.029.
Georgescu, M., M. Moustaoui, A. Mahalov, and J. Dudhia, 2012: Summer-time
climate impacts of projected megapolitan expansion in Arizona. Nature
Climate Change, 3(1), 37-41, doi:10.1038/nclimate1656.
Gerten, D., S. Rost, W. von Bloh, and W. Lucht, 2008: Causes of change in 20th
century global river discharge. Geophysical Research Letters, 35(20), L20405,
doi:10.1029/2008gl035258.
Gerten, D. et al., 2013: Asynchronous exposure to global warming: freshwater
resources and terrestrial ecosystems. Environmental Research Letters, 8(3),
034032, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/034032.
Gharbaoui, D. and J. Blocher, 2016: The Reason Land Matters: Relocation as
Adaptation to Climate Change in Fiji Islands. In: Migration, Risk Management
and Climate Change: Evidence and Policy Responses [Milan, A., B. Schraven,
K. Warner, and N. Cascone (eds.)]. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 149-173,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-42922-9_8.
Ghosh, J., 2010: The unnatural coupling: Food and global finance. Journal of
Agrarian Change, 10(1), 72-86, doi:10.1111/j.1471-0366.2009.00249.x.

291

3

Chapter 3

3

Giardino, A., K. Nederhoff, and M. Vousdoukas, 2018: Coastal hazard risk
assessment for small islands: assessing the impact of climate change
and disaster reduction measures on Ebeye (Marshall Islands). Regional
Environmental Change, 1-12, doi: 10.1007/s10113-018-1353-3.
Goddard, P.B., C.O. Dufour, J. Yin, S.M. Griffies, and M. Winton, 2017: CO2-Induced
Ocean Warming of the Antarctic Continental Shelf in an Eddying Global
Climate Model. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 122(10), 8079-
8101, doi:10.1002/2017jc012849.
Goll, D.S. et al., 2012: Nutrient limitation reduces land carbon uptake in
simulations with a model of combined carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus
cycling. Biogeosciences, 9(9), 3547-3569, doi:10.5194/bg-9-3547-2012.
Golledge, N.R. et al., 2015: The multi-millennial Antarctic commitment to future
sea-level rise. Nature, 526(7573), 421-425, doi:10.1038/nature15706.
Gonzalez, C., A. Paz, and C. Ferro, 2014: Predicted altitudinal shifts and reduced
spatial distribution of Leishmania infantum vector species under climate
change scenarios in Colombia. Acta Tropica, 129, 83-90,
doi:10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.08.014.
Good, P., C. Jones, J. Lowe, R. Betts, and N. Gedney, 2013: Comparing Tropical
Forest Projections from Two Generations of Hadley Centre Earth System
Models, HadGEM2-ES and HadCM3LC. Journal of Climate, 26(2), 495-511,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-11-00366.1.
Good, P. et al., 2011: Quantifying Environmental Drivers of Future Tropical Forest
Extent. Journal of Climate, 24(5), 1337-1349, doi:10.1175/2010jcli3865.1.
Goodwin, P., I.D. Haigh, E.J. Rohling, and A. Slangen, 2017: A new approach to
projecting 21st century sea-level changes and extremes. Earth's Future, 5(2),
240-253, doi:10.1002/2016ef000508.
Goodwin, P., S. Brown, I.D. Haigh, R.J. Nicholls, and J.M. Matter, 2018:
Adjusting Mitigation Pathways to Stabilize Climate at 1.5C and 2.0C
Rise in Global Temperatures to Year 2300. Earth's Future, 6(3), 601-615,
doi:10.1002/2017ef000732.
Gosling, S.N. and N.W. Arnell, 2016: A global assessment of the impact of climate
change on water scarcity. Climatic Change, 134(3), 371-385,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0853-x.
Gosling, S.N. et al., 2017: A comparison of changes in river runoff from multiple
global and catchment-scale hydrological models under global warming
scenarios of 1C, 2C and 3C. Climatic Change, 141(3), 577-595,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1773-3.
Graham, N.A.J., 2014: Habitat complexity: Coral structural loss leads to fisheries
declines. Current Biology, 24(9), R359-R361, doi:10.1016/j.cub.2014.03.069.
Graham, N.A.J., S. Jennings, M.A. MacNeil, D. Mouillot, and S.K. Wilson, 2015:
Predicting climate-driven regime shifts versus rebound potential in coral reefs.
Nature, 518(7537), 1-17, doi:10.1038/nature14140.
Graux, A.-I., G. Bellocchi, R. Lardy, and J.-F. Soussana, 2013: Ensemble modelling
of climate change risks and opportunities for managed grasslands in France.
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 170, 114-131,
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2012.06.010.
Green, A.L. et al., 2014: Designing Marine Reserves for Fisheries Management,
Biodiversity Conservation, and Climate Change Adaptation. Coastal
Management, 42(2), 143-159, doi:10.1080/08920753.2014.877763.
Green, S.M. and S. Page, 2017: Tropical peatlands: current plight and the need for
responsible management. Geology Today, 33(5), 174-179,
doi:10.1111/gto.12197.
Gregory, J.M. and P. Huybrechts, 2006: Ice-sheet contributions to future sea-level
change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 364(1844), 1709-1731,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2006.1796.
Gregory, P.J. and B. Marshall, 2012: Attribution of climate change: a methodology
to estimate the potential contribution to increases in potato yield in Scotland
since 1960. Global Change Biology, 18(4), 1372-1388,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2011.02601.x.
Greve, P. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2015: Assessment of future changes in water
availability and aridity. Geophysical Research Letters, 42(13), 5493-5499,
doi:10.1002/2015gl064127.
Greve, P., L. Gudmundsson, and S.I. Seneviratne, 2018: Regional scaling of annual
mean precipitation and water availability with global temperature change.
Earth System Dynamics, 9(1), 227-240, doi:10.5194/esd-9-227-2018.
Greve, P. et al., 2014: Global assessment of trends in wetting and drying over land.
Nature Geoscience, 7(10), 716-721, doi:10.1038/ngeo2247.
Grillakis, M.G., A.G. Koutroulis, K.D. Seiradakis, and I.K. Tsanis, 2016: Implications
of 2C global warming in European summer tourism. Climate Services, 1, 30-
38, doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2016.01.002.

292

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Grillakis, M.G., A.G. Koutroulis, I.N. Daliakopoulos, and I.K. Tsanis, 2017: A method
to preserve trends in quantile mapping bias correction of climate modeled
temperature. Earth System Dynamics, 8, 889-900,
doi:10.5194/esd-8-889-2017.
Griscom, B.W. et al., 2017: Natural climate solutions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(44), 11645-11650, doi:10.1073/pnas.1710465114.
Grossman-Clarke, S., S. Schubert, and D. Fenner, 2017: Urban effects on
summertime air temperature in Germany under climate change. International
Journal of Climatology, 37(2), 905-917, doi:10.1002/joc.4748.
Grubler, A. et al., 2018: A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5C target
and sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies.
Nature Energy, 3(6), 515-527, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0172-6.
Gu, G. and R.F. Adler, 2013: Interdecadal variability/long-term changes in global
precipitation patterns during the past three decades: global warming and/
or pacific decadal variability? Climate Dynamics, 40(11-12), 3009-3022,
doi:10.1007/s00382-012-1443-8.
Gu, G. and R.F. Adler, 2015: Spatial patterns of global precipitation change
and variability during 1901-2010. Journal of Climate, 28(11), 4431-4453,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-14-00201.1.
Gudmundsson, L. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2016: Anthropogenic climate change
affects meteorological drought risk in Europe. Environmental Research Letters,
11(4), 044005, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/044005.
Gudmundsson, L., S.I. Seneviratne, and X. Zhang, 2017: Anthropogenic climate
change detected in European renewable freshwater resources. Nature Climate
Change, 7(11), 813-816, doi:10.1038/nclimate3416.
Guiot, J. and W. Cramer, 2016: Climate change: The 2015 Paris Agreement
thresholds and Mediterranean basin ecosystems. Science, 354(6311), 4528-
4532, doi:10.1126/science.aah5015.
Guis, H. et al., 2012: Modelling the effects of past and future climate on the risk
of bluetongue emergence in Europe. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
9(67), 339-350, doi:10.1098/rsif.2011.0255.
Guo, Y. et al., 2016: Projecting future temperature-related mortality in three
largest Australian cities. Environmental Pollution, 208, 66-73,
doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2015.09.041.
Gupta, H., S.-J. Kao, and M. Dai, 2012: The role of mega dams in reducing sediment
fluxes: A case study of large Asian rivers. Journal of Hydrology, 464-465, 447-
458, doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2012.07.038.
Gustafson, S., A. Joehl Cadena, and P. Hartman, 2016: Adaptation planning in the
Lower Mekong Basin: merging scientific data with local perspective to improve
community resilience to climate change. Climate and Development, 1-15,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2016.1223593.
Gustafson, S. et al., 2018: Merging science into community adaptation planning
processes: a cross-site comparison of four distinct areas of the Lower Mekong
Basin. Climatic Change, 149(1), 91-106, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1887-7.
Gutierrez, J.L. et al., 2012: Physical Ecosystem Engineers and the Functioning
of Estuaries and Coasts. In: Treatise on Estuarine and Coastal Science Vol. 7.
Academic Press, Waltham, MA, USA, pp. 53-81,
doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-374711-2.00705-1.
Haberl, H., T. Beringer, S.C. Bhattacharya, K.-H. Erb, and M. Hoogwijk, 2010: The
global technical potential of bio-energy in 2050 considering sustainability
constraints. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 2(5), 394-403,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2010.10.007.
Haberl, H. et al., 2013: Bioenergy: how much can we expect for 2050? Environmental
Research Letters, 8(3), 031004, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/031004.
Habibi Mohraz, M., A. Ghahri, M. Karimi, and F. Golbabaei, 2016: The Past and
Future Trends of Heat Stress Based On Wet Bulb Globe Temperature Index in
Outdoor Environment of Tehran City, Iran. Iranian Journal of Public Health,
45(6), 787-794, http://ijph.tums.ac.ir/index.php/ijph/article/view/7085.
Hadden, D. and A. Grelle, 2016: Changing temperature response of respiration
turns boreal forest from carbon sink into carbon source. Agricultural and Forest
Meteorology, 223, 30-38, doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2016.03.020.
Hajat, S., S. Vardoulakis, C. Heaviside, and B. Eggen, 2014: Climate change effects
on human health: Projections of temperature-related mortality for the UK
during the 2020s, 2050s and 2080s. Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health, 68(7), 641-648, doi:10.1136/jech-2013-202449.
Hales, S., S. Kovats, S. Lloyd, and D. Campbell-Lendrum (eds.), 2014: Quantitative risk
assessment of the effects of climate change on selected causes of death, 2030s
and 2050s. World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva, Switzerland, 115 pp.
Hall, J. et al., 2014: Understanding flood regime changes in Europe: a state-ofthe-art assessment. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 18(7), 2735-2772,
doi:10.5194/hess-18-2735-2014.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Hallegatte, S. and J. Rozenberg, 2017: Climate change through a poverty lens.
Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 250-256, doi:10.1038/nclimate3253.
Hallegatte, S., C. Green, R.J. Nicholls, and J. Corfee-Morlot, 2013: Future flood
losses in major coastal cities. Nature Climate Change, 3(9), 802-806,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1979.
Hallegatte, S. et al., 2016: Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change
on Poverty. Climate Change and Development Series, World Bank, Washington
DC, USA, 227 pp., doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0673-5.
Hall-Spencer, J.M. et al., 2008: Volcanic carbon dioxide vents show ecosystem
effects of ocean acidification. Nature, 454(7200), 96-99,
doi:10.1038/nature07051.
Halpern, B.S. et al., 2015: Spatial and temporal changes in cumulative human
impacts on the world's ocean. Nature Communications, 6(1), 7615,
doi:10.1038/ncomms8615.
Hamukuaya, H., M. O'Toole, and P. Woodhead, 1998: Observations of severe
hypoxia and offshore displacement of Cape hake over the Namibian
shelf in 1994. South African Journal of Marine Science, 19, 57-59,
doi:10.2989/025776198784126809.
Hanasaki, N. et al., 2013: A global water scarcity assessment under Shared Socioeconomic Pathways - Part 2: Water availability and scarcity. Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences, 17(7), 2393-2413,
doi:10.5194/hess-17-2393-2013.
Handisyde, N., T.C. Telfer, and L.G. Ross, 2016: Vulnerability of aquaculture-related
livelihoods to changing climate at the global scale. Fish and Fisheries, 18(3),
466-488, doi:10.1111/faf.12186.
Hanna, E.G., T. Kjellstrom, C. Bennett, and K. Dear, 2011: Climate Change
and Rising Heat: Population Health Implications for Working People
in Australia. Asia-Pacific Journal of Public Health, 23(2), 14s-26s,
doi:10.1177/1010539510391457.
Hansen, G. and D. Stone, 2016: Assessing the observed impact of anthropogenic
climate change. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 532-537,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2896.
Hansen, J., R. Ruedy, M. Sato, and K. Lo, 2010: Global surface temperature change.
Reviews of Geophysics, 48(4), RG4004, doi:10.1029/2010rg000345.
Hanson, S. et al., 2011: A global ranking of port cities with high exposure to
climate extremes. Climatic Change, 104(1), 89-111,
doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9977-4.
Harrington, L.J. and F.E.L. Otto, 2018: Changing population dynamics and uneven
temperature emergence combine to exacerbate regional exposure to heat
extremes under 1.5C and 2C of warming. Environmental Research Letters,
13(3), 034011, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaaa99.
Hartmann, D.L. et al., 2013: Observations: Atmosphere and Surface. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 159-254.
Harvey, C.A. et al., 2014: Climate-Smart Landscapes: Opportunities and Challenges
for Integrating Adaptation and Mitigation in Tropical Agriculture. Conservation
Letters, 7(2), 77-90, doi:10.1111/conl.12066.
Hasegawa, T., S. Fujimori, K. Takahashi, T. Yokohata, and T. Masui, 2016:
Economic implications of climate change impacts on human health through
undernourishment. Climatic Change, 136(2), 189-202,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1606-4.
Hasegawa, T. et al., 2014: Climate Change Impact and Adaptation Assessment
on Food Consumption Utilizing a New Scenario Framework. Environmental
Science & Technology, 48(1), 438-445, doi:10.1021/es4034149.
Hashimoto, H. et al., 2013: Structural Uncertainty in Model-Simulated Trends
of Global Gross Primary Production. Remote Sensing, 5(3), 1258-1273,
doi:10.3390/rs5031258.
Hatfield, J.L. et al., 2011: Climate Impacts on Agriculture: Implications for Crop
Production. Agronomy Journal, 103(2), 351-370,
doi:10.2134/agronj2010.0303.
Hauer, M.E., J.M. Evans, and D.R. Mishra, 2016: Millions projected to be at risk
from sea-level rise in the continental United States. Nature Climate Change,
6(7), 691-695, doi:10.1038/nclimate2961.
Hauri, C., T. Friedrich, and A. Timmermann, 2016: Abrupt onset and prolongation
of aragonite undersaturation events in the Southern Ocean. Nature Climate
Change, 6(2), 172-176, doi:10.1038/nclimate2844.
Haustein, K. et al., 2017: A real-time Global Warming Index. Scientific Reports,
7(1), 15417, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-14828-5.

Chapter 3
Haywood, A.M., H.J. Dowsett, and A.M. Dolan, 2016: Integrating geological
archives and climate models for the mid-Pliocene warm period. Nature
Communications, 7, 10646, doi:10.1038/ncomms10646.
He, Q. and G. Zhou, 2016: Climate-associated distribution of summer maize in
China from 1961 to 2010. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 232, 326-
335, doi:10.1016/j.agee.2016.08.020.
Heal, M.R. et al., 2013: Health burdens of surface ozone in the UK for a range of
future scenarios. Environment International, 61, 36-44,
doi:10.1016/j.envint.2013.09.010.
Heck, V., D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and A. Popp, 2018: Biomass-based negative emissions
difficult to reconcile with planetary boundaries. Nature Climate Change, 8(2),
151-155, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0064-y.
Herbert, E.R. et al., 2015: A global perspective on wetland salinization: ecological
consequences of a growing threat to freshwater wetlands. Ecosphere, 6(10),
1-43, doi:10.1890/es14-00534.1.
Hewitt, A.J. et al., 2016: Sources of Uncertainty in Future Projections of the Carbon
Cycle. Journal of Climate, 29(20), 7203-7213, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0161.1.
Hidalgo, H.G. et al., 2009: Detection and Attribution of Streamflow Timing Changes
to Climate Change in the Western United States. Journal of Climate, 22(13),
3838-3855, doi:10.1175/2009jcli2470.1.
Hill, T.D. and S.C. Anisfeld, 2015: Coastal wetland response to sea level rise in
Connecticut and New York. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 163, 185-
193, doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2015.06.004.
Hinkel, J. et al., 2014: Coastal flood damage and adaptation costs under 21st
century sea-level rise. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(9), 3292-7, doi:10.1073/pnas.1222469111.
Hirsch, A.L., M. Wilhelm, E.L. Davin, W. Thiery, and S.I. Seneviratne, 2017:
Can climate-effective land management reduce regional warming?
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 122(4), 2269-2288,
doi:10.1002/2016jd026125.
Hirsch, A.L. et al., 2018: Biogeophysical Impacts of Land-Use Change on Climate
Extremes in Low-Emission Scenarios: Results From HAPPI-Land. Earth's Future,
6(3), 396-409, doi:10.1002/2017ef000744.
HLPE, 2011: Price volatility and food security. A report by the High Level Panel of
Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security.
The High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition (HLPE), 79 pp.
Hoang, L.P. et al., 2016: Mekong River flow and hydrological extremes under
climate change. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 20(7), 3027-3041,
doi:10.5194/hess-20-3027-2016.
Hoang, L.P. et al., 2018: Managing flood risks in the Mekong Delta: How to address
emerging challenges under climate change and socioeconomic developments.
Ambio, 47(6), 635-649, doi:10.1007/s13280-017-1009-4.
Hobbs, J.P.A. and C.A. Mcdonald, 2010: Increased seawater temperature and
decreased dissolved oxygen triggers fish kill at the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Indian Ocean. Journal of Fish Biology, 77(6), 1219-1229,
doi:10.1111/j.1095-8649.2010.02726.x.
Hobbs, W.R. et al., 2016: A review of recent changes in Southern Ocean sea
ice, their drivers and forcings. Global and Planetary Change, 143, 228-250,
doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2016.06.008.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., 1999: Climate change, coral bleaching and the future of
the world's coral reefs. Marine and Freshwater Research, 50(8), 839-866,
doi:10.1071/mf99078.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., 2012: The adaptation of coral reefs to climate change: Is the
Red Queen being outpaced? Scientia Marina, 76(2), 403-408,
doi:10.3989/scimar.03660.29a.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., 2014a: Coral reef sustainability through adaptation: Glimmer
of hope or persistent mirage? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
7, 127-133, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2014.01.005.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., 2014b: Coral reefs in the Anthropocene: persistence or the
end of the line? Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 395(1),
167-183, doi:10.1144/sp395.17.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., E.S. Poloczanska, W. Skirving, and S. Dove, 2017: Coral
Reef Ecosystems under Climate Change and Ocean Acidification. Frontiers in
Marine Science, 4, 158, doi:10.3389/fmars.2017.00158.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al., 2007: Coral Reefs Under Rapid Climate Change and
Ocean Acidification. Science, 318(5857), 1737-1742,
doi:10.1126/science.1152509.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al., 2014: The Ocean. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J.

293

3

Chapter 3

3

Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma,
E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1655-1731.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al., 2015: Reviving the Ocean Economy: the case for action
- 2015. WWF International, Gland, Switzerland, 60 pp.
Hoffman, J.S., P.U. Clark, A.C. Parnell, and F. He, 2017: Regional and global seasurface temperatures during the last interglaciation. Science, 355(6322),
276-279, doi:10.1126/science.aai8464.
Holding, S. and D.M. Allen, 2015: Wave overwash impact on small islands:
Generalised observations of freshwater lens response and recovery for
multiple hydrogeological settings. Journal of Hydrology, 529(Part 3), 1324-
1335, doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2015.08.052.
Holding, S. et al., 2016: Groundwater vulnerability on small islands. Nature
Climate Change, 6, 1100-1103, doi:10.1038/nclimate3128.
Holland, G. and C.L. Bruyere, 2014: Recent intense hurricane response to global
climate change. Climate Dynamics, 42(3-4), 617-627,
doi:10.1007/s00382-013-1713-0.
Holland, M.M., C.M. Bitz, and B. Tremblay, 2006: Future abrupt reductions in
the summer Arctic sea ice. Geophysical Research Letters, 33(23), L23503,
doi:10.1029/2006gl028024.
Hollowed, A.B. and S. Sundby, 2014: Change is coming to the northern oceans.
Science, 344(6188), 1084-1085, doi:10.1126/science.1251166.
Hollowed, A.B. et al., 2013: Projected impacts of climate change on marine fish
and fisheries. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 70(510), 1023-1037,
doi:10.1093/icesjms/fst081.
Holmgren, K. et al., 2016: Mediterranean Holocene climate, environment and
human societies. Quaternary Science Reviews, 136, 1-4,
doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2015.12.014.
Holstein, D.M., C.B. Paris, A.C. Vaz, and T.B. Smith, 2016: Modeling vertical coral
connectivity and mesophotic refugia. Coral Reefs, 35(1), 23-37,
doi:10.1007/s00338-015-1339-2.
Holz, C., L. Siegel, E.B. Johnston, A.D. Jones, and J. Sterman, 2017: Ratcheting
Ambition to Limit Warming to 1.5C - Trade-offs Between Emission
Reductions and Carbon Dioxide Removal. Environmental Research Letters,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac0c1.
Honda, Y. et al., 2014: Heat-related mortality risk model for climate change impact
projection. Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine, 19(1), 56-63,
doi:10.1007/s12199-013-0354-6.
Hong, J. and W.S. Kim, 2015: Weather impacts on electric power load: partial
phase synchronization analysis. Meteorological Applications, 22(4), 811-816,
doi:10.1002/met.1535.
Honisch, B. et al., 2012: The geological record of ocean acidification. Science,
335(6072), 1058-1063, doi:10.1126/science.1208277.
Horta E Costa, B. et al., 2014: Tropicalization of fish assemblages in temperate
biogeographic transition zones. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 504, 241-
252, doi:10.3354/meps10749.
Hosking, J.S. et al., 2018: Changes in European wind energy generation potential
within a 1.5C warmer world. Environmental Research Letters, 13(5), 054032,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf78.
Hossain, M.S., L. Hein, F.I. Rip, and J.A. Dearing, 2015: Integrating ecosystem
services and climate change responses in coastal wetlands development plans
for Bangladesh. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
20(2), 241-261, doi:10.1007/s11027-013-9489-4.
Hosseini, N., J. Johnston, and K.-E. Lindenschmidt, 2017: Impacts of Climate
Change on the Water Quality of a Regulated Prairie River. Water, 9(3), 199,
doi:10.3390/w9030199.
Houghton, R.A. and A.A. Nassikas, 2018: Negative emissions from stopping
deforestation and forest degradation, globally. Global Change Biology, 24(1),
350-359, doi:10.1111/gcb.13876.
Hsiang, S. et al., 2017: Estimating economic damage from climate change in the
United States. Science, 356(6345), 1362-1369,
doi:10.1126/science.aal4369.
Hsiang, S.M. and M. Burke, 2014: Climate, conflict, and social stability: what does
the evidence say? Climatic Change, 123(1), 39-55,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0868-3.
Hsiang, S.M. and A.H. Sobel, 2016: Potentially Extreme Population Displacement
and Concentration in the Tropics Under Non-Extreme Warming. Scientific
Reports, 6, 25697, doi:10.1038/srep25697.
Hsiang, S.M., M. Burke, and E. Miguel, 2013: Quantifying the influence of climate on
human conflict. Science, 341(6151), 1235367, doi:10.1126/science.1235367.

294

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Huang, C.R., A.G. Barnett, X.M. Wang, and S.L. Tong, 2012: The impact of
temperature on years of life lost in Brisbane, Australia. Nature Climate Change,
2(4), 265-270, doi:10.1038/nclimate1369.
Huang, J., H. Yu, A. Dai, Y. Wei, and L. Kang, 2017: Drylands face potential threat
under 2C global warming target. Nature Climate Change, 7(6), 417-422,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3275.
Huang, M. et al., 2017: Velocity of change in vegetation productivity over northern
high latitudes. Nature Ecology & Evolution, 1(11), 1649-1654,
doi:10.1038/s41559-017-0328-y.
Hughes, D.J. and B.E. Narayanaswamy, 2013: Impacts of climate change on deepsea habitats. In: MCCIP Science Review. Marine Climate Change Impacts
Partnership (MCCIP), pp. 204-210, doi:10.14465/2013.arc17.155-166.
Hughes, T.P., J.T. Kerry, and T. Simpson, 2018: Large-scale bleaching of corals on the
Great Barrier Reef. Ecology, 99(2), 501, doi:10.1002/ecy.2092.
Hughes, T.P. et al., 2017a: Coral reefs in the Anthropocene. Nature, 546(7656),
82-90, doi:10.1038/nature22901.
Hughes, T.P. et al., 2017b: Global warming and recurrent mass bleaching of corals.
Nature, 543(7645), 373-377, doi:10.1038/nature21707.
Humpenoder, F. et al., 2014: Investigating afforestation and bioenergy CCS as
climate change mitigation strategies. Environmental Research Letters, 9(6),
064029, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/6/064029.
Humpenoder, F. et al., 2018: Large-scale bioenergy production: how to resolve
sustainability trade-offs? Environmental Research Letters, 13(2), 024011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9e3b.
Huntingford, C. et al., 2013: Simulated resilience of tropical rainforests to CO2induced climate change. Nature Geoscience, 6, 268-273,
doi:10.1038/ngeo1741.
Hutyra, L.R. et al., 2005: Climatic variability and vegetation vulnerability in Amazonia.
Geophysical Research Letters, 32(24), L24712, doi:10.1029/2005gl024981.
Huynen, M.M.T.E. and P. Martens, 2015: Climate Change Effects on Heat- and
Cold-Related Mortality in the Netherlands: A Scenario-Based Integrated
Environmental Health Impact Assessment. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(10), 13295-13320,
doi:10.3390/ijerph121013295.
ICEM, 2013: USAID Mekong ARCC Climate Change Impact and Adaptation:
Summary. Prepared for the United States Agency for International Development
by ICEM - International Centre for Environmental Management, 61 pp.
IFPRI, 2018: 2018 Global Food Policy Report. International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC, USA, 150 pp.,
doi:10.2499/9780896292970.
Iida, Y. et al., 2015: Trends in pCO2 and sea-air CO2 flux over the global open
oceans for the last two decades. Journal of Oceanography, 71(6), 637-661,
doi:10.1007/s10872-015-0306-4.
Iizumi, T. et al., 2017: Responses of crop yield growth to global temperature and
socioeconomic changes. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 7800,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-08214-4.
IPCC, 2000: Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. [Nakicenovic, N. and R. Swart
(eds.)]. A Special Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, 599 pp.
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II, III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the International Panel on
Climate Change. [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri, and A. Reisinger (eds.)].
IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 104 pp.
IPCC, 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance
Climate Change Adaptation. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J.
Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M.
Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, USA, 594 pp.
IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Working Group
I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor,
S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 1535 pp.
IPCC, 2014a: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
[Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1132 pp.
IPCC, 2014b: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part
B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 688 pp.
Ishida, H. et al., 2014: Global-scale projection and its sensitivity analysis of the
health burden attributable to childhood undernutrition under the latest
scenario framework for climate change research. Environmental Research
Letters, 9(6), 064014, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/6/064014.
Islam, M.R. and M. Shamsuddoha, 2017: Socioeconomic consequences of climate
induced human displacement and migration in Bangladesh. International
Sociology, 32(3), 277-298, doi:10.1177/0268580917693173.
IUCN, 2018: The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Retrieved from: www.iucnredlist.org.
Izaurralde, R.C. et al., 2011: Climate Impacts on Agriculture: Implications for
Forage and Rangeland Production. Agronomy Journal, 103(2), 371-381,
doi:10.2134/agronj2010.0304.
Jacinto, G.S., 2011: Fish Kill in the Philippines - Deja Vu. Science Diliman, 23, 1-3,
http://journals.upd.edu.ph/index.php/sciencediliman/article/view/2835.
Jackson, J.E. et al., 2010: Public health impacts of climate change in Washington
State: projected mortality risks due to heat events and air pollution. Climatic
Change, 102(1-2), 159-186, doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9852-3.
Jackson, L.P., A. Grinsted, and S. Jevrejeva, 2018: 21st Century Sea-Level
Rise in Line with the Paris Accord. Earth's Future, 6(2), 213-229,
doi:10.1002/2017ef000688.
Jacob, D. and S. Solman, 2017: IMPACT2C - An introduction. Climate Services, 7,
1-2, doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2017.07.006.
Jacob, D. et al., 2014: EURO-CORDEX: new high-resolution climate change
projections for European impact research. Regional Environmental Change,
14(2), 563-578, doi:10.1007/s10113-013-0499-2.
Jacob, D. et al., 2018: Climate Impacts in Europe Under +1.5C Global Warming.
Earth's Future, 6(2), 264-285, doi:10.1002/2017ef000710.
Jacobs, S.S., A. Jenkins, C.F. Giulivi, and P. Dutrieux, 2011: Stronger ocean circulation
and increased melting under Pine Island Glacier ice shelf. Nature Geoscience,
4(8), 519-523, doi:10.1038/ngeo1188.
Jaggard, K.W., A. Qi, and M.A. Semenov, 2007: The impact of climate change on
sugarbeet yield in the UK: 1976-2004. The Journal of Agricultural Science,
145(4), 367-375, doi:10.1017/s0021859607006922.
Jahn, A., 2018: Reduced probability of ice-free summers for 1.5C compared to
2C warming. Nature Climate Change, 8(5), 409-413,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0127-8.
Jahn, A., J.E. Kay, M.M. Holland, and D.M. Hall, 2016: How predictable is the
timing of a summer ice-free Arctic? Geophysical Research Letters, 43(17),
9113-9120, doi:10.1002/2016gl070067.
Jaiswal, D. et al., 2017: Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an expandable green
alternative to crude oil use. Nature Climate Change, 7(11), 788-792,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3410.
Jamero, M.L., M. Onuki, M. Esteban, and N. Tan, 2018: Community-based
adaptation in low-lying islands in the Philippines: challenges and lessons
learned. Regional Environmental Change, 1-12,
doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1332-8.
Jamero, M.L. et al., 2017: Small-island communities in the Philippines prefer local
measures to relocation in response to sea-level rise. Nature Climate Change,
7, 581-586, doi:10.1038/nclimate3344.
James, R., R. Washington, C.-F. Schleussner, J. Rogelj, and D. Conway, 2017:
Characterizing half-a-degree difference: a review of methods for identifying
regional climate responses to global warming targets. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 8(2), e457, doi:10.1002/wcc.457.
Jean-Baptiste, N. et al., 2018: Housing and Informal Settlements. In: Climate
Change and Cities: Second Assessment Report of the Urban Climate Change
Research Network [Rosenzweig, C., W.D. Solecki, P. Romero-Lankao, S.
Mehrotra, S. Dhakal, and S.E. Ali Ibrahim (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, USA, pp. 399-431,
doi:10.1017/9781316563878.018.
Jeong, S.-J. et al., 2014: Effects of double cropping on summer climate of the North
China Plain and neighbouring regions. Nature Climate Change, 4(7), 615-619,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2266.

Chapter 3
Jevrejeva, S., L.P. Jackson, R.E.M. Riva, A. Grinsted, and J.C. Moore, 2016: Coastal
sea level rise with warming above 2C. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 113(47), 13342-13347, doi:10.1073/pnas.1605312113.
Jiang, D.B. and Z.P. Tian, 2013: East Asian monsoon change for the 21st century:
Results of CMIP3 and CMIP5 models. Chinese Science Bulletin, 58(12), 1427-
1435, doi:10.1007/s11434-012-5533-0.
Jiang, L. and B.C.O. Neill, 2017: Global urbanization projections for the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways. Global Environmental Change, 42, 193-199,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.03.008.
Jiang, Y. et al., 2016: Importance of soil thermal regime in terrestrial ecosystem
carbon dynamics in the circumpolar north. Global and Planetary Change, 142,
28-40, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2016.04.011.
Jiao, M., G. Zhou, and Z. Chen (eds.), 2014: Blue book of agriculture for
addressing climate change: Assessment report of climatic change impacts
on agriculture in China (No.1) (in Chinese). Social Sciences Academic Press,
Beijing, China.
Jiao, M., G. Zhou, and Z. Zhang (eds.), 2016: Blue book of agriculture for addressing
climate change: Assessment report of agro-meteorological disasters and yield
losses in China (No.2) (in Chinese). Social Sciences Academic Press, Beijing,
China.
Jimenez Cisneros, B.E. et al., 2014: Freshwater Resources. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 229-269.
Johnson, W.C. and K.A. Poiani, 2016: Climate Change Effects on Prairie Pothole
Wetlands: Findings from a Twenty-five Year Numerical Modeling Project.
Wetlands, 36(2), 273-285, doi:10.1007/s13157-016-0790-3.
Johnson, W.C., B. Werner, and G.R. Guntenspergen, 2016: Non-linear responses
of glaciated prairie wetlands to climate warming. Climatic Change, 134(1-2),
209-223, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1534-8.
Jones, A. and M. Phillips (eds.), 2017: Global Climate Change and Coastal Tourism:
Recognizing Problems, Managing Solutions and Future Expectations. Centre
for Agriculture and Biosciences International (CABI), 360 pp.
Jones, C. and L.M. Carvalho, 2013: Climate change in the South American
monsoon system: Present climate and CMIP5 projections. Journal of Climate,
26(17), 6660-6678, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00412.1.
Jones, C.D., J. Lowe, S. Liddicoat, and R. Betts, 2009: Committed terrestrial
ecosystem changes due to climate change. Nature Geoscience, 2(7), 484-487,
doi:10.1038/ngeo555.
Jones, C.D. et al., 2013: Twenty-First-Century Compatible CO2 Emissions and
Airborne Fraction Simulated by CMIP5 Earth System Models under Four
Representative Concentration Pathways. Journal of Climate, 26(13), 4398-
4413, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00554.1.
Jones, C.D. et al., 2016: Simulating the Earth system response to negative
emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), 095012,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095012.
Jonker, J.G.G., M. Junginger, and A. Faaij, 2014: Carbon payback period and carbon
offset parity point of wood pellet production in the South-eastern United
States. GCB Bioenergy, 6(4), 371-389, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12056.
Joughin, I., B.E. Smith, and B. Medley, 2014: Marine Ice Sheet Collapse Potentially
Under Way for the Thwaites Glacier Basin, West Antarctica. Science, 344(6185),
735-738, doi:10.1126/science.1249055.
Kaiser, K. et al., 2014: Detection and attribution of lake-level dynamics in northeastern central Europe in recent decades. Regional Environmental Change,
14(4), 1587-1600, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0600-5.
Kamahori, H., N. Yamazaki, N. Mannoji, and K. Takahashi, 2006: Variability in
Intense Tropical Cyclone Days in the Western North Pacific. SOLA, 2, 104-107,
doi:10.2151/sola.2006-027.
Kamei, M., K. Hanaki, and K. Kurisu, 2016: Tokyo's long-term socioeconomic
pathways: Towards a sustainable future. Sustainable Cities and Society, 27,
73-82, doi:10.1016/j.scs.2016.07.002.
Kampf, J. and P. Chapman, 2016: The Functioning of Coastal Upwelling Systems.
In: Upwelling Systems of the World. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
Switzerland, pp. 31-65, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-42524-5_2.
Kang, N.-Y. and J.B. Elsner, 2015: Trade-off between intensity and frequency of
global tropical cyclones. Nature Climate Change, 5(7), 661-664,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2646.

295

3

Chapter 3

3

Kaniewski, D., J.J.J. Guiot, and E. Van Campo, 2015: Drought and societal collapse
3200 years ago in the Eastern Mediterranean: A review. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 6(4), 369-382, doi:10.1002/wcc.345.
Kannan, K.P., S.M. Dev, and A.N. Sharma, 2000: Concerns on Food Security.
Economic And Political Weekly, 35(45), 3919-3922,
www.jstor.org/stable/4409916.
Karl, T.R. et al., 2015: Possible artifacts of data biases in the recent global surface
warming hiatus. Science, 348(6242), 1469-1472,
doi:10.1126/science.aaa5632.
Karnauskas, K.B., J.P. Donnelly, and K.J. Anchukaitis, 2016: Future freshwater
stress for island populations. Nature Climate Change, 6(7), 720-725,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2987.
Karnauskas, K.B. et al., 2018: Freshwater Stress on Small Island Developing
States: Population Projections and Aridity Changes at 1.5C and 2C. Regional
Environmental Change, 1-10, doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1331-9.
Karstensen, J. et al., 2015: Open ocean dead zones in the tropical North Atlantic
Ocean. Biogeosciences, 12(8), 2597-2605,
doi:10.5194/bg-12-2597-2015.
Kawaguchi, S. et al., 2013: Risk maps for Antarctic krill under projected Southern
Ocean acidification. Nature Climate Change, 3(9), 843-847,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1937.
Kelley, C.P., S. Mohtadi, M.A. Cane, R. Seager, and Y. Kushnir, 2015: Climate
change in the Fertile Crescent and implications of the recent Syrian drought.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(11), 3241-6,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1421533112.
Kelly, K.A., K. Drushka, L.A. Thompson, D. Le Bars, and E.L. McDonagh, 2016:
Impact of slowdown of Atlantic overturning circulation on heat and
freshwater transports. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(14), 7625-7631,
doi:10.1002/2016gl069789.
Kench, P., D. Thompson, M. Ford, H. Ogawa, and R. Mclean, 2015: Coral islands
defy sea-level rise over the past century: Records from a central Pacific atoll.
Geology, 43(6), 515-518, doi:10.1130/g36555.1.
Kench, P.S., M.R. Ford, and S.D. Owen, 2018: Patterns of island change and
persistence offer alternate adaptation pathways for atoll nations. Nature
Communications, 9(1), 605, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-02954-1.
Kendrovski, V. et al., 2017: Quantifying Projected Heat Mortality Impacts
under 21st-Century Warming Conditions for Selected European Countries.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(7),
729, doi:10.3390/ijerph14070729.
Kennedy, E. et al., 2013: Avoiding Coral Reef Functional Collapse Requires Local
and Global Action. Current Biology, 23(10), 912-918,
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.04.020.
Kent, C. et al., 2017: Using climate model simulations to assess the current climate
risk to maize production. Environmental Research Letters, 12(5), 054012,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa6cb9.
Keppel, G. and J. Kavousi, 2015: Effective climate change refugia for coral reefs.
Global Change Biology, 21(8), 2829-2830, doi:10.1111/gcb.12936.
Kersting, D.K., E. Cebrian, J. Verdura, and E. Ballesteros, 2017: A new cladocora
caespitosa population with unique ecological traits. Mediterranean Marine
Science, 18(1), 38-42, doi:10.12681/mms.1955.
Kharin, V. et al., 2018: Risks from Climate Extremes Change Differently from
1.5C to 2.0C Depending on Rarity. Earth's Future, 6(5), 704-715,
doi:10.1002/2018ef000813.
Khouakhi, A. and G. Villarini, 2017: Attribution of annual maximum sea levels
to tropical cyclones at the global scale. International Journal of Climatology,
37(1), 540-547, doi:10.1002/joc.4704.
Khouakhi, A., G. Villarini, and G.A. Vecchi, 2017: Contribution of Tropical
Cyclones to Rainfall at the Global Scale. Journal of Climate, 30(1), 359-372,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0298.1.
Kim, H.-Y., J. Ko, S. Kang, and J. Tenhunen, 2013: Impacts of climate change on
paddy rice yield in a temperate climate. Global Change Biology, 19(2), 548-
562, doi:10.1111/gcb.12047.
Kim, Y. et al., 2017: A perspective on climate-resilient development and national
adaptation planning based on USAID's experience. Climate and Development,
9(2), 141-151, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1124037.
King, A.D., D.J. Karoly, and B.J. Henley, 2017: Australian climate extremes at
1.5C and 2C of global warming. Nature Climate Change, 7(6), 412-416,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3296.
King, A.D. et al., 2018: Reduced heat exposure by limiting global warming to
1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 549-551,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0191-0.

296

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Kinoshita, Y., M. Tanoue, S. Watanabe, and Y. Hirabayashi, 2018: Quantifying the
effect of autonomous adaptation to global river flood projections: Application
to future flood risk assessments. Environmental Research Letters, 13(1),
014006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9401.
Kipling, R.P. et al., 2016: Modeling European ruminant production systems:
Facing the challenges of climate change. Agricultural Systems, 147, 24-37,
doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2016.05.007.
Kirtman, B. et al., 2013: Near-term Climate Change: Projections and Predictability.
In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen,
J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp.
953-1028.
Kirwan, M. and P. Megonigal, 2013: Tidal wetland stability in the face of human
impacts and sea-level rise. Nature, 504, 53-60,
doi:10.1038/nature12856.
Kittinger, J.N., 2013: Human Dimensions of Small-Scale and Traditional Fisheries in
the Asia-Pacific Region. Pacific Science, 67(3), 315-325,
doi:10.2984/67.3.1.
Kittinger, J.N. et al., 2013: Emerging frontiers in social-ecological systems research
for sustainability of small-scale fisheries. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 5(3-4), 352-357, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.06.008.
Kjellstrom, T., B. Lemke, and M. Otto, 2013: Mapping Occupational Heat Exposure
and Effects in South-East Asia: Ongoing Time Trends 1980-2011 and Future
Estimates to 2050. Industrial Health, 51(1), 56-67,
doi:10.2486/indhealth.2012-0174.
Kjellstrom, T., C. Freyberg, B. Lemke, M. Otto, and D. Briggs, 2018: Estimating
population heat exposure and impacts on working people in conjunction with
climate change. International Journal of Biometeorology, 62(3), 291-306,
doi:10.1007/s00484-017-1407-0.
Kjellstrom, E. et al., 2018: European climate change at global mean temperature
increases of 1.5 and 2C above pre-industrial conditions as simulated by the
EURO-CORDEX regional climate models. Earth System Dynamics, 9(2), 459-
478, doi:10.5194/esd-9-459-2018.
Kline, D.I. et al., 2012: A short-term in situ CO2 enrichment experiment on Heron
Island (GBR). Scientific Reports, 2, 413, doi:10.1038/srep00413.
Kline, K.L. et al., 2017: Reconciling food security and bioenergy: priorities for
action. GCB Bioenergy, 9(3), 557-576, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12366.
Kling, H., P. Stanzel, and M. Preishuber, 2014: Impact modelling of water resources
development and climate scenarios on Zambezi River discharge. Journal of
Hydrology: Regional Studies, 1, 17-43,
doi:10.1016/j.ejrh.2014.05.002.
Kloster, S. et al., 2009: A GCM study of future climate response to aerosol pollution
reductions. Climate Dynamics, 34(7-8), 1177-1194,
doi:10.1007/s00382-009-0573-0.
Klotzbach, P.J., 2006: Trends in global tropical cyclone activity over the past
twenty years (1986-2005). Geophysical Research Letters, 33(10), L10805,
doi:10.1029/2006gl025881.
Klotzbach, P.J. and C.W. Landsea, 2015: Extremely Intense Hurricanes: Revisiting
Webster et al. (2005) after 10 Years. Journal of Climate, 28(19), 7621-7629,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-15-0188.1.
Klutse, N.A.B. et al., 2018: Potential Impact of 1.5C and 2C global warming
on extreme rainfall over West Africa. Environmental Research Letters, 13(5),
055013, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab37b.
Knapp, J.R., G.L. Laur, P.A. Vadas, W.P. Weiss, and J.M. Tricarico, 2014: Enteric
methane in dairy cattle production: Quantifying the opportunities and
impact of reducing emissions. Journal of Dairy Science, 97(6), 3231-3261,
doi:10.3168/jds.2013-7234.
Knutson, T.R. et al., 2010: Tropical cyclones and climate change. Nature Geoscience,
3(3), 157-163, doi:10.1038/ngeo779.
Knutson, T.R. et al., 2013: Dynamical Downscaling Projections of Twenty-FirstCentury Atlantic Hurricane Activity: CMIP3 and CMIP5 Model-Based Scenarios.
Journal of Climate, 26(17), 6591-6617, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00539.1.
Knutson, T.R. et al., 2015: Global Projections of Intense Tropical Cyclone Activity
for the Late Twenty-First Century from Dynamical Downscaling of CMIP5/RCP4.5
Scenarios. Journal of Climate, 28(18), 7203-7224,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-15-0129.1.
Knutti, R. and J. Sedlaek, 2012: Robustness and uncertainties in the new
CMIP5 climate model projections. Nature Climate Change, 3(4), 369-373,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1716.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Kopp, R.E., F.J. Simons, J.X. Mitrovica, A.C. Maloof, and M. Oppenheimer, 2013:
A probabilistic assessment of sea level variations within the last interglacial
stage. Geophysical Journal International, 193(2), 711-716,
doi:10.1093/gji/ggt029.
Kopp, R.E. et al., 2014: Probabilistic 21st and 22nd century sea-level projections
at a global network of tide-gauge sites. Earth's Future, 2(8), 383-406,
doi:10.1002/2014ef000239.
Kopp, R.E. et al., 2016: Temperature-driven global sea-level variability in the
Common Era. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(11),
E1434-E1441, doi:10.1073/pnas.1517056113.
Kossin, J.P. et al., 2013: Trend Analysis with a New Global Record of Tropical
Cyclone Intensity. Journal of Climate, 26(24), 9960-9976,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-13-00262.1.
Koutroulis, A.G., M.G. Grillakis, I.N. Daliakopoulos, I.K. Tsanis, and D. Jacob,
2016: Cross sectoral impacts on water availability at +2C and +3C for east
Mediterranean island states: The case of Crete. Journal of Hydrology, 532,
16-28, doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2015.11.015.
Koven, C.D. et al., 2015: Controls on terrestrial carbon feedbacks by productivity
versus turnover in the CMIP5 Earth System Models. Biogeosciences, 12(17),
5211-5228, doi:10.5194/bg-12-5211-2015.
Krause, A. et al., 2017: Global consequences of afforestation and bioenergy
cultivation on ecosystem service indicators. Biogeosciences, 14(21), 4829-
4850, doi:10.5194/bg-14-4829-2017.
Kreidenweis, U. et al., 2016: Afforestation to mitigate climate change: impacts
on food prices under consideration of albedo effects. Environmental Research
Letters, 11(8), 085001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/085001.
Krey, V., G. Luderer, L. Clarke, and E. Kriegler, 2014: Getting from here to there
- energy technology transformation pathways in the EMF27 scenarios.
Climatic Change, 123(3), 369-382, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0947-5.
Krey, V. et al., 2012: Urban and rural energy use and carbon dioxide emissions
in Asia. Energy Economics, 34, S272-S283, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2012.04.013.
Kriegler, E., J.W. Hall, H. Held, R. Dawson, and H.J. Schellnhuber, 2009: Imprecise
probability assessment of tipping points in the climate system. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 106(13), 5041-5046,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0809117106.
Kriegler, E. et al., 2017: Fossil-fueled development (SSP5): An energy and resource
intensive scenario for the 21st century. Global Environmental Change, 42,
297-315, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.015.
Kroeker, K.J. et al., 2013: Impacts of ocean acidification on marine organisms:
Quantifying sensitivities and interaction with warming. Global Change
Biology, 19(6), 1884-1896, doi:10.1111/gcb.12179.
Kroon, F.J., P. Thorburn, B. Schaffelke, and S. Whitten, 2016: Towards protecting the
Great Barrier Reef from land-based pollution. Global Change Biology, 22(6),
1985-2002, doi:10.1111/gcb.13262.
Krumhansl, K.A. et al., 2016: Global patterns of kelp forest change over the past
half-century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(48),
13785-13790, doi:10.1073/pnas.1606102113.
Kumar, L. and S. Taylor, 2015: Exposure of coastal built assets in the South Pacific
to climate risks. Nature Climate Change, 5(11), 992-996,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2702.
Kummu, M. et al., 2016: The world's road to water scarcity: shortage and stress in
the 20th century and pathways towards sustainability. Scientific Reports, 6(1),
38495, doi:10.1038/srep38495.
Kusaka, H., A. Suzuki-Parker, T. Aoyagi, S.A. Adachi, and Y. Yamagata, 2016:
Assessment of RCM and urban scenarios uncertainties in the climate
projections for August in the 2050s in Tokyo. Climatic Change, 137(3-4),
427-438, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1693-2.
Lachkar, Z., M. Levy, and S. Smith, 2018: Intensification and deepening of the
Arabian Sea oxygen minimum zone in response to increase in Indian monsoon
wind intensity. Biogeosciences, 15(1), 159-186, doi:10.5194/bg-15-159-2018.
Lacoue-Labarthe, T. et al., 2016: Impacts of ocean acidification in a warming
Mediterranean Sea: An overview. Regional Studies in Marine Science, 5, 1-11,
doi:10.1016/j.rsma.2015.12.005.
Laderach, P., A. Martinez-Valle, G. Schroth, and N. Castro, 2013: Predicting the
future climatic suitability for cocoa farming of the world's leading producer
countries, Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire. Climatic Change, 119(3), 841-854,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0774-8.
Lal, R., 2014: Soil Carbon Management and Climate Change. In: Soil Carbon
[Hartemink, A.E. and K. McSweeney (eds.)]. Progress in Soil Science, Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 339-361,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-04084-4_35.

Chapter 3
Lallo, C.H.O. et al., 2018: Characterizing heat stress on livestock using the
temperature humidity index (THI) - prospects for a warmer Caribbean.
Regional Environmental Change, 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1359-x.
Lam, V.W.Y., W.W.L. Cheung, and U.R. Sumaila, 2014: Marine capture fisheries in
the Arctic: Winners or losers under climate change and ocean acidification?
Fish and Fisheries, 17, 335-357, doi:10.1111/faf.12106.
Lam, V.W.Y., W.W.L. Cheung, W. Swartz, and U.R. Sumaila, 2012: Climate change
impacts on fisheries in West Africa: implications for economic, food and
nutritional security. African Journal of Marine Science, 34(1), 103-117,
doi:10.2989/1814232x.2012.673294.
Lam, V.W.Y., W.W.L. Cheung, G. Reygondeau, and U.R. Sumaila, 2016: Projected
change in global fisheries revenues under climate change. Scientific Reports,
6(1), 32607, doi:10.1038/srep32607.
Lana, M.A. et al., 2017: Yield stability and lower susceptibility to abiotic stresses
of improved open-pollinated and hybrid maize cultivars. Agronomy for
Sustainable Development, 37(4), 30, doi:10.1007/s13593-017-0442-x.
Landsea, C.W., 2006: Can We Detect Trends in Extreme Tropical Cyclones? Science,
313(5786), 452-454, doi:10.1126/science.1128448.
Larsen, J.N. et al., 2014: Polar regions. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J.
Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma,
E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1567-1612.
Lawrence, P.J. et al., 2012: Simulating the biogeochemical and biogeophysical
impacts of transient land cover change and wood harvest in the Community
Climate System Model (CCSM4) from 1850 to 2100. Journal of Climate, 25(9),
3071-3095, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-11-00256.1.
Le Cozannet, G., M. Garcin, M. Yates, D. Idier, and B. Meyssignac, 2014: Approaches
to evaluate the recent impacts of sea-level rise on shoreline changes. EarthScience Reviews, 138, 47-60, doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2014.08.005.
Le Dang, H., E. Li, J. Bruwer, and I. Nuberg, 2013: Farmers' perceptions of climate
variability and barriers to adaptation: lessons learned from an exploratory
study in Vietnam. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
19(5), 531-548, doi:10.1007/s11027-012-9447-6.
Leadley, P. et al., 2016: Relationships between the Aichi Targets and land-based
climate mitigation. Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 26 pp.
Lebel, L., C.T. Hoanh, C. Krittasudthacheewa, and R. Daniel (eds.), 2014: Climate risks,
regional integration and sustainability in the Mekong region. Strategic Information
and Research Development Centre (SIRD), Selangor, Malaysia, 417 pp.
Lee, J., 2016: Valuation of Ocean Acidification Effects on Shellfish Fisheries and
Aquaculture. DP 132, Centre for Financial and Management Studies (CeFiMS),
School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London, London,
UK, 14 pp.
Lee, J.Y., S. Hyun Lee, S.-C. Hong, and H. Kim, 2017: Projecting future summer
mortality due to ambient ozone concentration and temperature changes.
Atmospheric Environment, 156, 88-94, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2017.02.034.
Lee, M.A., A.P. Davis, M.G.G. Chagunda, and P. Manning, 2017: Forage quality
declines with rising temperatures, with implications for livestock production
and methane emissions. Biogeosciences, 14(6), 1403-1417,
doi:10.5194/bg-14-1403-2017.
Lee, S.-M. and S.-K. Min, 2018: Heat Stress Changes over East Asia under 1.5
and 2.0C Global Warming Targets. Journal of Climate, 31(7), 2819-2831,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-17-0449.1.
Lehner, F. et al., 2017: Projected drought risk in 1.5C and 2C warmer climates.
Geophysical Research Letters, 44(14), 7419-7428, doi:10.1002/2017gl074117.
Lehodey, P., I. Senina, S. Nicol, and J. Hampton, 2015: Modelling the impact of
climate change on South Pacific albacore tuna. Deep Sea Research Part II:
Topical Studies in Oceanography, 113, 246-259,
doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2014.10.028.
Lemasson, A.J., S. Fletcher, J.M. Hall-Spencer, and A.M. Knights, 2017: Linking the
biological impacts of ocean acidification on oysters to changes in ecosystem
services: A review. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 492,
49-62, doi:10.1016/j.jembe.2017.01.019.
Lemelin, H., J. Dawson, and E.J. Stewart (eds.), 2012: Last Chance Tourism:
Adapting Tourism Opportunities in a Changing World. Routledge, Abingdon,
UK, 238 pp., doi:10.1080/14927713.2012.747359.
Lemoine, D. and C.P. Traeger, 2016: Economics of tipping the climate dominoes.
Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 514-519, doi:10.1038/nclimate2902.

297

3

Chapter 3

3

Lenton, T.M., 2012: Arctic Climate Tipping Points. Ambio, 41(1, SI), 10-22,
doi:10.1007/s13280-011-0221-x.
Lenton, T.M. et al., 2008: Tipping elements in the Earth's climate system.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(6), 1786-93,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0705414105.
Lesk, C., P. Rowhani, and N. Ramankutty, 2016: Influence of extreme weather
disasters on global crop production. Nature, 529(7584), 84-87,
doi:10.1038/nature16467.
Lesnikowski, A., J. Ford, R. Biesbroek, L. Berrang-Ford, and S.J. Heymann, 2016:
National-level progress on adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 261-264,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2863.
Levermann, A. et al., 2013: The multimillennial sea-level commitment of global
warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(34), 13745-
13750, doi:10.1073/pnas.1219414110.
Levermann, A. et al., 2014: Projecting Antarctic ice discharge using response
functions from SeaRISE ice-sheet models. Earth System Dynamics, 5(2), 271-
293, doi:10.5194/esd-5-271-2014.
Levi, T., F. Keesing, K. Oggenfuss, and R.S. Ostfeld, 2015: Accelerated phenology
of blacklegged ticks under climate warming. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 370(1665), 20130556,
doi:10.1098/rstb.2013.0556.
Levin, L.A. and N. Le Bris, 2015: The deep ocean under climate change. Science,
350(6262), 766-768, doi:10.1126/science.aad0126.
Li, C., D. Notz, S. Tietsche, and J. Marotzke, 2013: The Transient versus the
Equilibrium Response of Sea Ice to Global Warming. Journal of Climate,
26(15), 5624-5636, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00492.1.
Li, C. et al., 2018: Midlatitude atmospheric circulation responses under 1.5 and
2.0C warming and implications for regional impacts. Earth System Dynamics,
9(2), 359-382, doi:10.5194/esd-9-359-2018.
Li, S., Q. Wang, and J.A. Chun, 2017: Impact assessment of climate change on rice
productivity in the Indochinese Peninsula using a regional-scale crop model.
International Journal of Climatology, 37, 1147-1160, doi:10.1002/joc.5072.
Li, S. et al., 2016: Interactive Effects of Seawater Acidification and Elevated
Temperature on the Transcriptome and Biomineralization in the Pearl Oyster
Pinctada fucata. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(3), 1157-1165,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05107.
Li, T. et al., 2015: Heat-related mortality projections for cardiovascular and
respiratory disease under the changing climate in Beijing, China. Scientific
Reports, 5(1), 11441, doi:10.1038/srep11441.
Li, T. et al., 2016: Aging Will Amplify the Heat-related Mortality Risk under a
Changing Climate: Projection for the Elderly in Beijing, China. Scientific
Reports, 6(1), 28161, doi:10.1038/srep28161.
Li, Z. and H. Fang, 2016: Impacts of climate change on water erosion: A review.
Earth-Science Reviews, 163, 94-117, doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2016.10.004.
Likhvar, V. et al., 2015: A multi-scale health impact assessment of air pollution
over the 21st century. Science of The Total Environment, 514, 439-449,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.02.002.
Linares, C. et al., 2015: Persistent natural acidification drives major distribution
shifts in marine benthic ecosystems. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 282(1818), 20150587, doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.0587.
Lindsay, R. and A. Schweiger, 2015: Arctic sea ice thickness loss determined using
subsurface, aircraft, and satellite observations. The Cryosphere, 9(1), 269-283,
doi:10.5194/tc-9-269-2015.
Ling, F.H., M. Tamura, K. Yasuhara, K. Ajima, and C. Van Trinh, 2015: Reducing flood
risks in rural households: survey of perception and adaptation in the Mekong
delta. Climatic change, 132(2), 209-222, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1416-0.
Ling, S.D., C.R. Johnson, K. Ridgway, A.J. Hobday, and M. Haddon, 2009: Climatedriven range extension of a sea urchin: Inferring future trends by analysis
of recent population dynamics. Global Change Biology, 15(3), 719-731,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01734.x.
Lipper, L. et al., 2014: Climate-smart agriculture for food security. Nature Climate
Change, 4(12), 1068-1072, doi:10.1038/nclimate2437.
Liu, J. et al., 2017: Water scarcity assessments in the past, present, and future.
Earth's Future, 5(6), 545-559, doi:10.1002/2016ef000518.
Liu, L., H. Xu, Y. Wang, and T. Jiang, 2017: Impacts of 1.5 and 2C global warming
on water availability and extreme hydrological events in Yiluo and Beijiang
River catchments in China. Climatic Change, 145, 145-158,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2072-3.
Liu, W. et al., 2018: Global drought and severe drought-affected populations in 1.5
and 2C warmer worlds. Earth System Dynamics, 9(1), 267-283,
doi:10.5194/esd-9-267-2018.

298

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Lluch-Cota, S.E. et al., 2014: Cross-chapter box on uncertain trends in major
upwelling ecosystems. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E. Kissel, A. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA,
pp. 149-151.
Loarie, S.R. et al., 2009: The velocity of climate change. Nature, 462(7276), 1052-
1055, doi:10.1038/nature08649.
Lobell, D. et al., 2009: Regional differences in the influence of irrigation on climate.
Journal of Climate, 22(8), 2248-2255, doi:10.1175/2008jcli2703.1.
Lobell, D.B., G. Bala, and P.B. Duffy, 2006: Biogeophysical impacts of cropland
management changes on climate. Geophysical Research Letters, 33(6),
L06708, doi:10.1029/2005gl025492.
Lobell, D.B., W. Schlenker, and J. Costa-Roberts, 2011: Climate Trends and Global
Crop Production Since 1980. Science, 333(6042), 616-620,
doi:10.1126/science.1204531.
Lobell, D.B. et al., 2014: Greater Sensitivity to Drought Accompanies Maize Yield
Increase in the U.S. Midwest. Science, 344(6183), 516-519,
doi:10.1126/science.1251423.
Long, J., C. Giri, J. Primavera, and M. Trivedi, 2016: Damage and recovery
assessment of the Philippines' mangroves following Super Typhoon Haiyan.
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 109(2), 734-743,
doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.06.080.
LoPresti, A. et al., 2015: Rate and velocity of climate change caused by
cumulative carbon emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 10(9), 095001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/9/095001.
Lovelock, C.E., I.C. Feller, R. Reef, S. Hickey, and M.C. Ball, 2017: Mangrove dieback
during fluctuating sea levels. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1680,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-01927-6.
Lovelock, C.E. et al., 2015: The vulnerability of Indo-Pacific mangrove forests to
sea-level rise. Nature, 526(7574), 559-563, doi:10.1038/nature15538.
Lovenduski, N.S. and G.B. Bonan, 2017: Reducing uncertainty in projections of
terrestrial carbon uptake. Environmental Research Letters, 12(4), 044020,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa66b8.
Lu, X.X. et al., 2013: Sediment loads response to climate change: A preliminary
study of eight large Chinese rivers. International Journal of Sediment Research,
28(1), 1-14, doi:10.1016/s1001-6279(13)60013-x.
Lucht, W., S. Schaphoff, T. Erbrecht, U. Heyder, and W. Cramer, 2006: Terrestrial
vegetation redistribution and carbon balance under climate change. Carbon
Balance and Management, 1(1), 6, doi:10.1186/1750-0680-1-6.
Luo, K., F. Tao, J.P. Moiwo, D. Xiao, and J. Zhang, 2016: Attribution of hydrological
change in Heihe River Basin to climate and land use change in the past three
decades. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 33704, doi:10.1038/srep33704.
Luyssaert, S. et al., 2014: Land management and land-cover change have impacts
of similar magnitude on surface temperature. Nature Climate Change, 4(5),
1-5, doi:10.1038/nclimate2196.
Lyra, A. et al., 2017: Projections of climate change impacts on central America tropical
rainforest. Climatic Change, 141(1), 93-105, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1790-2.
Macel, M., T. Dostalek, S. Esch, and A. Bucharova, 2017: Evolutionary responses
to climate change in a range expanding plant. Oecologia, 184(2), 543-554,
doi:10.1007/s00442-017-3864-x.
Mackenzie, C.L. et al., 2014: Ocean Warming, More than Acidification, Reduces
Shell Strength in a Commercial Shellfish Species during Food Limitation. PLOS
ONE, 9(1), e86764, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0086764.
Magrin, G.O. et al., 2014: Central and South America. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea,
K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma,
E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1499-1566.
Mahlstein, I. and R. Knutti, 2012: September Arctic sea ice predicted to disappear
near 2C global warming above present. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 117(D6), D06104, doi:10.1029/2011jd016709.
Mahlstein, I., R. Knutti, S. Solomon, and R.W. Portmann, 2011: Early onset of
significant local warming in low latitude countries. Environmental Research
Letters, 6(3), 034009, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/6/3/034009.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Mahowald, N.M., D.S. Ward, S.C. Doney, P.G. Hess, and J.T. Randerson, 2017a:
Are the impacts of land use on warming underestimated in climate policy?
Environmental Research Letters, 12(9), 94016.
Mahowald, N.M. et al., 2017b: Aerosol Deposition Impacts on Land and Ocean
Carbon Cycles. Current Climate Change Reports, 3(1), 16-31,
doi:10.1007/s40641-017-0056-z.
Maksym, T., S.E. Stammerjohn, S. Ackley, and R. Massom, 2011: Antarctic Sea ice - A
polar opposite? Oceanography, 24(3), 162-173, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2012.88.
Mallakpour, I. and G. Villarini, 2015: The changing nature of flooding across the
central United States. Nature Climate Change, 5(3), 250-254,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2516.
Marcinkowski, P. et al., 2017: Effect of Climate Change on Hydrology, Sediment
and Nutrient Losses in Two Lowland Catchments in Poland. Water, 9(3), 156,
doi:10.3390/w9030156.
Marcott, S.A., J.D. Shakun, P.U. Clark, and A.C. Mix, 2013: A Reconstruction
of Regional and Global Temperature for the Past 11,300 Years. Science,
339(6124), 1198-1201, doi:10.1126/science.1228026.
Markham, A., E. Osipova, K. Lafrenz Samuels, and A. Caldas, 2016: World Heritage
and Tourism in a Changing Climate. United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and Union of Concerned Scientists, 108 pp.
Marszelewski, W. and B. Pius, 2016: Long-term changes in temperature of river
waters in the transitional zone of the temperate climate: a case study of Polish
rivers. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 61(8), 1430-1442,
doi:10.1080/02626667.2015.1040800.
Martinez, M.L., G. Mendoza-Gonzalez, R. Silva-Casarin, and E. Mendoza-Baldwin,
2014: Land use changes and sea level rise may induce a "coastal squeeze" on
the coasts of Veracruz, Mexico. Global Environmental Change, 29, 180-188,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.09.009.
Martinez-Baron, D., G. Orjuela, G. Renzoni, A.M. Loboguerrero Rodriguez, and
S.D. Prager, 2018: Small-scale farmers in a 1.5C future: The importance of
local social dynamics as an enabling factor for implementation and scaling of
climate-smart agriculture. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31,
112-119, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.02.013.
Martius, O., S. Pfahl, and C. Chevalier, 2016: A global quantification of compound
precipitation and wind extremes. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(14), 7709-
7717, doi:10.1002/2016gl070017.
Marx, A. et al., 2018: Climate change alters low flows in Europe under global
warming of 1.5, 2, and 3C. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 22(2),
1017-1032, doi:10.5194/hess-22-1017-2018.
Marzeion, B. and A. Levermann, 2014: Loss of cultural world heritage and
currently inhabited places to sea-level rise. Environmental Research Letters,
9(3), 034001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/3/034001.
Marzeion, B., G. Kaser, F. Maussion, and N. Champollion, 2018: Limited influence
of climate change mitigation on short-term glacier mass loss. Nature Climate
Change, 8, 305-308, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0093-1.
Masike, S. and P. Urich, 2008: Vulnerability of traditional beef sector to drought
and the challenges of climate change: The case of Kgatleng District, Botswana.
Journal of Geography and Regional Planning, 1(1), 12-18,
https://academicjournals.org/journal/jgrp/article-abstract/93cd326741.
Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., 2013: Information from Paleoclimate Archives. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels,
Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 383-464.
Mastrandrea, M.D. et al., 2010: Guidance Note for Lead Authors of the IPCC Fifth
Assessment Report on Consistent Treatment of Uncertainties. Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 7 pp.
Mastrorillo, M. et al., 2016: The influence of climate variability on internal
migration flows in South Africa. Global Environmental Change, 39, 155-169,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.04.014.
Matear, R.J., M.A. Chamberlain, C. Sun, and M. Feng, 2015: Climate change
projection for the western tropical Pacific Ocean using a high-resolution
ocean model: Implications for tuna fisheries. Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical
Studies in Oceanography, 113, 22-46,
doi:10.1016/j.dsr2.2014.07.003.
Mathbout, S., J.A. Lopez-bustins, J. Martin-vide, and F.S. Rodrigo, 2017: Spatial and
temporal analysis of drought variability at several time scales in Syria during
1961-2012. Atmospheric Research, 1-39,
doi:10.1016/j.atmosres.2017.09.016.

Chapter 3
Matthews, D. and K. Caldeira, 2008: Stabilizing climate requires near-zero
emissions. Geophysical Research Letters, 35(4), L04705,
doi:10.1029/2007gl032388.
Matthews, T.K.R., R.L. Wilby, and C. Murphy, 2017: Communicating the deadly
consequences of global warming for human heat stress. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 114(15), 3861-3866,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1617526114.
Maule, C.F., T. Mendlik, and O.B. Christensen, 2017: The effect of the pathway to
a two degrees warmer world on the regional temperature change of Europe.
Climate Services, 7, 3-11, doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2016.07.002.
Maure, G. et al., 2018: The southern African climate under 1.5C and 2C of global
warming as simulated by CORDEX regional climate models. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(6), 065002, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab190.
Maynard, J. et al., 2015: Projections of climate conditions that increase coral
disease susceptibility and pathogen abundance and virulence. Nature Climate
Change, 5(7), 688-694, doi:10.1038/nclimate2625.
Mba, W.P. et al., 2018: Consequences of 1.5C and 2C global warming levels
for temperature and precipitation changes over Central Africa. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(5), 055011, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab048.
McCarthy, M.P., M.J. Best, and R.A. Betts, 2010: Climate change in cities due
to global warming and urban effects. Geophysical Research Letters, 37(9),
L09705, doi:10.1029/2010gl042845.
McClanahan, T.R., E.H. Allison, and J.E. Cinner, 2015: Managing fisheries for human
and food security. Fish and Fisheries, 16(1), 78-103, doi:10.1111/faf.12045.
McClanahan, T.R., J.C. Castilla, A.T. White, and O. Defeo, 2009: Healing small-scale
fisheries by facilitating complex socio-ecological systems. Reviews in Fish
Biology and Fisheries, 19(1), 33-47, doi:10.1007/s11160-008-9088-8.
McFarland, J. et al., 2015: Impacts of rising air temperatures and emissions
mitigation on electricity demand and supply in the United States: a multimodel comparison. Climatic Change, 131(1), 111-125,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1380-8.
McGranahan, G., D. Balk, and B. Anderson, 2007: The rising tide: Assessing the
risks of climate change and human settlements in low elevation coastal zones.
Environment and Urbanization, 19(1), 17-37,
doi:10.1177/0956247807076960.
McGrath, J.M. and D.B. Lobell, 2013: Regional disparities in the CO2 fertilization
effect and implications for crop yields. Environmental Research Letters, 8(1),
014054, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/014054.
McLean, R. and P. Kench, 2015: Destruction or persistence of coral atoll islands
in the face of 20th and 21st century sea-level rise? Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 6(5), 445-463, doi:10.1002/wcc.350.
McNamara, K.E. and H.J. Des Combes, 2015: Planning for Community Relocations
Due to Climate Change in Fiji. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science,
6(3), 315-319, doi:10.1007/s13753-015-0065-2.
Medek, D.E., J. Schwartz, and S.S. Myers, 2017: Estimated Effects of Future
Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations on Protein Intake and the Risk of Protein
Deficiency by Country and Region. Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(8),
087002, doi:10.1289/ehp41.
Meehl, G.A. et al., 2007: Global Climate Projections. In: Climate Change 2007:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.
Tignor, and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 747-846.
Mehran, A., O. Mazdiyasni, and A. Aghakouchak, 2015: A hybrid framework for
assessing socioeconomic drought: Linking climate variability, local resilience,
and demand. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 120(15), 7520-
7533, doi:10.1002/2015jd023147.
Mehran, A. et al., 2017: Compounding Impacts of Human-Induced Water Stress
and Climate Change on Water Availability. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1-9,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-06765-0.
Meier, K.J.S., L. Beaufort, S. Heussner, and P. Ziveri, 2014: The role of ocean
acidification in Emiliania huxleyi coccolith thinning in the Mediterranean Sea.
Biogeosciences, 11(10), 2857-2869, doi:10.5194/bg-11-2857-2014.
Meier, W.N. et al., 2014: Arctic sea ice in transformation: A review of recent
observed changes and impacts on biology and human activity. Reviews of
Geophysics, 52(3), 185-217, doi:10.1002/2013rg000431.
Meinshausen, M., S.C.B. Raper, and T.M.L. Wigley, 2011: Emulating coupled
atmosphere-ocean and carbon cycle models with a simpler model, MAGICC6
- Part 1: Model description and calibration. Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics, 11(4), 1417-1456, doi:10.5194/acp-11-1417-2011.

299

3

Chapter 3

3

Melia, N., K. Haines, and E. Hawkins, 2016: Sea ice decline and 21st century transArctic shipping routes. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(18), 9720-9728,
doi:10.1002/2016gl069315.
Mengel, M., A. Nauels, J. Rogelj, and C.F. Schleussner, 2018: Committed sea-level
rise under the Paris Agreement and the legacy of delayed mitigation action.
Nature Communications, 9(1), 1-10, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-02985-8.
Mengel, M. et al., 2016: Future sea level rise constrained by observations and
long-term commitment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
113(10), 2597-2602, doi:10.1073/pnas.1500515113.
Millar, R.J. et al., 2017: Emission budgets and pathways consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C. Nature Geoscience, 10(10), 741-747, doi:10.1038/ngeo3031.
Mills, M. et al., 2016: Reconciling Development and Conservation under
Coastal Squeeze from Rising Sea Level. Conservation Letters, 9(5), 361-368,
doi:10.1111/conl.12213.
Minasny, B. et al., 2017: Soil carbon 4 per mille. Geoderma, 292, 59-86,
doi:10.1016/j.geoderma.2017.01.002.
Minx, J.C., W.F. Lamb, M.W. Callaghan, L. Bornmann, and S. Fuss, 2017: Fast
growing research on negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters,
12(3), 035007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5ee5.
Minx, J.C. et al., 2018: Negative emissions - Part 1: Research landscape and synthesis.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9b.
Mishra, V., M. Sourav, R. Kumar, and D.A. Stone, 2017: Heat wave exposure in India
in current, 1.5C, and 2.0C worlds. Environmental Research Letters, 12(12),
124012, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9388.
Mitchell, D., 2016: Human influences on heat-related health indicators during the
2015 Egyptian heat wave. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,
97(12), S70-S74, doi:10.1175/bams-d-16-0132.1.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2016: Attributing human mortality during extreme heat waves
to anthropogenic climate change. Environmental Research Letters, 11(7),
074006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/074006.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2017: Half a degree additional warming, prognosis and projected
impacts (HAPPI): background and experimental design. Geoscientific Model
Development, 10, 571-583, doi:10.5194/gmd-10-571-2017.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2018a: The myriad challenges of the Paris Agreement.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20180066, doi:10.1098/rsta.2018.0066.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2018b: Extreme heat-related mortality avoided under Paris
Agreement goals. Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 551-553,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0210-1.
Mohammed, K. et al., 2017: Extreme flows and water availability of the
Brahmaputra River under 1.5 and 2C global warming scenarios. Climatic
Change, 145(1-2), 159-175, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2073-2.
Mohapatra, M., A.K. Srivastava, S. Balachandran, and B. Geetha, 2017: Interannual Variation and Trends in Tropical Cyclones and Monsoon Depressions
Over the North Indian Ocean. In: Observed Climate Variability and Change over
the Indian Region [Rajeevan, M.N. and S. Nayak (eds.)]. Springer Singapore,
Singapore, pp. 89-106, doi:10.1007/978-981-10-2531-0_6.
Monioudi, I. et al., 2018: Climate change impacts on critical international
transportation assets of Caribbean small island developing states: The case of
Jamaica and Saint Lucia. Regional Environmental Change, 1-15,
doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1360-4.
Montroull, N.B., R.I. Saurral, and I.A. Camilloni, 2018: Hydrological impacts in La
Plata basin under 1.5, 2 and 3C global warming above the pre-industrial level.
International Journal of Climatology, 38(8), 3355-3368, doi:10.1002/joc.5505.
Moore, F.C. and D.B. Lobell, 2015: The fingerprint of climate trends on European
crop yields. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(9), 2670-
2675, doi:10.1073/pnas.1409606112.
Mora, C. et al., 2017: Global risk of deadly heat. Nature Climate Change, 7(7),
501-506, doi:10.1038/nclimate3322.
Moriondo, M. et al., 2013a: Projected shifts of wine regions in response to climate
change. Climatic Change, 119(3-4), 825-839,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0739-y.
Moriondo, M. et al., 2013b: Olive trees as bio-indicators of climate evolution in
the Mediterranean Basin. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 22(7), 818-833,
doi:10.1111/geb.12061.
Moritz, M.A. et al., 2012: Climate change and disruptions to global fire activity.
Ecosphere, 3(6), art49, doi:10.1890/es11-00345.1.
Mortensen, C.J. et al., 2009: Embryo recovery from exercised mares. Animal
Reproduction Science, 110(3), 237-244,
doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2008.01.015.

300

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Mortola, J.P. and P.B. Frappell, 2000: Ventilatory Responses to Changes in
Temperature in Mammals and Other Vertebrates. Annual Review of Physiology,
62(1), 847-874, doi:10.1146/annurev.physiol.62.1.847.
Mouginot, J., E. Rignot, and B. Scheuchl, 2014: Sustained increase in ice discharge
fromthe Amundsen Sea Embayment, West Antarctica, from1973 to 2013.
Geophysical Research Letters, 41(5), 1576-1584,
doi:10.1002/2013gl059069.
Moy, A.D., W.R. Howard, S.G. Bray, and T.W. Trull, 2009: Reduced calcification in
modern Southern Ocean planktonic foraminifera. Nature Geoscience, 2(4),
276-280, doi:10.1038/ngeo460.
Mueller, B. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2012: Hot days induced by precipitation deficits at
the global scale. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(31),
12398-12403, doi:10.1073/pnas.1204330109.
Mueller, B. et al., 2015: Lengthening of the growing season in wheat and maize
producing regions. Weather and Climate Extremes, 9, 47-56,
doi:10.1016/j.wace.2015.04.001.
Mueller, N.D. et al., 2016: Cooling of US Midwest summer temperature extremes
from cropland intensification. Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 317-322,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2825.
Mueller, S.A., J.E. Anderson, and T.J. Wallington, 2011: Impact of biofuel production
and other supply and demand factors on food price increases in 2008. Biomass
and Bioenergy, 35(5), 1623-1632,
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2011.01.030.
Mueller, V., C. Gray, and K. Kosec, 2014: Heat stress increases long-term human migration
in rural Pakistan. Nature Climate Change, 4(3), 182-185,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2103.
Mullan, D., D. Favis-Mortlock, and R. Fealy, 2012: Addressing key limitations
associated with modelling soil erosion under the impacts of future climate
change. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 156, 18-30,
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.12.004.
Muller, C., 2011: Agriculture: Harvesting from uncertainties. Nature Climate
Change, 1(5), 253-254, doi:10.1038/nclimate1179.
Murakami, H., G.A. Vecchi, and S. Underwood, 2017: Increasing frequency of
extremely severe cyclonic storms over the Arabian Sea. Nature Climate
Change, 7(12), 885-889, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0008-6.
Muratori, M., K. Calvin, M. Wise, P. Kyle, and J. Edmonds, 2016: Global economic
consequences of deploying bioenergy with carbon capture and storage
(BECCS). Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), 095004,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095004.
Murphy, G.E.P. and T.N. Romanuk, 2014: A meta-analysis of declines in local
species richness from human disturbances. Ecology and Evolution, 4(1), 91-
103, doi:10.1002/ece3.909.
Muthige, M.S. et al., 2018: Projected changes in tropical cyclones over the South
West Indian Ocean under different extents of global warming. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(6), 065019, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabc60.
Mweya, C.N. et al., 2016: Climate Change Influences Potential Distribution of
Infected Aedes aegypti Co-Occurrence with Dengue Epidemics Risk Areas in
Tanzania. PLOS ONE, 11(9), e0162649,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0162649.
Mycoo, M., 2014: Sustainable tourism, climate change and sea level rise
adaptation policies in Barbados. Natural Resources Forum, 38(1), 47-57,
doi:10.1111/1477-8947.12033.
Mycoo, M.A., 2017: Beyond 1.5C: vulnerabilities and adaptation strategies for
Caribbean Small Island Developing States. Regional Environmental Change,
1-13, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1248-8.
Myers, S.S. et al., 2014: Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature,
510(7503), 139-142, doi:10.1038/nature13179.
Myers, S.S. et al., 2017: Climate Change and Global Food Systems: Potential
Impacts on Food Security and Undernutrition. Annual Review of Public Health,
38(1), 259-277, doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031816-044356.
Myhre, G. et al., 2013: Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 658-740.
Narayan, S. et al., 2016: The effectiveness, costs and coastal protection benefits of
natural and nature-based defences. PLOS ONE, 11(5), e0154735,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0154735.
Naudts, K. et al., 2016: Europe's forest management did not mitigate climate
warming. Science, 351(6273), 597-600, doi:10.1126/science.aad7270.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Nauels, A., M. Meinshausen, M. Mengel, K. Lorbacher, and T.M.L. Wigley, 2017:
Synthesizing long-term sea level rise projections - the MAGICC sea level
model v2.0. Geoscientific Model Development, 10(6), 2495-2524,
doi:10.5194/gmd-10-2495-2017.
Naylor, R.L. and W.P. Falcon, 2010: Food security in an era of economic volatility.
Population and Development Review, 36(4), 693-723,
doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2010.00354.x.
NCCARF, 2013: Terrestrial Report Card 2013: Climate change impacts and
adaptation on Australian biodiversity. National Climate Change Adaptation
Research Facility (NCCARF), Gold Coast, Australia, 8 pp.
Nelson, G.C. et al., 2010: Food Security, Farming, and Climate Change to 2050:
Scenarios, Results, Policy Options. IFPRI Research Monograph, International
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC, USA, 140 pp.,
doi:10.2499/9780896291867.
Nelson, G.C. et al., 2014a: Climate change effects on agriculture: Economic
responses to biophysical shocks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(9), 3274-3279, doi:10.1073/pnas.1222465110.
Nelson, G.C. et al., 2014b: Agriculture and climate change in global scenarios: why don't
the models agree. Agricultural Economics, 45(1), 85-101, doi:10.1111/agec.12091.
Nemet, G.F. et al., 2018: Negative emissions-Part 3: Innovation and upscaling.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063003, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabff4.
Neumann, K., P.H. Verburg, E. Stehfest, and C. Muller, 2010: The yield gap of global
grain production: A spatial analysis. Agricultural Systems, 103(5), 316-326,
doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2010.02.004.
Newbold, T. et al., 2015: Global effects of land use on local terrestrial biodiversity.
Nature, 520(7545), 45-50, doi:10.1038/nature14324.
Niang, I. et al., 2014: Africa. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1199-1265.
Nicholls, R.J., T. Reeder, S. Brown, and I.D. Haigh, 2015: The risks of sea-level rise
in coastal cities. In: Climate Change: A risk assessment [King, D., D. Schrag,
Z. Dadi, Q. Ye, and A. Ghosh (eds.)]. Centre for Science and Policy (CSaP),
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, pp. 94-98.
Nicholls, R.J. et al., 2007: Coastal systems and low-lying areas. In: Climate Change
2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Parry, M.L., O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Linden, and C.E. Hanson
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 315-356.
Nicholls, R.J. et al., 2018: Stabilization of global temperature at 1.5C and 2.0C:
implications for coastal areas. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160448,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0448.
Nicholson, C.T.M., 2014: Climate change and the politics of causal reasoning:
the case of climate change and migration. The Geographical Journal, 180(2),
151-160, doi:10.1111/geoj.12062.
Niederdrenk, A.L. and D. Notz, 2018: Arctic Sea Ice in a 1.5C Warmer World.
Geophysical Research Letters, 45(4), 1963-1971, doi:10.1002/2017gl076159.
Njeru, J., K. Henning, M.W. Pletz, R. Heller, and H. Neubauer, 2016: Q fever is an
old and neglected zoonotic disease in Kenya: a systematic review. BMC Public
Health, 16, 297, doi:10.1186/s12889-016-2929-9.
Nobre, C.A. et al., 2016: Land-use and climate change risks in the Amazon and
the need of a novel sustainable development paradigm. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113(39), 10759-68,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1605516113.
Notenbaert, A.M.O., J.A. Cardoso, N. Chirinda, M. Peters, and A. Mottet, 2017:
Climate change impacts on livestock and implications for adaptation.
International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), Rome, Italy, 30 pp.
Notz, D., 2015: How well must climate models agree with observations?
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 373(2052), 20140164, doi:10.1098/rsta.2014.0164.
Notz, D. and J. Stroeve, 2016: Observed Arctic sea-ice loss directly follows
anthropogenic CO2 emission. Science, 354(6313), 747-750,
doi:10.1126/science.aag2345.
Nunn, P.D., J. Runman, M. Falanruw, and R. Kumar, 2017: Culturally grounded
responses to coastal change on islands in the Federated States of Micronesia,
northwest Pacific Ocean. Regional Environmental Change, 17(4), 959-971,
doi:10.1007/s10113-016-0950-2.

Chapter 3
Nurse, L.A. et al., 2014: Small islands. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1613-1654.
O'Leary, J.K. et al., 2017: The Resilience of Marine Ecosystems to Climatic
Disturbances. BioScience, 67(3), 208-220, doi:10.1093/biosci/biw161.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: IPCC Reasons for Concern regarding climate change risks.
Nature Climate Change, 7, 28-37, doi:10.1038/nclimate3179.
Oberbauer, S.F. et al., 2013: Phenological response of tundra plants to background
climate variation tested using the International Tundra Experiment.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
368(1624), 20120481, doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0481.
Obersteiner, M. et al., 2016: Assessing the land resource-food price nexus of
the Sustainable Development Goals. Science Advances, 2(9), e1501499,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1501499.
Obersteiner, M. et al., 2018: How to spend a dwindling greenhouse gas budget.
Nature Climate Change, 8(1), 7-10, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0045-1.
Ogden, N.H., R. Milka, C. Caminade, and P. Gachon, 2014a: Recent and projected
future climatic suitability of North America for the Asian tiger mosquito Aedes
albopictus. Parasites & Vectors, 7(1), 532, doi:10.1186/s13071-014-0532-4.
Ogden, N.H. et al., 2014b: Estimated effects of projected climate change on the basic
reproductive number of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 122(6), 631-638, doi:10.1289/ehp.1307799.
Okada, M., T. Iizumi, Y. Hayashi, and M. Yokozawa, 2011: Modeling the multiple
effects of temperature and radiation on rice quality. Environmental Research
Letters, 6(3), 034031, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/6/3/034031.
Oleson, K.W., G.B. Bonan, and J. Feddema, 2010: Effects of white roofs on urban
temperature in a global climate model. Geophysical Research Letters, 37(3),
L03701, doi:10.1029/2009gl042194.
Oliver, E.C.J. et al., 2018: Longer and more frequent marine heatwaves over the
past century. Nature Communications, 9(1), 1324,
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03732-9.
Olsson, L. et al., 2014: Livelihoods and Poverty. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 793-832.
Omstedt, A., M. Edman, B. Claremar, and A. Rutgersson, 2015: Modelling the
contributions to marine acidification from deposited SOx, NOx, and NHx in
the Baltic Sea: Past and present situations. Continental Shelf Research, 111,
234-249, doi:10.1016/j.csr.2015.08.024.
Ong, E.Z., M. Briffa, T. Moens, and C. Van Colen, 2017: Physiological responses
to ocean acidification and warming synergistically reduce condition of the
common cockle Cerastoderma edule. Marine Environmental Research, 130,
38-47, doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2017.07.001.
Oppenheimer, M. et al., 2014: Emergent risks and key vulnerabilities. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L.White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1039-1099.
Ordonez, A. et al., 2014: Effects of Ocean Acidification on Population Dynamics
and Community Structure of Crustose Coralline Algae. The Biological Bulletin,
226, 255-268, doi:10.1086/bblv226n3p255.
Orlowsky, B. and S.I. Seneviratne, 2013: Elusive drought: uncertainty in observed
trends and short- and long-term CMIP5 projections. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences, 17(5), 1765-1781, doi:10.5194/hess-17-1765-2013.
Orr, J.C. et al., 2005: Anthropogenic ocean acidification over the twenty-first
century and its impact on calcifying organisms. Nature, 437(7059), 681-686,
doi:10.1038/nature04095.
Osima, S. et al., 2018: Projected climate over the Greater Horn of Africa under
1.5C and 2C global warming. Environmental Research Letters, 13(6),
065004, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaba1b.

301

3

Chapter 3

3

Osorio, J.A., M.J. Wingfield, and J. Roux, 2016: A review of factors associated
with decline and death of mangroves, with particular reference to fungal
pathogens. South African Journal of Botany, 103, 295-301,
doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2014.08.010.
Ourbak, T. and A.K. Magnan, 2017: The Paris Agreement and climate change
negotiations: Small Islands, big players. Regional Environmental Change, 1-7,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1247-9.
Paeth, H. et al., 2010: Meteorological characteristics and potential causes of
the 2007 flood in sub-Saharan Africa. International Journal of Climatology,
31(13), 1908-1926, doi:10.1002/joc.2199.
Palazzo, A. et al., 2017: Linking regional stakeholder scenarios and shared
socioeconomic pathways: Quantified West African food and climate futures in
a global context. Global Environmental Change, 45, 227-242,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.002.
Palmer, M.A. et al., 2008: Climate change and the world's river basins: Anticipating
management options. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 6(2), 81-89,
doi:10.1890/060148.
Palumbi, S.R., D.J. Barshis, N. Traylor-Knowles, and R.A. Bay, 2014: Mechanisms
of reef coral resistance to future climate change. Science, 344(6186), 895-8,
doi:10.1126/science.1251336.
Park, C. et al., 2018: Avoided economic impacts of energy demand changes by 1.5
and 2C climate stabilization. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 045010,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab724.
Parker, L.M. et al., 2017: Ocean acidification narrows the acute thermal and
salinity tolerance of the Sydney rock oyster Saccostrea glomerata. Marine
Pollution Bulletin, 122(1-2), 263-271, doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.06.052.
Parkes, B., D. Defrance, B. Sultan, P. Ciais, and X. Wang, 2018: Projected changes in
crop yield mean and variability over West Africa in a world 1.5 K warmer than
the pre-industrial era. Earth System Dynamics, 9(1), 119-134,
doi:10.5194/esd-9-119-2018.
Parmesan, C. and M.E. Hanley, 2015: Plants and climate change: complexities and
surprises. Annals of Botany, 116(6, SI), 849-864,
doi:10.1093/aob/mcv169.
Paterson, R.R.M. and N. Lima, 2010: How will climate change affect mycotoxins in
food? Food Research International, 43(7), 1902-1914,
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2009.07.010.
Patino, R., D. Dawson, and M.M. VanLandeghem, 2014: Retrospective analysis
of associations between water quality and toxic blooms of golden alga
(Prymnesium parvum) in Texas reservoirs: Implications for understanding
dispersal mechanisms and impacts of climate change. Harmful Algae, 33,
1-11, doi:10.1016/j.hal.2013.12.006.
Pauly, D. and A. Charles, 2015: Counting on small-scale fisheries. Science,
347(6219), 242-243, doi:10.1126/science.347.6219.242-b.
Paustian, K. et al., 2006: Introduction. In: 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Prepared by the National Greenhouse Gas
Inventories Programme: Vol. 4 [Eggleston, H.S., L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara,
and K. Tanabe (eds.)]. IGES, Japan, pp. 1-21.
Pecl, G.T. et al., 2017: Biodiversity redistribution under climate change: Impacts
on ecosystems and human well-being. Science, 355(6332), eaai9214,
doi:10.1126/science.aai9214.
Pendergrass, A.G., F. Lehner, B.M. Sanderson, and Y. Xu, 2015: Does extreme
precipitation intensity depend on the emissions scenario? Geophysical
Research Letters, 42(20), 8767-8774, doi:10.1002/2015gl065854.
Pendleton, L. et al., 2016: Coral reefs and people in a high-CO2 world: Where can
science make a difference to people? PLOS ONE, 11(11), 1-21,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0164699.
Pereira, H.M. et al., 2010: Scenarios for global biodiversity in the 21st century.
Science, 330(6010), 1496-1501, doi:10.1126/science.1196624.
Perez-Escamilla, R., 2017: Food Security and the 2015-2030 Sustainable
Development Goals: From Human to Planetary Health. Current Developments
in Nutrition, 1(7), e000513, doi:10.3945/cdn.117.000513.
Perring, M.P., B.R. Cullen, I.R. Johnson, and M.J. Hovenden, 2010: Modelled effects of
rising CO2 concentration and climate change on native perennial grass and sown
grass-legume pastures. Climate Research, 42(1), 65-78,
doi:10.3354/cr00863.
Petkova, E.P., R.M. Horton, D.A. Bader, and P.L. Kinney, 2013: Projected Heat-Related
Mortality in the U.S. Urban Northeast. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 10(12), 6734-6747, doi:10.3390/ijerph10126734.
Piao, S. et al., 2015: Detection and attribution of vegetation greening trend in
China over the last 30 years. Global Change Biology, 21(4), 1601-1609,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12795.

302

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Pierrehumbert, R.T., 2014: Short-Lived Climate Pollution. Annual Review of Earth
and Planetary Sciences, 42(1), 341-379,
doi:10.1146/annurev-earth-060313-054843.
Piggott-McKellar, A.E. and K.E. McNamara, 2017: Last chance tourism and the
Great Barrier Reef. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 25(3), 397-415,
doi:10.1080/09669582.2016.1213849.
Piguet, E. and F. Laczko (eds.), 2014: People on the Move in a Changing Climate:
The Regional Impact of Environmental Change on Migration. Global
Migration Issues, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 253 pp.,
doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6985-4.
Pinones, A. and A. Fedorov, 2016: Projected changes of Antarctic krill habitat by
the end of the 21st century. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(16), 8580-8589,
doi:10.1002/2016gl069656.
Pinsky, M.L., B. Worm, M.J. Fogarty, J.L. Sarmiento, and S.A. Levin, 2013: Marine
Taxa Track Local Climate Velocities. Science, 341(6151), 1239-1242,
doi:10.1126/science.1239352.
Piontek, F. et al., 2014: Multisectoral climate impact hotspots in a warming
world. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3233-3238,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222471110.
Pistorious, T. and L. Kiff, 2017: From a biodiversity perspective: risks, trade- offs,
and international guidance for Forest Landscape Restoration. UNIQUE forestry
and land use GmbH, Freiburg, Germany, 66 pp.
Pittelkow, C.M. et al., 2014: Productivity limits and potentials of the principles of
conservation agriculture. Nature, 517(7534), 365-367,
doi:10.1038/nature13809.
Poloczanska, E.S., O. Hoegh-Guldberg, W. Cheung, H.-O. Portner, and M.
Burrows, 2014: Cross-chapter box on observed global responses of marine
biogeography, abundance, and phenology to climate change. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 123-127.
Poloczanska, E.S. et al., 2013: Global imprint of climate change on marine life.
Nature Climate Change, 3(10), 919-925,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1958.
Poloczanska, E.S. et al., 2016: Responses of Marine Organisms to Climate Change
across Oceans. Frontiers in Marine Science, 3, 62,
doi:10.3389/fmars.2016.00062.
Polyak, L. et al., 2010: History of sea ice in the Arctic. Quaternary Science Reviews,
29(15-16), 1757-1778, doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2010.02.010.
Popp, A. et al., 2017: Land-use futures in the shared socio-economic pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 331-345,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.10.002.
Porter, J.R. et al., 2014: Food security and food production systems. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros,, D.J. Dokken, K.J. March, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee,
K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White Field (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 485-533.
Portmann, F.T., P. Doll, S. Eisner, and M. Florke, 2013: Impact of climate change
on renewable groundwater resources: assessing the benefits of avoided
greenhouse gas emissions using selected CMIP5 climate projections.
Environmental Research Letters, 8(2), 024023,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024023.
Portner, H.O. et al., 2014: Ocean Systems. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 411-484.
Potemkina, T.G. and V.L. Potemkin, 2015: Sediment load of the main rivers of
Lake Baikal in a changing environment (east Siberia, Russia). Quaternary
International, 380-381, 342-349,
doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2014.08.029.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Prestele, R. et al., 2016: Hotspots of uncertainty in land-use and land-cover change
projections: a global-scale model comparison. Global Change Biology, 22(12),
3967-3983, doi:10.1111/gcb.13337.
Pretis, F., M. Schwarz, K. Tang, K. Haustein, and M.R. Allen, 2018: Uncertain
impacts on economic growth when stabilizing global temperatures at 1.5C or
2C warming. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160460,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0460.
Primavera, J.H. et al., 2016: Preliminary assessment of post-Haiyan mangrove
damage and short-term recovery in Eastern Samar, central Philippines. Marine
Pollution Bulletin, 109(2), 744-750, doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.05.050.
Prober, S.M., D.W. Hilbert, S. Ferrier, M. Dunlop, and D. Gobbett, 2012: Combining
community-level spatial modelling and expert knowledge to inform climate
adaptation in temperate grassy eucalypt woodlands and related grasslands.
Biodiversity and Conservation, 21(7), 1627-1650,
doi:10.1007/s10531-012-0268-4.
Pryor, S.C., R.C. Sullivan, and T. Wright, 2016: Quantifying the Roles of Changing
Albedo, Emissivity, and Energy Partitioning in the Impact of Irrigation on
Atmospheric Heat Content. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology,
55(8), 1699-1706, doi:10.1175/jamc-d-15-0291.1.
Pugh, T.A.M., C. Muller, A. Arneth, V. Haverd, and B. Smith, 2016: Key knowledge
and data gaps in modelling the influence of CO2 concentration on the
terrestrial carbon sink. Journal of Plant Physiology, 203, 3-15,
doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2016.05.001.
Qian, B., X. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Feng, and T. O'Brien, 2010: Observed Long-Term
Trends for Agroclimatic Conditions in Canada. Journal of Applied Meteorology
and Climatology, 49(4), 604-618, doi:10.1175/2009jamc2275.1.
Qian, Y. et al., 2013: A Modeling Study of Irrigation Effects on Surface Fluxes
and Land-Air-Cloud Interactions in the Southern Great Plains. Journal of
Hydrometeorology, 14(3), 700-721, doi:10.1175/jhm-d-12-0134.1.
Quataert, E., C. Storlazzi, A. van Rooijen, O. Cheriton, and A. van Dongeren, 2015:
The influence of coral reefs and climate change on wave-driven flooding
of tropical coastlines. Geophysical Research Letters, 42(15), 6407-6415,
doi:10.1002/2015gl064861.
Raabe, E.A. and R.P. Stumpf, 2016: Expansion of Tidal Marsh in Response to SeaLevel Rise: Gulf Coast of Florida, USA. Estuaries and Coasts, 39(1), 145-157,
doi:10.1007/s12237-015-9974-y.
Rafferty, N.E., 2017: Effects of global change on insect pollinators: multiple
drivers lead to novel communities. Current Opinion in Insect Science, 23, 1-6,
doi:10.1016/j.cois.2017.06.009.
Rahmstorf, S. et al., 2015a: Corrigendum: Evidence for an exceptional twentiethcentury slowdown in Atlantic Ocean overturning. Nature Climate Change,
5(10), 956-956, doi:10.1038/nclimate2781.
Rahmstorf, S. et al., 2015b: Exceptional twentieth-century slowdown in Atlantic
Ocean overturning circulation. Nature Climate Change, 5(5), 475-480,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2554.
Ramirez-Cabral, N.Y.Z., L. Kumar, and S. Taylor, 2016: Crop niche modeling
projects major shifts in common bean growing areas. Agricultural and Forest
Meteorology, 218-219, 102-113, doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2015.12.002.
Ranger, N., T. Reeder, and J. Lowe, 2013: Addressing `deep' uncertainty over longterm climate in major infrastructure projects: four innovations of the Thames
Estuary 2100 Project. EURO Journal on Decision Processes, 1(3-4), 233-262,
doi:10.1007/s40070-013-0014-5.
Rasmussen, D.J. et al., 2018: Extreme sea level implications of 1.5C, 2.0C,
and 2.5C temperature stabilization targets in the 21st and 22nd centuries.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(3), 034040,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaac87.
Ray, D.K., J.S. Gerber, G.K. MacDonald, and P.C. West, 2015: Climate variation
explains a third of global crop yield variability. Nature Communications, 6(1),
5989, doi:10.1038/ncomms6989.
Reaka-Kudla, M.L., 1997: The Global Biodiversity of Coral Reefs: A comparison
with Rain Forests. In: Biodiversity II: Understanding and Protecting Our
Biological Resources [Reaka-Kudla, M., D.E. Wilson, and E.O. Wilson (eds.)].
Joseph Henry Press, Washington DC, USA, pp. 83-108,
doi:10.2307/1791071.
Reasoner, M.A. and W. Tinner, 2009: Holocene Treeline Fluctuations. In: Encyclopedia
of Paleoclimatology and Ancient Environments. Springer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, pp. 442-446, doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-4411-3_107.
Reid, P., S. Stammerjohn, R. Massom, T. Scambos, and J. Lieser, 2015: The record
2013 Southern Hemisphere sea-ice extent maximum. Annals of Glaciology,
56(69), 99-106, doi:10.3189/2015aog69a892.

Chapter 3
Ren, Z. et al., 2016: Predicting malaria vector distribution under climate change
scenarios in China: Challenges for malaria elimination. Scientific Reports, 6,
20604, doi:10.1038/srep20604.
Renaud, F.G., T.T.H. Le, C. Lindener, V.T. Guong, and Z. Sebesvari, 2015: Resilience
and shifts in agro-ecosystems facing increasing sea-level rise and salinity
intrusion in Ben Tre Province, Mekong Delta. Climatic Change, 133(1), 69-84,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1113-4.
Renaudeau, D., J.L. Gourdine, and N.R. St-Pierre, 2011: A meta-analysis of the
effects of high ambient temperature on growth performance of growingfinishing pigs. Journal of Animal Science, 89(7), 2220-2230,
doi:10.2527/jas.2010-3329.
Revi, A. et al., 2014: Urban areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 535-612.
Reyer, C.P.O. et al., 2017a: Climate change impacts in Latin America and the
Caribbean and their implications for development. Regional Environmental
Change, 17(6), 1601-1621, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0854-6.
Reyer, C.P.O. et al., 2017b: Are forest disturbances amplifying or canceling out climate
change-induced productivity changes in European forests? Environmental
Research Letters, 12(3), 034027, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5ef1.
Reyer, C.P.O. et al., 2017c: Climate change impacts in Central Asia and their
implications for development. Regional Environmental Change, 17(6), 1639-
1650, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0893-z.
Reyer, C.P.O. et al., 2017d: Turn down the heat: regional climate change impacts
on development. Regional Environmental Change, 17(6), 1563-1568,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1187-4.
Reyes-Nivia, C., G. Diaz-Pulido, and S. Dove, 2014: Relative roles of endolithic
algae and carbonate chemistry variability in the skeletal dissolution of crustose
coralline algae. Biogeosciences, 11(17), 4615-4626,
doi:10.5194/bg-11-4615-2014.
Reyes-Nivia, C., G. Diaz-Pulido, D. Kline, O.H. Guldberg, and S. Dove, 2013:
Ocean acidification and warming scenarios increase microbioerosion of coral
skeletons. Global Change Biology, 19(6), 1919-1929,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12158.
Rhein, M., S.R. Rintoul, S. Aoki, E. Campos, and D. Chambers, 2013: Observations:
Ocean. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K.
Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp.
255-316.
Rhiney, K., 2015: Geographies of Caribbean Vulnerability in a Changing Climate:
Issues and Trends. Geography Compass, 9(3), 97-114,
doi:10.1111/gec3.12199.
Ribes, A., F.W. Zwiers, J.-M. Azais, and P. Naveau, 2017: A new statistical approach
to climate change detection and attribution. Climate Dynamics, 48(1), 367-
386, doi:10.1007/s00382-016-3079-6.
Richardson, M., K. Cowtan, E. Hawkins, and M.B. Stolpe, 2016: Reconciled climate
response estimates from climate models and the energy budget of Earth.
Nature Climate Change, 6(10), 931-935, doi:10.1038/nclimate3066.
Richier, S. et al., 2014: Phytoplankton responses and associated carbon cycling
during shipboard carbonate chemistry manipulation experiments conducted
around Northwest European shelf seas. Biogeosciences, 11(17), 4733-4752,
doi:10.5194/bg-11-4733-2014.
Ricke, K.L., J.B. Moreno-cruz, J. Schewe, A. Levermann, and K. Caldeira, 2016:
Policy thresholds in mitigation. Nature Geoscience, 9(1), 5-6,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2607.
Ridgwell, A. and D.N. Schmidt, 2010: Past constraints on the vulnerability of
marine calcifiers to massive carbon dioxide release. Nature Geoscience, 3(3),
196-200, doi:10.1038/ngeo755.
Ridley, J.K., J.A. Lowe, and H.T. Hewitt, 2012: How reversible is sea ice loss? The
Cryosphere, 6(1), 193-198, doi:10.5194/tc-6-193-2012.
Riebesell, U., J.-P. Gattuso, T.F. Thingstad, and J.J. Middelburg, 2013: Arctic ocean
acidification: pelagic ecosystem and biogeochemical responses during a
mesocosm study. Biogeosciences, 10(8), 5619-5626,
doi:10.5194/bg-10-5619-2013.

303

3

Chapter 3

3

Rienecker, M.M. et al., 2011: MERRA: NASA's Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis
for Research and Applications. Journal of Climate, 24(14), 3624-3648,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-11-00015.1.
Rignot, E., J. Mouginot, M. Morlighem, H. Seroussi, and B. Scheuchl, 2014:
Widespread, rapid grounding line retreat of Pine Island, Thwaites, Smith, and
Kohler glaciers, West Antarctica, from 1992 to 2011. Geophysical Research
Letters, 41(10), 3502-3509, doi:10.1002/2014gl060140.
Rinkevich, B., 2014: Rebuilding coral reefs: Does active reef restoration lead to
sustainable reefs? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 7, 28-36,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.11.018.
Rinkevich, B., 2015: Climate Change and Active Reef Restoration-Ways of
Constructing the "Reefs of Tomorrow". Journal of Marine Science and
Engineering, 3(1), 111-127, doi:10.3390/jmse3010111.
Rippke, U. et al., 2016: Timescales of transformational climate change adaptation
in sub-Saharan African agriculture. Nature Climate Change, 6(6), 605-609,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2947.
Risser, M.D. and M.F. Wehner, 2017: Attributable Human-Induced Changes in
the Likelihood and Magnitude of the Observed Extreme Precipitation during
Hurricane Harvey. Geophysical Research Letters, 44(24), 12457-12464,
doi:10.1002/2017gl075888.
Rivetti, I., S. Fraschetti, P. Lionello, E. Zambianchi, and F. Boero, 2014: Global
warming and mass mortalities of benthic invertebrates in the Mediterranean
Sea. PLOS ONE, 9(12), e115655, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0115655.
Roberts, A.M.I., C. Tansey, R.J. Smithers, and A.B. Phillimore, 2015: Predicting a
change in the order of spring phenology in temperate forests. Global Change
Biology, 21(7), 2603-2611, doi:10.1111/gcb.12896.
Roberts, M.J. and W. Schlenker, 2013: Identifying Supply and Demand Elasticities
of Agricultural Commodities: Implications for the US Ethanol Mandate.
American Economic Review, 103(6), 2265-2295, doi:10.1257/aer.103.6.2265.
Robinson, A., R. Calov, and A. Ganopolski, 2012: Multistability and critical
thresholds of the Greenland ice sheet. Nature Climate Change, 2(6), 429-432,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1449.
Robledo-Abad, C. et al., 2017: Bioenergy production and sustainable development:
science base for policymaking remains limited. GCB Bioenergy, 9(3), 541-556,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12338.
Roderick, M., G. Peter, and F.G. D., 2015: On the assessment of aridity with
changes in atmospheric CO2. Water Resources Research, 51(7), 5450-5463,
doi:10.1002/2015wr017031.
Rodrigues, L.C. et al., 2015: Sensitivity of Mediterranean Bivalve Mollusc
Aquaculture to Climate Change, Ocean Acidification, and Other Environmental
Pressures: Findings from a Producer Survey. Journal of Shellfish Research,
34(3), 1161-1176, doi:10.2983/035.034.0341.
Rogelj, J., D.L. McCollum, A. Reisinger, M. Meinshausen, and K. Riahi, 2013:
Probabilistic cost estimates for climate change mitigation. Nature, 493(7430),
79-83, doi:10.1038/nature11787.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2015: Energy system transformations for limiting end-of-century
warming to below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 519-527,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2572.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2018: Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature
increase below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 325-332,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0091-3.
Romero-Lankao, P. et al., 2014: North America. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J.
Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma,
E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1439-1498.
Romine, B.M., C.H. Fletcher, M.M. Barbee, T.R. Anderson, and L.N. Frazer, 2013: Are
beach erosion rates and sea-level rise related in Hawaii? Global and Planetary
Change, 108, 149-157, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2013.06.009.
Rose, G., T. Osborne, H. Greatrex, and T. Wheeler, 2016: Impact of progressive
global warming on the global-scale yield of maize and soybean. Climatic
Change, 134(3), 417-428, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1601-9.
Rosenblum, E. and I. Eisenman, 2016: Faster Arctic Sea Ice Retreat in CMIP5
than in CMIP3 due to Volcanoes. Journal of Climate, 29(24), 9179-9188,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0391.1.
Rosenblum, E. and I. Eisenman, 2017: Sea Ice Trends in Climate Models Only
Accurate in Runs with Biased Global Warming. Journal of Climate, 30(16),
6265-6278, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0455.1.

304

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Rosenzweig, C. and W. Solecki, 2014: Hurricane Sandy and adaptation pathways in
New York: Lessons from a first-responder city. Global Environmental Change,
28, 395-408, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.003.
Rosenzweig, C. and D. Hillel (eds.), 2015: Handbook of Climate Change and
Agroecosystems. Imperial College Press, London, UK, 1160 pp.,
doi:10.1142/p970.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2013: The Agricultural Model Intercomparison and
Improvement Project (AgMIP): Protocols and pilot studies. Agricultural and
Forest Meteorology, 170, 166-182, doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2012.09.011.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2014: Assessing agricultural risks of climate change in the
21st century in a global gridded crop model intercomparison. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3268-73,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222463110.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2017: Assessing inter-sectoral climate change risks: the role
of ISIMIP. Environmental Research Letters, 12(1), 10301,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/12/1/010301.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2018: Coordinating AgMIP data and models across global
and regional scales for 1.5C and 2C assessments. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
376(2119), 20160455, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0455.
Ross, A.C. et al., 2015: Sea-level rise and other influences on decadal-scale salinity
variability in a coastal plain estuary. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 157,
79-92, doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2015.01.022.
Rossello-Nadal, J., 2014: How to evaluate the effects of climate change on tourism.
Tourism Management, 42, 334-340, doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2013.11.006.
Roudier, P., B. Sultan, P. Quirion, and A. Berg, 2011: The impact of future climate
change on West African crop yields: What does the recent literature say?
Global Environmental Change, 21(3), 1073-1083,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.04.007.
Roudier, P. et al., 2016: Projections of future floods and hydrological droughts
in Europe under a +2C global warming. Climatic Change, 135(2), 341-355,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1570-4.
Roy, D.B. et al., 2015: Similarities in butterfly emergence dates among populations
suggest local adaptation to climate. Global Change Biology, 21(9), 3313-
3322, doi:10.1111/gcb.12920.
Ruane, A.C. et al., 2018: Biophysical and economic implications for agriculture
of +1.5 and +2.0C global warming using AgMIP Coordinated Global and
Regional Assessments. Climate Research, 76(1), 17-39,
doi:10.3354/cr01520.
Russo, S., A.F. Marchese, J. Sillmann, and G. Imme, 2016: When will unusual heat
waves become normal in a warming Africa? Environmental Research Letters,
11(5), 1-22, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/054016.
Sacks, W.J., B.I. Cook, N. Buenning, S. Levis, and J.H. Helkowski, 2009: Effects of
global irrigation on the near-surface climate. Climate Dynamics, 33(2-3),
159-175, doi:10.1007/s00382-008-0445-z.
Saeidi, M., F. Moradi, and M. Abdoli, 2017: Impact of drought stress on yield,
photosynthesis rate, and sugar alcohols contents in wheat after anthesis in
semiarid region of Iran. Arid Land Research and Management, 31(2), 1-15,
doi:10.1080/15324982.2016.1260073.
Sakalli, A., A. Cescatti, A. Dosio, and M.U. Gucel, 2017: Impacts of 2C global
warming on primary production and soil carbon storage capacity at panEuropean level. Climate Services, 7, 64-77,
doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2017.03.006.
Salem, G.S.A., S. Kazama, S. Shahid, and N.C. Dey, 2017: Impact of temperature
changes on groundwater levels and irrigation costs in a groundwaterdependent agricultural region in Northwest Bangladesh. Hydrological
Research Letters, 11(1), 85-91, doi:10.3178/hrl.11.85.
Salisbury, J., M. Green, C. Hunt, and J. Campbell, 2008: Coastal acidification by
rivers: A threat to shellfish? Eos, 89(50), 513, doi:10.1029/2008eo500001.
Samaniego, L. et al., 2018: Anthropogenic warming exacerbates European soil
moisture droughts. Nature Climate Change, 8(5), 421-426,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0138-5.
Sanderson, B.M. et al., 2017: Community climate simulations to assess avoided
impacts in 1.5C and 2C futures. Earth System Dynamics, 8(3), 827-847,
doi:10.5194/esd-8-827-2017.
Sarojini, B.B., P.A. Stott, and E. Black, 2016: Detection and attribution of human
influence on regional precipitation. Nature Climate Change, 6(7), 669-675,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2976.
Sasmito, S.D., D. Murdiyarso, D.A. Friess, and S. Kurnianto, 2016: Can mangroves
keep pace with contemporary sea level rise? A global data review. Wetlands
Ecology and Management, 24(2), 263-278, doi:10.1007/s11273-015-9466-7.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Saunders, M.I. et al., 2014: Interdependency of tropical marine ecosystems
in response to climate change. Nature Climate Change, 4(8), 724-729,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2274.
Scaven, V.L. and N.E. Rafferty, 2013: Physiological effects of climate warming on
flowering plants and insect pollinators and potential consequences for their
interactions. Current Zoology, 59(3), 418-426, doi:10.1093/czoolo/59.3.418.
Schaeffer, M., W. Hare, S. Rahmstorf, and M. Vermeer, 2012: Long-term sea-level
rise implied by 1.5C and 2C warming levels. Nature Climate Change, 2(12),
867-870, doi:10.1038/nclimate1584.
Schewe, J., A. Levermann, and M. Meinshausen, 2011: Climate change under
a scenario near 1.5 degrees C of global warming: monsoon intensification,
ocean warming and steric sea level rise. Earth System Dynamics, 2(1), 25-35,
doi:10.5194/esd-2-25-2011.
Schewe, J. et al., 2014: Multimodel assessment of water scarcity under climate
change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3245-
3250, doi:10.1073/pnas.1222460110.
Schimel, D., B.B. Stephens, and J.B. Fisher, 2015: Effect of increasing CO2 on the
terrestrial carbon cycle. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
112(2), 436-441, doi:10.1073/pnas.1407302112.
Schipper, L., W. Liu, D. Krawanchid, and S. Chanthy, 2010: Review of climate
change adaptation methods and tools. MRC Technical Paper No. 34, Mekong
River Commission (MRC), Vientiane, Lao PDR, 76 pp.
Schlenker, W. and M.J. Roberts, 2009: Nonlinear temperature effects indicate
severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(37), 15594-15598,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0906865106.
Schleussner, C.-F., P. Pfleiderer, and E.M. Fischer, 2017: In the observational record
half a degree matters. Nature Climate Change, 7, 460-462,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3320.
Schleussner, C.-F., J.F. Donges, R. Donner, and H.J. Schellnhuber, 2016a: Armedconflict risks enhanced by climate-related disasters in ethnically fractionalized
countries. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(33),
9216-21, doi:10.1073/pnas.1601611113.
Schleussner, C.-F., K. Frieler, M. Meinshausen, J. Yin, and A. Levermann, 2011:
Emulating Atlantic overturning strength for low emission scenarios:
Consequences for sea-level rise along the North American east coast. Earth
System Dynamics, 2(2), 191-200, doi:10.5194/esd-2-191-2011.
Schleussner, C.-F. et al., 2016b: Differential climate impacts for policy-relevant
limits to global warming: The case of 1.5C and 2C. Earth System Dynamics,
7(2), 327-351, doi:10.5194/esd-7-327-2016.
Schmidtko, S., L. Stramma, and M. Visbeck, 2017: Decline in global oceanic
oxygen content during the past five decades. Nature, 542(7641), 335-339,
doi:10.1038/nature21399.
Schoof, C., 2007: Ice sheet grounding line dynamics: Steady states, stability,
and hysteresis. Journal of Geophysical Research, 112(F3), F03S28,
doi:10.1029/2006jf000664.
Schroder, D. and W.M. Connolley, 2007: Impact of instantaneous sea ice removal
in a coupled general circulation model. Geophysical Research Letters, 34(14),
L14502, doi:10.1029/2007gl030253.
Schulze, E.-D., C. Korner, B.E. Law, H. Haberl, and S. Luyssaert, 2012: Large-scale
bioenergy from additional harvest of forest biomass is neither sustainable nor
greenhouse gas neutral. GCB Bioenergy, 4(6), 611-616,
doi:10.1111/j.1757-1707.2012.01169.x.
Schwartz, J.D. et al., 2015: Projections of temperature-attributable premature
deaths in 209 US cities using a cluster-based Poisson approach. Environmental
Health, 14(1), 85, doi:10.1186/s12940-015-0071-2.
Scott, D. and S. Verkoeyen, 2017: Assessing the Climate Change Risk of a CoastalIsland Destination. In: Global climate change and coastal tourism: recognizing
problems, managing solutions and future expectations [Jones, A. and M.
Phillips (eds.)]. Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences International (CABI),
Wallingford, UK, pp. 62-73, doi:10.1079/9781780648439.0062.
Scott, D. and S. Gossling, 2018: Tourism and Climate Change Mitigation.
Embracing the Paris Agreement: Pathways to Decarbonisation. European
Travel Commission (ETC), Brussels, Belgium, 39 pp.
Scott, D., M.C. Simpson, and R. Sim, 2012: The vulnerability of Caribbean coastal
tourism to scenarios of climate change related sea level rise. Journal of
Sustainable Tourism, 20(6), 883-898,
doi:10.1080/09669582.2012.699063.
Scott, D., C.M. Hall, and S. Gossling, 2016a: A review of the IPCC Fifth Assessment and
implications for tourism sector climate resilience and decarbonization. Journal of
Sustainable Tourism, 24(1), 8-30, doi:10.1080/09669582.2015.1062021.

Chapter 3
Scott, D., R. Steiger, M. Rutty, and P. Johnson, 2015: The future of the Olympic
Winter Games in an era of climate change. Current Issues in Tourism, 18(10),
913-930, doi:10.1080/13683500.2014.887664.
Scott, D., M. Rutty, B. Amelung, and M. Tang, 2016b: An Inter-Comparison of the
Holiday Climate Index (HCI) and the Tourism Climate Index (TCI) in Europe.
Atmosphere, 7(6), 80, doi:10.3390/atmos7060080.
Screen, J.A. and D. Williamson, 2017: Ice-free Arctic at 1.5C? Nature Climate
Change, 7(4), 230-231, doi:10.1038/nclimate3248.
Screen, J.A. et al., 2018: Consistency and discrepancy in the atmospheric response
to Arctic sea-ice loss across climate models. Nature Geoscience, 11(3), 155-
163, doi:10.1038/s41561-018-0059-y.
Scyphers, S.B., S.P. Powers, K.L. Heck, and D. Byron, 2011: Oyster reefs as natural
breakwaters mitigate shoreline loss and facilitate fisheries. PLOS ONE, 6(8),
e22396, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022396.
Sebesvari, Z., S. Rodrigues, and F. Renaud, 2017: Mainstreaming ecosystem-based
climate change adaptation into integrated water resources management in
the Mekong region. Regional Environmental Change, 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1161-1.
Seddon, A.W.R., M. Macias-Fauria, P.R. Long, D. Benz, and K.J. Willis, 2016:
Sensitivity of global terrestrial ecosystems to climate variability. Nature,
531(7593), 229-232, doi:10.1038/nature16986.
Sedlaek, J., O. Martius, and R. Knutti, 2011: Influence of subtropical and polar
sea-surface temperature anomalies on temperatures in Eurasia. Geophysical
Research Letters, 38(12), L12803, doi:10.1029/2011gl047764.
Seibel, B.A., 2016: Cephalopod Susceptibility to Asphyxiation via Ocean
Incalescence, Deoxygenation, and Acidification. Physiology, 31(6), 418-429,
doi:10.1152/physiol.00061.2015.
Seidl, R. et al., 2017: Forest disturbances under climate change. Nature Climate
Change, 7, 395-402, doi:10.1038/nclimate3303.
Seifert, C.A. and D.B. Lobell, 2015: Response of double cropping suitability to
climate change in the United States. Environmental Research Letters, 10(2),
024002, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/2/024002.
Selby, J., 2014: Positivist Climate Conflict Research: A Critique. Geopolitics, 19(4),
829-856, doi:10.1080/14650045.2014.964865.
Semakula, H.M. et al., 2017: Prediction of future malaria hotspots under climate
change in sub-Saharan Africa. Climatic Change, 143(3), 415-428,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1996-y.
Semenza, J.C. and B. Menne, 2009: Climate change and infectious diseases in
Europe. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 9(6), 365-375,
doi:10.1016/s1473-3099(09)70104-5.
Semenza, J.C. et al., 2016: Climate change projections of West Nile virus infections
in Europe: implications for blood safety practices. Environmental Health,
15(S1), S28, doi:10.1186/s12940-016-0105-4.
Seneviratne, S.I., M.G. Donat, A.J. Pitman, R. Knutti, and R.L. Wilby, 2016: Allowable
CO2 emissions based on regional and impact-related climate targets. Nature,
529(7587), 477-83, doi:10.1038/nature16542.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2012: Changes in Climate Extremes and their Impacts on
the Natural Physical Environment. In: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events
and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation [Field, C.B., V. Barros,
T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K.
Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. A Special Report of
Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 109-230.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2013: Impact of soil moisture-climate feedbacks on CMIP5
projections: First results from the GLACE-CMIP5 experiment. Geophysical
Research Letters, 40(19), 5212-5217,
doi:10.1002/grl.50956.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2018a: Land radiative management as contributor to
regional-scale climate adaptation and mitigation. Nature Geoscience, 11,
88-96, doi: 10.1038/s41561-017-0057-5.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2018b: The many possible climates from the Paris
Agreement's aim of 1.5C warming. Nature, 558(7708), 41-49,
doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0181-4.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2018c: Climate extremes, land-climate feedbacks and
land-use forcing at 1.5C. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160450,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0450.
Serdeczny, O. et al., 2016: Climate change impacts in Sub-Saharan Africa: from
physical changes to their social repercussions. Regional Environmental
Change, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0910-2.

305

3

Chapter 3

3

Serreze, M.C. and J. Stroeve, 2015: Arctic sea ice trends, variability and implications
for seasonal ice forecasting. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 373(2045), 20140159,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2014.0159.
Settele, J. et al., 2014: Terrestrial and Inland Water Systems. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 271-359.
Shafir, S., J. Van Rijn, and B. Rinkevich, 2006: Steps in the construction of
underwater coral nursery, an essential component in reef restoration acts.
Marine Biology, 149(3), 679-687, doi:10.1007/s00227-005-0236-6.
Shearman, P., J. Bryan, and J.P. Walsh, 2013: Trends in Deltaic Change over Three
Decades in the Asia-Pacific Region. Journal of Coastal Research, 290, 1169-
1183, doi:10.2112/jcoastres-d-12-00120.1.
Sheffield, J., E.F. Wood, and M.L. Roderick, 2012: Little change in global drought
over the past 60 years. Nature, 491(7424), 435-438, doi:10.1038/nature11575.
Sheffield, P.E. et al., 2013: Current and future heat stress in Nicaraguan work
places under a changing climate. Industrial Health, 51, 123-127,
doi:10.2486/indhealth.2012-0156.
Shepherd, J.G., P.G. Brewer, A. Oschlies, and A.J. Watson, 2017: Ocean ventilation
and deoxygenation in a warming world: introduction and overview.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 375(2102), 20170240, doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0240.
Shi, H. and G. Wang, 2015: Impacts of climate change and hydraulic structures
on runoff and sediment discharge in the middle Yellow River. Hydrological
Processes, 29(14), 3236-3246, doi:10.1002/hyp.10439.
Shi, W. et al., 2016: Ocean acidification increases cadmium accumulation in
marine bivalves: a potential threat to seafood safety. Scientific Reports, 6(1),
20197, doi:10.1038/srep20197.
Shindell, D.T., G. Faluvegi, K. Seltzer, and C. Shindell, 2018: Quantified, localized
health benefits of accelerated carbon dioxide emissions reductions. Nature
Climate Change, 8, 1-5, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0108-y.
Shindell, D.T. et al., 2017: A climate policy pathway for near- and long-term
benefits. Science, 356(6337), 493-494, doi:10.1126/science.aak9521.
Short, F.T., S. Kosten, P.A. Morgan, S. Malone, and G.E. Moore, 2016: Impacts of
climate change on submerged and emergent wetland plants. Aquatic Botany,
135, 3-17, doi:10.1016/j.aquabot.2016.06.006.
Shrestha, B., T.A. Cochrane, B.S. Caruso, M.E. Arias, and T. Piman, 2016: Uncertainty
in flow and sediment projections due to future climate scenarios for the
3S Rivers in the Mekong Basin. Journal of Hydrology, 540, 1088-1104,
doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2016.07.019.
Sierra-Correa, P.C. and J.R. Cantera Kintz, 2015: Ecosystem-based adaptation for
improving coastal planning for sea-level rise: A systematic review for mangrove
coasts. Marine Policy, 51, 385-393, doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2014.09.013.
Sigmond, M., J.C. Fyfe, and N.C. Swart, 2018: Ice-free Arctic projections under the
Paris Agreement. Nature Climate Change, 8, 404-408,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0124-y.
Signorini, S.R., B.A. Franz, and C.R. McClain, 2015: Chlorophyll variability in the
oligotrophic gyres: mechanisms, seasonality and trends. Frontiers in Marine
Science, 2, 1-11, doi:10.3389/fmars.2015.00001.
Sihi, D., P.W. Inglett, S. Gerber, and K.S. Inglett, 2017: Rate of warming affects
temperature sensitivity of anaerobic peat decomposition and greenhouse gas
production. Global Change Biology, 24(1), e259-e274, doi:10.1111/gcb.13839.
Silva, R.A. et al., 2016: The effect of future ambient air pollution on human
premature mortality to 2100 using output from the ACCMIP model ensemble.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 16(15), 9847-9862,
doi:10.5194/acp-16-9847-2016.
Simulundu, E. et al., 2017: Genetic characterization of orf virus associated with an
outbreak of severe orf in goats at a farm in Lusaka, Zambia (2015). Archives of
Virology, 162(8), 2363-2367, doi:10.1007/s00705-017-3352-y.
Singh, B.P., V.K. Dua, P.M. Govindakrishnan, and S. Sharma, 2013: Impact of
Climate Change on Potato. In: Climate-Resilient Horticulture: Adaptation and
Mitigation Strategies [Singh, H.C.P., N.K.S. Rao, and K.S. Shivashankar (eds.)].
Springer India, India, pp. 125-135, doi:10.1007/978-81-322-0974-4_12.
Singh, D., M. Tsiang, B. Rajaratnam, and N.S. Diffenbaugh, 2014: Observed changes
in extreme wet and dry spells during the South Asian summer monsoon
season. Nature Climate Change, 4(6), 456-461, doi:10.1038/nclimate2208.

306

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Singh, O.P., 2010: Recent Trends in Tropical Cyclone Activity in the North Indian
Ocean. In: Indian Ocean Tropical Cyclones and Climate Change [Charabi, Y.
(ed.)]. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 51-54,
doi:10.1007/978-90-481-3109-9_8.
Singh, O.P., T.M. Ali Khan, and M.S. Rahman, 2000: Changes in the frequency of
tropical cyclones over the North Indian Ocean. Meteorology and Atmospheric
Physics, 75(1-2), 11-20, doi:10.1007/s007030070011.
Slade, R., A. Bauen, and R. Gross, 2014: Global bioenergy resources. Nature
Climate Change, 4(2), 99-105, doi:10.1038/nclimate2097.
Slangen, A.B.A. et al., 2016: Anthropogenic forcing dominates global mean sealevel rise since 1970. Nature Climate Change, 6(7), 701-705,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2991.
Slater, A.G. and D.M. Lawrence, 2013: Diagnosing present and future permafrost
from climate models. Journal of Climate, 26(15), 5608-5623,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00341.1.
Smajgl, A. et al., 2015: Responding to rising sea levels in the Mekong Delta. Nature
Climate Change, 5(2), 167-174, doi:10.1038/nclimate2469.
Smeed, D.A. et al., 2014: Observed decline of the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation 2004-2012. Ocean Science, 10(1), 29-38,
doi:10.5194/os-10-29-2014.
Smirnov, O. et al., 2016: The relative importance of climate change and population
growth for exposure to future extreme droughts. Climatic Change, 138(1-2),
41-53, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1716-z.
Smith, K.R. et al., 2014: Human Health: Impacts, Adaptation, and Co-Benefits. In:
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global
and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 709-754.
Smith, P., 2016: Soil carbon sequestration and biochar as negative emission
technologies. Global Change Biology, 22(3), 1315-1324,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13178.
Smith, P., J. Price, A. Molotoks, R. Warren, and Y. Malhi, 2018: Impacts on terrestrial
biodiversity of moving from a 2C to a 1.5C target. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
376(2119), 20160456, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0456.
Smith, P. et al., 2010: Competition for land. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 365(1554), 2941-2957,
doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0127.
Smith, P. et al., 2013: How much land-based greenhouse gas mitigation can be
achieved without compromising food security and environmental goals?
Global Change Biology, 19(8), 2285-2302, doi:10.1111/gcb.12160.
Smith, P. et al., 2014: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU). In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 811-922.
Smith, P. et al., 2015: Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions.
Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 42-50,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2870.
Smith, T.F., D.C. Thomsen, S. Gould, K. Schmitt, and B. Schlegel, 2013: Cumulative
Pressures on Sustainable Livelihoods: Coastal Adaptation in the Mekong Delta.
Sustainability, 5(1), 228-241, doi:10.3390/su5010228.
Sok, S. and X. Yu, 2015: Adaptation, resilience and sustainable livelihoods in the
communities of the Lower Mekong Basin, Cambodia. International Journal of
Water Resources Development, 31(4), 575-588,
doi:10.1080/07900627.2015.1012659.
Solomon, S., G.-K. Plattner, R. Knutti, and P. Friedlingstein, 2009: Irreversible
climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106(6), 1704-1709,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0812721106.
Song, A.M. and R. Chuenpagdee, 2015: Interactive Governance for Fisheries.
Interactive Governance for Small-Scale Fisheries, 5, 435-456,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-17034-3.
Song, Y. et al., 2016: Spatial distribution estimation of malaria in northern China
and its scenarios in 2020, 2030, 2040 and 2050. Malaria journal, 15(1), 345,
doi:10.1186/s12936-016-1395-2.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Sonntag, S., J. Pongratz, C.H. Reick, and H. Schmidt, 2016: Reforestation in a highCO2 world - Higher mitigation potential than expected, lower adaptation
potential than hoped for. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(12), 6546-6553,
doi:10.1002/2016gl068824.
Sovacool, B.K., 2012: Perceptions of climate change risks and resilient island
planning in the Maldives. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global
Change, 17(7), 731-752, doi:10.1007/s11027-011-9341-7.
Spalding, M.D. and B.E. Brown, 2015: Warm-water coral reefs and climate change.
Science, 350(6262), 769-771, doi:10.1126/science.aad0349.
Spalding, M.D. et al., 2014: The role of ecosystems in coastal protection: Adapting
to climate change and coastal hazards. Ocean and Coastal Management, 90,
50-57, doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2013.09.007.
Spalding, M.D. et al., 2017: Mapping the global value and distribution of coral
reef tourism. Marine Policy, 82, 104-113, doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.014.
Speelman, L.H., R.J. Nicholls, and J. Dyke, 2017: Contemporary migration intentions
in the Maldives: the role of environmental and other factors. Sustainability
Science, 12(3), 433-451, doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0410-4.
Spencer, T. et al., 2016: Global coastal wetland change under sea-level rise and
related stresses: The DIVA Wetland Change Model. Global and Planetary
Change, 139, 15-30, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2015.12.018.
Springer, J., R. Ludwig, and S. Kienzle, 2015: Impacts of Forest Fires and Climate
Variability on the Hydrology of an Alpine Medium Sized Catchment in the Canadian
Rocky Mountains. Hydrology, 2(1), 23-47, doi:10.3390/hydrology2010023.
Springmann, M. et al., 2016: Global and regional health effects of future food
production under climate change: a modelling study. The Lancet, 387(10031),
1937-1946, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(15)01156-3.
Srokosz, M.A. and H.L. Bryden, 2015: Observing the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation yields a decade of inevitable surprises. Science,
348(6241), 1255575, doi:10.1126/science.1255575.
Stanturf, J.A., B.J. Palik, and R.K. Dumroese, 2014: Contemporary forest restoration:
A review emphasizing function. Forest Ecology and Management, 331, 292-
323, doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2014.07.029.
Steiger, R., D. Scott, B. Abegg, M. Pons, and C. Aall, 2017: A critical review of
climate change risk for ski tourism. Current Issues in Tourism, 1-37,
doi:10.1080/13683500.2017.1410110.
Steinberg, D.K. et al., 2015: Long-term (1993-2013) changes in macrozooplankton
off the Western Antarctic Peninsula. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic
Research Papers, 101, 54-70, doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2015.02.009.
Stephens, P.A. et al., 2016: Consistent response of bird populations to climate
change on two continents. Science, 352(6281), 84-87,
doi:10.1126/science.aac4858.
Sterling, S.M., A. Ducharne, and J. Polcher, 2012: The impact of global land-cover
change on the terrestrial water cycle. Nature Climate Change, 3(4), 385-390,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1690.
Sterman, J.D., L. Siegel, and J.N. Rooney-Varga, 2018: Does replacing coal with wood
lower CO2 emissions? Dynamic lifecycle analysis of wood bioenergy. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(1), 015007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa512.
Stevens, A.J., D. Clarke, and R.J. Nicholls, 2016: Trends in reported flooding in the
UK: 1884-2013. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 61(1), 50-63,
doi:10.1080/02626667.2014.950581.
Stewart, E.J. et al., 2016: Implications of climate change for glacier tourism.
Tourism Geographies, 18(4), 377-398,
doi:10.1080/14616688.2016.1198416.
Stockdale, A., E. Tipping, S. Lofts, and R.J.G. Mortimer, 2016: Effect of Ocean
Acidification on Organic and Inorganic Speciation of Trace Metals. Environmental
Science & Technology, 50(4), 1906-1913, doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05624.
Stocker, T.F. et al., 2013: Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M.
Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 33-115.
Storlazzi, C.D., E.P.L. Elias, and P. Berkowitz, 2015: Many Atolls May be
Uninhabitable Within Decades Due to Climate Change. Scientific Reports, 5(1),
14546, doi:10.1038/srep14546.
Storlazzi, C.D. et al., 2018: Most atolls will be uninhabitable by the mid-21st
century because of sea-level rise exacerbating wave-driven flooding. Science
Advances, 4(4), eaap9741, doi:10.1126/sciadv.aap9741.
Strefler, J. et al., 2018: Between Scylla and Charybdis: Delayed mitigation narrows
the passage between large-scale CDR and high costs. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(044015), 1-6, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab2ba.

Chapter 3
Suckall, N., E. Fraser, and P. Forster, 2017: Reduced migration under climate change:
evidence from Malawi using an aspirations and capabilities framework.
Climate and Development, 9(4), 298-312,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2016.1149441.
Sudmeier-Rieux, K., M. Fernandez, J.C. Gaillard, L. Guadagno, and M. Jaboyedoff,
2017: Introduction: Exploring Linkages Between Disaster Risk Reduction,
Climate Change Adaptation, Migration and Sustainable Development. In:
Identifying Emerging Issues in Disaster Risk Reduction, Migration, Climate
Change and Sustainable Development [Sudmeier-Rieux, K., M. Fernandez,
I.M. Penna, M. Jaboyedoff, and J.C. Gaillard (eds.)]. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 1-11,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-33880-4_1.
Sugi, M. and J. Yoshimura, 2012: Decreasing trend of tropical cyclone frequency
in 228-year high-resolution AGCM simulations. Geophysical Research Letters,
39(19), L19805, doi:10.1029/2012gl053360.
Sugi, M., H. Murakami, and K. Yoshida, 2017: Projection of future changes in the
frequency of intense tropical cyclones. Climate Dynamics, 49(1), 619-632,
doi:10.1007/s00382-016-3361-7.
Sultan, B. and M. Gaetani, 2016: Agriculture in West Africa in the Twenty-First
Century: Climate Change and Impacts Scenarios, and Potential for Adaptation.
Frontiers in Plant Science, 7, 1262, doi:10.3389/fpls.2016.01262.
Sun, H. et al., 2017: Exposure of population to droughts in the Haihe River Basin
under global warming of 1.5 and 2.0C scenarios. Quaternary International,
453, 74-84, doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2017.05.005.
Sun, S., X.-G. Yang, J. Zhao, and F. Chen, 2015: The possible effects of global
warming on cropping systems in China XI The variation of potential lighttemperature suitable cultivation zone of winter wheat in China under climate
change. Scientia Agricultura Sinica, 48(10), 1926-1941.
Sun, Y., X. Zhang, G. Ren, F.W. Zwiers, and T. Hu, 2016: Contribution of urbanization
to warming in China. Nature Climate Change, 6(7), 706-709,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2956.
Sundby, S., K.F. Drinkwater, and O.S. Kjesbu, 2016: The North Atlantic SpringBloom System-Where the Changing Climate Meets the Winter Dark. Frontiers
in Marine Science, 3, 28, doi:10.3389/fmars.2016.00028.
Supit, I. et al., 2010: Recent changes in the climatic yield potential of various crops
in Europe. Agricultural Systems, 103(9), 683-694,
doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2010.08.009.
Sutton-Grier, A.E. and A. Moore, 2016: Leveraging Carbon Services of Coastal
Ecosystems for Habitat Protection and Restoration. Coastal Management,
44(3), 259-277, doi:10.1080/08920753.2016.1160206.
Suzuki-Parker, A., H. Kusaka, and Y. Yamagata, 2015: Assessment of the Impact
of Metropolitan-Scale Urban Planning Scenarios on the Moist Thermal
Environment under Global Warming: A Study of the Tokyo Metropolitan Area
Using Regional Climate Modeling. Advances in Meteorology, 2015, 1-11,
doi:10.1155/2015/693754.
Sweetman, A.K. et al., 2017: Major impacts of climate change on deep-sea benthic
ecosystems. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene, 5, 4,
doi:10.1525/elementa.203.
Sydeman, W.J. et al., 2014: Climate change and wind intensification in coastal
upwelling ecosystems. Science, 345(6192), 77-80,
doi:10.1126/science.1251635.
Sylla, M.B., N. Elguindi, F. Giorgi, and D. Wisser, 2016: Projected robust shift of
climate zones over West Africa in response to anthropogenic climate change
for the late 21st century. Climatic Change, 134(1), 241-253,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1522-z.
Sylla, M.B. et al., 2015: Projected Changes in the Annual Cycle of High-Intensity
Precipitation Events over West Africa for the Late Twenty-First Century. Journal
of Climate, 28(16), 6475-6488, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-14-00854.1.
Tainio, M. et al., 2013: Future climate and adverse health effects caused by fine
particulate matter air pollution: case study for Poland. Regional Environmental
Change, 13(3), 705-715, doi:10.1007/s10113-012-0366-6.
Takagi, H., N. Thao, and L. Anh, 2016: Sea-Level Rise and Land Subsidence: Impacts
on Flood Projections for the Mekong Delta's Largest City. Sustainability, 8(9),
959, doi:10.3390/su8090959.
Takakura, J. et al., 2017: Cost of preventing workplace heat-related illness through
worker breaks and the benefit of climate-change mitigation. Environmental
Research Letters, 12(6), 064010, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa72cc.
Tanaka, A. et al., 2017: On the scaling of climate impact indicators with global
mean temperature increase: a case study of terrestrial ecosystems and water
resources. Climatic Change, 141(4), 775-782,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1911-6.

307

3

Chapter 3

3

Tanoue, M., Y. Hirabayashi, H. Ikeuchi, E. Gakidou, and T. Oki, 2016: Global-scale
river flood vulnerability in the last 50 years. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 36021,
doi:10.1038/srep36021.
Tavoni, M. and R. Socolow, 2013: Modeling meets science and technology: an
introduction to a special issue on negative emissions. Climatic Change, 118(1),
1-14, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0757-9.
Taylor, C.M. et al., 2017: Frequency of extreme Sahelian storms tripled since 1982
in satellite observations. Nature, 544(7651), 475-478,
doi:10.1038/nature22069.
Taylor, M.A. et al., 2018: Future Caribbean Climates in a World of Rising
Temperatures: The 1.5 vs 2.0 Dilemma. Journal of Climate, 31(7), 2907-2926,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-17-0074.1.
Tebaldi, C. and R. Knutti, 2018: Evaluating the accuracy of climate change pattern
emulation for low warming targets. Environmental Research Letters, 13(5),
055006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabef2.
Teichmann, C. et al., 2018: Avoiding extremes: Benefits of staying below +1.5C
compared to +2.0C and +3.0C global warming. Atmosphere, 9(4), 1-19,
doi:10.3390/atmos9040115.
Temmerman, S. et al., 2013: Ecosystem-based coastal defence in the face of global
change. Nature, 504(7478), 79-83, doi:10.1038/nature12859.
Terry, J.P. and T.F.M. Chui, 2012: Evaluating the fate of freshwater lenses on atoll
islands after eustatic sea-level rise and cyclone-driven inundation: A modelling
approach. Global and Planetary Change, 88-89, 76-84,
doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2012.03.008.
Teshager, A.D., P.W. Gassman, J.T. Schoof, and S. Secchi, 2016: Assessment of
impacts of agricultural and climate change scenarios on watershed water
quantity and quality, and crop production. Hydrology and Earth System
Sciences, 20(8), 3325-3342, doi:10.5194/hess-20-3325-2016.
Tessler, Z.D., C.J. Vorosmarty, I. Overeem, and J.P.M. Syvitski, 2018: A model of
water and sediment balance as determinants of relative sea level rise in
contemporary and future deltas. Geomorphology, 305, 209-220,
doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2017.09.040.
Thackeray, S.J. et al., 2016: Phenological sensitivity to climate across taxa and
trophic levels. Nature, 535(7611), 241-245, doi:10.1038/nature18608.
Theisen, O.M., N.P. Gleditsch, and H. Buhaug, 2013: Is climate change a driver of armed
conflict? Climatic Change, 117(3), 613-625,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0649-4.
Thiery, W. et al., 2017: Present-day irrigation mitigates heat extremes.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 122(3), 1403-1422,
doi:10.1002/2016jd025740.
Thober, T. et al., 2018: Multi-model ensemble projections of European river floods
and high flows at 1.5, 2, and 3 degrees global warming. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(1), 014003, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9e35.
Thomas, A. and L. Benjamin, 2017: Management of loss and damage in small
island developing states: implications for a 1.5C or warmer world. Regional
Environmental Change, 1-10, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1184-7.
Thornton, P.K., P.G. Jones, P.J. Ericksen, and A.J. Challinor, 2011: Agriculture and
food systems in sub-Saharan Africa in a 4C+ world. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
369(1934), 117-136, doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0246.
Thornton, P.K., P.J. Ericksen, M. Herrero, and A.J. Challinor, 2014: Climate variability
and vulnerability to climate change: a review. Global Change Biology, 20(11),
3313-3328, doi:10.1111/gcb.12581.
Thronson, A. and A. Quigg, 2008: Fifty-five years of fish kills in coastal Texas.
Estuaries and Coasts, 31(4), 802-813,
doi:10.1007/s12237-008-9056-5.
Tietsche, S., D. Notz, J.H. Jungclaus, and J. Marotzke, 2011: Recovery mechanisms
of Arctic summer sea ice. Geophysical Research Letters, 38(2), L02707,
doi:10.1029/2010gl045698.
Tilman, D., C. Balzer, J. Hill, and B.L. Befort, 2011: Global food demand and the
sustainable intensification of agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 108(50), 20260-20264, doi:10.1073/pnas.1116437108.
Tjaden, N.B. et al., 2017: Modelling the effects of global climate change on
Chikungunya transmission in the 21st century. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 3813,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-03566-3.
Tobin, I. et al., 2015: Assessing climate change impacts on European wind energy
from ENSEMBLES high-resolution climate projections. Climatic Change,
128(1), 99-112, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1291-0.
Tobin, I. et al., 2016: Climate change impacts on the power generation potential of
a European mid-century wind farms scenario. Environmental Research Letters,
11(3), 034013, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034013.

308

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Tobin, I. et al., 2018: Vulnerabilities and resilience of European power generation
to 1.5C, 2C and 3C warming. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4),
044024, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab211.
Todd-Brown, K.E.O. et al., 2014: Changes in soil organic carbon storage predicted
by Earth system models during the 21st century. Biogeosciences, 11(8), 2341-
2356, doi:10.5194/bg-11-2341-2014.
Tran, T.A., J. Pittock, and L.A. Tuan, 2018: Adaptive co-management in the
Vietnamese Mekong Delta: examining the interface between flood
management and adaptation. International Journal of Water Resources
Development, 1-17, doi:10.1080/07900627.2018.1437713.
Trang, N.T.T., S. Shrestha, M. Shrestha, A. Datta, and A. Kawasaki, 2017: Evaluating
the impacts of climate and land-use change on the hydrology and nutrient
yield in a transboundary river basin: A case study in the 3S River Basin
(Sekong, Sesan, and Srepok). Science of The Total Environment, 576, 586-598,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.138.
Trathan, P.N. and S.L. Hill, 2016: The Importance of Krill Predation in the Southern
Ocean. In: Biology and Ecology of Antarctic Krill [Siegel, V. (ed.)]. Springer,
Cham, Switzerland, pp. 321-350,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-29279-3_9.
Trigo, R.M., C.M. Gouveia, and D. Barriopedro, 2010: The intense 2007-2009
drought in the Fertile Crescent: Impacts and associated atmospheric circulation.
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 150(9), 1245-1257,
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2010.05.006.
Turner, J. et al., 2014: Antarctic climate change and the environment: An update.
Polar Record, 50(3), 237-259, doi:10.1017/s0032247413000296.
Turner, J. et al., 2017a: Atmosphere-ocean-ice interactions in the Amundsen
Sea Embayment, West Antarctica. Reviews of Geophysics, 55(1), 235-276,
doi:10.1002/2016rg000532.
Turner, J. et al., 2017b: Unprecedented springtime retreat of Antarctic
sea ice in 2016. Geophysical Research Letters, 44(13), 6868-6875,
doi:10.1002/2017gl073656.
Turner, R.E., N.N. Rabalais, and D. Justic, 2008: Gulf of Mexico hypoxia: Alternate
states and a legacy. Environmental Science & Technology, 42(7), 2323-2327,
doi:10.1021/es071617k.
Rosenzweig, C., W. Solecki, P. Romero-Lankao, S. Mehrotra, S. Dhakal, and S. Ali
Ibrahim (eds.), 2018: Climate Change and Cities: Second Assessment Report
of the Urban Climate Change Research Network. Urban Climate Change
Research Network (UCCRN). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 811 pp.,
doi:10.1017/9781316563878.
Udo, K. and Y. Takeda, 2017: Projections of Future Beach Loss in Japan Due to
Sea-Level Rise and Uncertainties in Projected Beach Loss. Coastal Engineering
Journal, 59(2), 1740006, doi:10.1142/s057856341740006x.
UN, 2015: Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
A/RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), 35 pp.,
doi:10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2.
UN, 2017: The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2017. United Nations (UN),
New York, NY, USA, 64 pp.
UNEP-WCMC, 2006: In the front line: shoreline protection and other ecosystem
services from mangroves and coral reefs. UNEP-WCMC Biodiversity Series 24,
UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC), Cambridge, UK,
33 pp.
UNESCO, 2011: The Impact of Global Change on Water Resources: The Response
of UNESCO'S International Hydrology Programme. United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) International Hydrological
Programme (IHP), Paris, France, 20 pp.
Urban, M.C., 2015: Accelerating extinction risk from climate change. Science,
348(6234), 571-573, doi:10.1126/science.aaa4984.
Utete, B., C. Phiri, S.S. Mlambo, N. Muboko, and B.T. Fregene, 2018: Vulnerability
of fisherfolks and their perceptions towards climate change and its impacts
on their livelihoods in a peri-urban lake system in Zimbabwe. Environment,
Development and Sustainability, 1-18, doi:10.1007/s10668-017-0067-x.
Valle, M. et al., 2014: Projecting future distribution of the seagrass Zostera noltii
under global warming and sea level rise. Biological Conservation, 170, 74-85,
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2013.12.017.
van Bruggen, A.H.C., J.W. Jones, J.M.C. Fernandes, K. Garrett, and K.J. Boote,
2015: Crop Diseases and Climate Change in the AgMIP Framework. In:
Handbook of Climate Change and Agroecosystems [Rosenzweig, C. and
D. Hillel (eds.)]. ICP Series on Climate Change Impacts, Adaptation, and
Mitigation Volume 3, Imperial College Press, London, UK, pp. 297-330,
doi:10.1142/9781783265640_0012.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Van Den Hurk, B., E. Van Meijgaard, P. De Valk, K.J. Van Heeringen, and J.
Gooijer, 2015: Analysis of a compounding surge and precipitation event
in the Netherlands. Environmental Research Letters, 10(3), 035001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/3/035001.
van der Velde, M., F.N. Tubiello, A. Vrieling, and F. Bouraoui, 2012: Impacts of
extreme weather on wheat and maize in France: evaluating regional crop
simulations against observed data. Climatic Change, 113(3-4), 751-765,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0368-2.
Van Dingenen, R. et al., 2009: The global impact of ozone on agricultural crop yields
under current and future air quality legislation. Atmospheric Environment,
43(3), 604-618, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.10.033.
van Hooidonk, R. and M. Huber, 2012: Effects of modeled tropical sea surface
temperature variability on coral reef bleaching predictions. Coral Reefs, 31(1),
121-131, doi:10.1007/s00338-011-0825-4.
van Hooidonk, R., J.A. Maynard, and S. Planes, 2013: Temporary refugia for coral
reefs in a warming world. Nature Climate Change, 3(5), 508-511,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1829.
van Hooidonk, R. et al., 2016: Local-scale projections of coral reef futures
and implications of the Paris Agreement. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 39666,
doi:10.1038/srep39666.
van Oldenborgh, G.J. et al., 2017: Attribution of extreme rainfall from Hurricane
Harvey, August 2017. Environmental Research Letters, 12(12), 124009,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9ef2.
van Oort, P.A.J. and S.J. Zwart, 2018: Impacts of climate change on rice production
in Africa and causes of simulated yield changes. Global Change Biology, 24(3),
1029-1045, doi:10.1111/gcb.13967.
van Oppen, M.J.H., J.K. Oliver, H.M. Putnam, and R.D. Gates, 2015: Building
coral reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112(8), 2307-2313, doi:10.1073/pnas.1422301112.
van Oppen, M.J.H. et al., 2017: Shifting paradigms in restoration of the world's
coral reefs. Global Change Biology, 23(9), 3437-3448,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13647.
van Vliet, M.T.H. et al., 2016: Multi-model assessment of global hydropower and
cooling water discharge potential under climate change. Global Environmental
Change, 40, 156-170, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.07.007.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2009: Comparison of top-down and bottom-up estimates
of sectoral and regional greenhouse gas emission reduction potentials. Energy
Policy, 37(12), 5125-5139, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.07.024.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2011a: The representative concentration pathways: an
overview. Climatic Change, 109(1), 5, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0148-z.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2011b: RCP2.6: exploring the possibility to keep global
mean temperature increase below 2C. Climatic Change, 109(1), 95,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0152-3.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2016: Carbon budgets and energy transition pathways.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(7), 075002,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/075002.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2018: Alternative pathways to the 1.5C target reduce
the need for negative emission technologies. Nature Climate Change, 8(5),
391-397, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0119-8.
Vardoulakis, S. et al., 2014: Comparative Assessment of the Effects of Climate
Change on Heat-and Cold-Related Mortality in the United Kingdom and
Australia. Environmental Health Perspectives, 122(12), 1285-1292,
doi:10.1289/ehp.1307524.
Vaughan, D.G. et al., 2013: Observations: Cryosphere. In: Climate Change 2013:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels,
Y. Xia, V.B. And, P.M. Midgley, and Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 317-382.
Vaughan, N.E. and C. Gough, 2016: Expert assessment concludes negative
emissions scenarios may not deliver. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9),
095003, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095003.
Vaughan, N.E. et al., 2018: Evaluating the use of biomass energy with carbon
capture and storage in low emission scenarios. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(4), 044014, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaaa02.
Vautard, R. et al., 2014: The European climate under a 2C global warming.
Environmental Research Letters, 9(3), 034006,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/3/034006.
Velez, C., E. Figueira, A.M.V.M. Soares, and R. Freitas, 2016: Combined effects
of seawater acidification and salinity changes in Ruditapes philippinarum.
Aquatic Toxicology, 176, 141-150, doi:10.1016/j.aquatox.2016.04.016.

Chapter 3
Verges, A. et al., 2014: The tropicalization of temperate marine ecosystems: climatemediated changes in herbivory and community phase shifts. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 281(1789), 20140846,
doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.0846.
Verges, A. et al., 2016: Long-term empirical evidence of ocean warming leading
to tropicalization of fish communities, increased herbivory, and loss of kelp.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(48), 13791-13796,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1610725113.
Versini, P.-A., M. Velasco, A. Cabello, and D. Sempere-Torres, 2013: Hydrological
impact of forest fires and climate change in a Mediterranean basin. Natural
Hazards, 66(2), 609-628, doi:10.1007/s11069-012-0503-z.
Villamayor, B.M.R., R.N. Rollon, M.S. Samson, G.M.G. Albano, and J.H. Primavera,
2016: Impact of Haiyan on Philippine mangroves: Implications to the fate of the
widespread monospecific Rhizophora plantations against strong typhoons. Ocean
and Coastal Management, 132, 1-14, doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.07.011.
Vitali, A. et al., 2009: Seasonal pattern of mortality and relationships between
mortality and temperature-humidity index in dairy cows. Journal of Dairy
Science, 92(8), 3781-3790, doi:10.3168/jds.2009-2127.
Vitousek, S. et al., 2017: Doubling of coastal flooding frequency within decades
due to sea-level rise. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1399,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-01362-7.
Vogel, M.M. et al., 2017: Regional amplification of projected changes in extreme
temperatures strongly controlled by soil moisture-temperature feedbacks.
Geophysical Research Letters, 44(3), 1511-1519,
doi:10.1002/2016gl071235.
von Lampe, M. et al., 2014: Why do global long-term scenarios for agriculture
differ? An overview of the AgMIP Global Economic Model Intercomparison.
Agricultural Economics, 45(1), 3-20, doi:10.1111/agec.12086.
von Uexkull, N., M. Croicu, H. Fjelde, and H. Buhaug, 2016: Civil conflict sensitivity
to growing-season drought. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
113(44), 12391-12396, doi:10.1073/pnas.1607542113.
Wada, Y. et al., 2017: Human-water interface in hydrological modelling: current
status and future directions. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 215194,
4169-4193, doi:10.5194/hess-21-4169-2017.
Waha, K. et al., 2017: Climate change impacts in the Middle East and Northern Africa
(MENA) region and their implications for vulnerable population groups. Regional
Environmental Change, 17(6), 1623-1638, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1144-2.
Wahl, T., S. Jain, J. Bender, S.D. Meyers, and M.E. Luther, 2015: Increasing risk of
compound flooding from storm surge and rainfall for major US cities. Nature
Climate Change, 5(12), 1093-1097, doi:10.1038/nclimate2736.
Wairiu, M., 2017: Land degradation and sustainable land management practices
in Pacific Island Countries. Regional Environmental Change, 17(4), 1053-
1064, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1041-0.
Waldbusser, G.G. et al., 2014: Saturation-state sensitivity of marine bivalve larvae
to ocean acidification. Nature Climate Change, 5(3), 273-280,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2479.
Wall, E., A. Wreford, K. Topp, and D. Moran, 2010: Biological and economic
consequences heat stress due to a changing climate on UK livestock. Advances
in Animal Biosciences, 1(01), 53, doi:10.1017/s2040470010001962.
Walsh, K.J.E. et al., 2016: Tropical cyclones and climate change. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(1), 65-89, doi:10.1002/wcc.371.
Wan, H., X. Zhang, and F. Zwiers, 2018: Human influence on Canadian temperatures.
Climate Dynamics, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s00382-018-4145-z.
Wang, B., H.H. Shugart, and M.T. Lerdau, 2017: Sensitivity of global greenhouse gas
budgets to tropospheric ozone pollution mediated by the biosphere. Environmental
Research Letters, 12(8), 084001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa7885.
Wang, D., T.C. Gouhier, B.A. Menge, and A.R. Ganguly, 2015: Intensification and
spatial homogenization of coastal upwelling under climate change. Nature,
518(7539), 390-394, doi:10.1038/nature14235.
Wang, G. et al., 2017: Continued increase of extreme El Nino frequency long
after 1.5C warming stabilization. Nature Climate Change, 7(8), 568-572,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3351.
Wang, H., S.P. Xie, and Q. Liu, 2016: Comparison of climate response to
anthropogenic aerosol versus greenhouse gas forcing: Distinct patterns.
Journal of Climate, 29(14), 5175-5188, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0106.1.
Wang, L., J.B. Huang, Y. Luo, Y. Yao, and Z.C. Zhao, 2015: Changes in Extremely
Hot Summers over the Global Land Area under Various Warming Targets. PLOS
ONE, 10(6), e0130660, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0130660.
Wang, Q. et al., 2016: Effects of ocean acidification on immune responses of
the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas. Fish & shellfish immunology, 49, 24-33,
doi:10.1016/j.fsi.2015.12.025.

309

3

Chapter 3

3

Wang, Z. et al., 2017: Scenario dependence of future changes in climate
extremes under 1.5C and 2C global warming.. Scientific Reports, 7, 46432,
doi:10.1038/srep46432.
Warren, R., J. Price, E. Graham, N. Forstenhaeusler, and J. VanDerWal, 2018a: The
projected effect on insects, vertebrates, and plants of limiting global warming
to 1.5C rather than 2C. Science, 360(6390), 791-795,
doi:10.1126/science.aar3646.
Warren, R., J. Price, J. VanDerWal, S. Cornelius, and H. Sohl, 2018b: The implications
of the United Nations Paris Agreement on Climate Change for Key Biodiversity
Areas. Climatic change, 147(3-4), 395-409,
doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2158-6.
Warren, R. et al., 2013: Quantifying the benefit of early climate change mitigation
in avoiding biodiversity loss. Nature Climate Change, 3(7), 678-682,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1887.
Warren, R. et al., 2018c: Risks associated with global warming of 1.5C or 2C.
Briefing Note, Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, UK, 4 pp.
Warszawski, L. et al., 2013: A multi-model analysis of risk of ecosystem shifts
under climate change. Environmental Research Letters, 8(4), 044018,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/044018.
Warszawski, L. et al., 2014: The Inter-Sectoral Impact Model Intercomparison
Project (ISI-MIP): project framework. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(9), 3228-32, doi:10.1073/pnas.1312330110.
Wartenburger, R. et al., 2017: Changes in regional climate extremes as a function
of global mean temperature: an interactive plotting framework. Geoscientific
Model Development, 10, 3609-3634, doi:10.5194/gmd-2017-33.
Watson, C.S. et al., 2015: Unabated global mean sea-level rise over the satellite
altimeter era. Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 565-568,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2635.
Watts, G. et al., 2015: Climate change and water in the UK - past changes
and future prospects. Progress in Physical Geography, 39(1), 6-28,
doi:10.1177/0309133314542957.
Weatherdon, L., A.K. Magnan, A.D. Rogers, U.R. Sumaila, and W.W.L. Cheung,
2016: Observed and Projected Impacts of Climate Change on Marine Fisheries,
Aquaculture, Coastal Tourism, and Human Health: An Update. Frontiers in
Marine Science, 3, 48, doi:10.3389/fmars.2016.00048.
Weber, T. et al., 2018: Analysing regional climate change in Africa in a 1.5C, 2C
and 3C global warming world. Earth's Future, 6, 1-13,
doi:10.1002/2017ef000714.
Webster, N.S., S. Uthicke, E.S. Botte, F. Flores, and A.P. Negri, 2013: Ocean
acidification reduces induction of coral settlement by crustose coralline algae.
Global Change Biology, 19(1), 303-315, doi:10.1111/gcb.12008.
Webster, P.J., G.J. Holland, J.A. Curry, and H.-R. Chang, 2005: Changes in Tropical
Cyclone Number, Duration, and Intensity in a Warming Environment. Science,
309(5742), 1844-1846, doi:10.1126/science.1116448.
Wehner, M.F., K.A. Reed, B. Loring, D. Stone, and H. Krishnan, 2018a: Changes in
tropical cyclones under stabilized 1.5 and 2.0C global warming scenarios as
simulated by the Community Atmospheric Model under the HAPPI protocols.
Earth System Dynamics, 9(1), 187-195, doi:10.5194/esd-9-187-2018.
Wehner, M.F. et al., 2018b: Changes in extremely hot days under stabilized 1.5
and 2.0C global warming scenarios as simulated by the HAPPI multi-model
ensemble. Earth System Dynamics, 9(1), 299-311,
doi:10.5194/esd-9-299-2018.
Wei, T., S. Glomsrod, and T. Zhang, 2017: Extreme weather, food security and the
capacity to adapt - the case of crops in China. Food Security, 9(3), 523-535,
doi:10.1007/s12571-015-0420-6.
Weir, T., L. Dovey, and D. Orcherton, 2017: Social and cultural issues raised by
climate change in Pacific Island countries: an overview. Regional Environmental
Change, 17(4), 1017-1028, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1012-5.
Welch, J.R. et al., 2010: Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia exhibit large but
opposing sensitivities to minimum and maximum temperatures. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(33), 14562-7,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1001222107.
Wernberg, T. et al., 2012: An extreme climatic event alters marine ecosystem
structure in a global biodiversity hotspot. Nature Climate Change, 3(1), 78-82,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1627.
Whan, K. et al., 2015: Impact of soil moisture on extreme maximum temperatures
in Europe. Weather and Climate Extremes, 9, 57-67,
doi:10.1016/j.wace.2015.05.001.
White, I. and T. Falkland, 2010: Management of freshwater lenses on small Pacific
islands. Hydrogeology Journal, 18(1), 227-246,
doi:10.1007/s10040-009-0525-0.

310

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Whitfield, S., A.J. Challinor, and R.M. Rees, 2018: Frontiers in Climate Smart Food
Systems: Outlining the Research Space. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems,
2, 2, doi:10.3389/fsufs.2018.00002.
Widlansky, M.J., A. Timmermann, and W. Cai, 2015: Future extreme sea level
seesaws in the tropical Pacific. Science Advances, 1(8), e1500560,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1500560.
Wieder, W.R., C.C. Cleveland, W.K. Smith, and K. Todd-Brown, 2015: Future
productivity and carbon storage limited by terrestrial nutrient availability.
Nature Geoscience, 8, 441-444, doi:10.1038/ngeo2413.
Wiens, J.J., 2016: Climate-Related Local Extinctions Are Already Widespread
among Plant and Animal Species. PLOS Biology, 14(12), e2001104,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2001104.
Wilhelm, M., E.L. Davin, and S.I. Seneviratne, 2015: Climate engineering of
vegetated land for hot extremes mitigation: An Earth system model sensitivity
study. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 120(7), 2612-2623,
doi:10.1002/2014jd022293.
Williams, J.W., B. Shuman, and P.J. Bartlein, 2009: Rapid responses of the prairieforest ecotone to early Holocene aridity in mid-continental North America.
Global and Planetary Change, 66(3), 195-207,
doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2008.10.012.
Williamson, P., 2016: Emissions reduction: Scrutinize CO2 removal methods.
Nature, 530(7589), 153-155, doi:10.1038/530153a.
Willmer, P., 2012: Ecology: Pollinator-Plant Synchrony Tested by Climate Change.
Current Biology, 22(4), R131-R132, doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.01.009.
Wilson, S.K., N.A.J. Graham, M.S. Pratchett, G.P. Jones, and N.V.C. Polunin, 2006:
Multiple disturbances and the global degradation of coral reefs: are reef fishes
at risk or resilient? Global Change Biology, 12(11), 2220-2234,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01252.x.
Wiltshire, A. and T. Davies-Barnard, 2015: Planetary limits to BECCS negative
emissions. AVOID 2, UK, 24 pp.
Wine, M.L. and D. Cadol, 2016: Hydrologic effects of large southwestern
USA wildfires significantly increase regional water supply: fact or fiction?
Environmental Research Letters, 11(8), 085006,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/085006.
Winsemius, H.C. et al., 2016: Global drivers of future river flood risk. Nature
Climate Change, 6(4), 381-385, doi:10.1038/nclimate2893.
Wong, P.P. et al., 2014: Coastal Systems and Low-Lying Areas. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 361-409.
Woodroffe, C.D. et al., 2010: Response of coral reefs to climate change: Expansion
and demise of the southernmost pacific coral reef. Geophysical Research
Letters, 37(15), L15602, doi:10.1029/2010gl044067.
Woolf, D., J.E. Amonette, F.A. Street-Perrott, J. Lehmann, and S. Joseph, 2010:
Sustainable biochar to mitigate global climate change. Nature Communications,
1(5), 56, doi:10.1038/ncomms1053.
World Bank, 2013: Turn Down The Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts
and the Case for Resilience. World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 255 pp.,
doi:10.1017/cbo9781107415324.004.
Wright, B.D., 2011: The Economics of Grain Price Volatility. Applied Economic
Perspectives and Policy, 33(1), 32-58, doi:10.1093/aepp/ppq033.
Wu, D., Y. Zhao, Y.-S. Pei, and Y.-J Bi, 2013: Climate Change and its Effects on Runoff
in Upper and Middle Reaches of Lancang-Mekong river (in Chinese). Journal of
Natural Resources, 28(9), 1569-1582,
doi:10.11849/zrzyxb.2013.09.012.
Wu, J. and Y.-J. Shi, 2016: Attribution index for changes in migratory bird
distributions: The role of climate change over the past 50 years in China.
Ecological Informatics, 31, 147-155, doi:10.1016/j.ecoinf.2015.11.013.
Wu, P., N. Christidis, and P. Stott, 2013: Anthropogenic impact on Earth's
hydrological cycle. Nature Climate Change, 3(9), 807-810,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1932.
Yamagata, Y. et al., 2018: Estimating water-food-ecosystem trade-offs for the
global negative emission scenario (IPCC-RCP2.6). Sustainability Science,
13(2), 301-313, doi:10.1007/s11625-017-0522-5.
Yamano, H., K. Sugihara, and K. Nomura, 2011: Rapid poleward range expansion of
tropical reef corals in response to rising sea surface temperatures. Geophysical
Research Letters, 38(4), L04601, doi:10.1029/2010gl046474.

Impacts of 1.5C of Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems
Yang, J. et al., 2015: Century-scale patterns and trends of global pyrogenic
carbon emissions and fire influences on terrestrial carbon balance. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles, 29(9), 1549-1566, doi:10.1002/2015gb005160.
Yang, X., P.E. Thornton, D.M. Ricciuto, and W.M. Post, 2014: The role of
phosphorus dynamics in tropical forests - a modeling study using CLM-CNP.
Biogeosciences, 11(6), 1667-1681, doi:10.5194/bg-11-1667-2014.
Yang, Z., T. Wang, N. Voisin, and A. Copping, 2015: Estuarine response to river
flow and sea-level rise under future climate change and human development.
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 156, 19-30,
doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2014.08.015.
Yang, Z. et al., 2016: Warming increases methylmercury production in an Arctic soil.
Environmental Pollution, 214, 504-509, doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2016.04.069.
Yasuhara, M. and R. Danovaro, 2016: Temperature impacts on deep-sea
biodiversity. Biological Reviews, 91(2), 275-287, doi:10.1111/brv.12169.
Yates, M., G. Le Cozannet, M. Garcin, E. Salai, and P. Walker, 2013: Multidecadal
Atoll Shoreline Change on Manihi and Manuae, French Polynesia. Journal of
Coastal Research, 29, 870-882, doi:10.2112/jcoastres-d-12-00129.1.
Yazdanpanah, M., M. Thompson, and J. Linnerooth-Bayer, 2016: Do Iranian
Policy Makers Truly Understand And Dealing with the Risk of Climate Change
Regarding Water Resource Management? IDRiM, 367-368.
Yohe, G.W., 2017: Characterizing transient temperature trajectories for assessing
the value of achieving alternative temperature targets. Climatic Change,
145(3-4), 469-479, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2100-3.
Yokoki, H., M.Tamura, M.Yotsukuri, N.Kumano, and Y.Kuwahara, 2018: Global
distribution of projected sea level changes using multiple climate models
and economic assessment of sea level rise. CLIVAR Exchanges: A joint special
edition on Sea Level Rise, 36-39,doi: 10.5065/d6445k82.
Yoshida, K., M. Sugi, M. Ryo, H. Murakami, and I. Masayoshi, 2017: Future Changes
in Tropical Cyclone Activity in High-Resolution Large-Ensemble Simulations.
Geophysical Research Letters, 44(19), 9910-9917, doi:10.1002/2017gl075058.
Yu, R., Z. Jiang, and P. Zhai, 2016: Impact of urban land-use change in eastern
China on the East Asian subtropical monsoon: A numerical study. Journal of
Meteorological Research, 30(2), 203-216, doi:10.1007/s13351-016-5157-4.
Yu, R., P. Zhai, and Y. Lu, 2018: Implications of differential effects between 1.5
and 2C global warming on temperature and precipitation extremes in
China's urban agglomerations. International Journal of Climatology, 38(5),
2374-2385, doi:10.1002/joc.5340.
Yu, Z., J. Loisel, D. Brosseau, D. Beilman, and S. Hunt, 2010: Global peatland
dynamics since the Last Glacial Maximum. Geophysical Research Letters,
37(13), L13402, doi:10.1029/2010gl043584.
Yumashev, D., K. van Hussen, J. Gille, and G. Whiteman, 2017: Towards a balanced
view of Arctic shipping: estimating economic impacts of emissions from
increased traffic on the Northern Sea Route. Climatic Change, 143(1-2), 143-
155, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1980-6.
Zaehle, S., C.D. Jones, B. Houlton, J.-F. Lamarque, and E. Robertson, 2015: Nitrogen
Availability Reduces CMIP5 Projections of Twenty-First-Century Land Carbon
Uptake. Journal of Climate, 28(6), 2494-2511, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-13-00776.1.
Zaman, A.M. et al., 2017: Impacts on river systems under 2C warming: Bangladesh
Case Study. Climate Services, 7, 96-114, doi:10.1016/j.cliser.2016.10.002.
Zarco-Perello, S., T. Wernberg, T.J. Langlois, and M.A. Vanderklift, 2017:
Tropicalization strengthens consumer pressure on habitat-forming seaweeds.
Scientific Reports, 7(1), 820, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-00991-2.
Zhai, R., F. Tao, and Z. Xu, 2018: Spatial-temporal changes in runoff and terrestrial
ecosystem water retention under 1.5 and 2C warming scenarios across China.
Earth System Dynamics, 9(2), 717-738, doi:10.5194/esd-9-717-2018.
Zhang, F., J. Tong, B. Su, J. Huang, and X. Zhu, 2016: Simulation and projection
of climate change in the south Asian River basin by CMIP5 multi-model
ensembles (in Chinese). Journal of Tropical Meteorology, 32(5), 734-742.
Zhang, K. et al., 2012: The role of mangroves in attenuating storm surges.
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 102-103, 11-23,
doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2012.02.021.
Zhang, Z., Y. Chen, C. Wang, P. Wang, and F. Tao, 2017: Future extreme temperature
and its impact on rice yield in China. International Journal of Climatology,
37(14), 4814-4827, doi:10.1002/joc.5125.
Zhao, C. et al., 2017: Temperature increase reduces global yields of major crops in
four independent estimates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
114(35), 9326-9331, doi:10.1073/pnas.1701762114.
Zhao, X. et al., 2017: Ocean acidification adversely influences metabolism,
extracellular pH and calcification of an economically important marine
bivalve, Tegillarca granosa. Marine Environmental Research, 125, 82-89,
doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2017.01.007.

Chapter 3
Zhao, Y. et al., 2016: Potential escalation of heat-related working costs with
climate and socioeconomic changes in China. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(17), 4640-4645,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1521828113.
Zhou, B., P. Zhai, Y. Chen, and R. Yu, 2018: Projected changes of thermal growing
season over Northern Eurasia in a 1.5C and 2C warming world. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(3), 035004, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa6dc.
Zhou, L. et al., 2014: Widespread decline of Congo rainforest greenness in the past
decade. Nature, 508(7498), 86-90, doi:10.1038/nature13265.
Zhu, C. et al., 2018: Carbon dioxide (CO2) levels this century will alter the protein,
micronutrients, and vitamin content of rice grains with potential health
consequences for the poorest rice-dependent countries. Science Advances,
4(5), eaaq1012, doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaq1012.
Zickfeld, K. et al., 2013: Long-Term climate change commitment and reversibility:
An EMIC intercomparison. Journal of Climate, 26(16), 5782-5809,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00584.1.
Zittier, Z.M.C., C. Bock, G. Lannig, and H.O. Portner, 2015: Impact of ocean
acidification on thermal tolerance and acid-base regulation of Mytilus edulis
(L.) from the North Sea. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology,
473, 16-25, doi:10.1016/j.jembe.2015.08.001.
Zscheischler, J. et al., 2018: Future climate risk from compound events. Nature
Climate Change, 8(6), 469-477, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0156-3.

3

311

4

Strengthening and
Implementing the
Global Response
Coordinating Lead Authors:
Heleen de Coninck (Netherlands/EU), Aromar Revi (India)

Lead Authors:
Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Marcos Buckeridge (Brazil), Anton Cartwright (South
Africa), Wenjie Dong (China), James Ford (UK/Canada), Sabine Fuss (Germany), Jean-Charles Hourcade
(France), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Reinhard Mechler (Germany), Peter Newman (Australia),
Anastasia Revokatova (Russian Federation), Seth Schultz (USA), Linda Steg (Netherlands), Taishi Sugiyama
(Japan)

Contributing Authors:
Malcolm Araos (Canada), Stefan Bakker (Netherlands), Amir Bazaz (India), Ella Belfer (Canada), Tim Benton
(UK), Sarah Connors (France/UK), Joana Correia de Oliveira de Portugal Pereira (UK/Portugal), Dipak
Dasgupta (India), Kiane de Kleijne (Netherlands/EU), Maria del Mar Zamora Dominguez (Mexico), Michel
den Elzen (Netherlands), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Dominique Finon (France), Piers Forster (UK), Jan Fuglestvedt
(Norway), Frederic Ghersi (France), Adriana Grandis (Brazil), Eamon Haughey (Ireland), Bronwyn Hayward
(New Zealand), Ove Hoegh-Guldberg (Australia), Daniel Huppmann (Austria), Kejun Jiang (China), Richard
Klein (Netherlands/Germany), Shagun Mehrotra (USA/India), Luis Mundaca (Sweden/Chile), Carolyn Opio
(Uganda), Maxime Plazzotta (France), Andy Reisinger (New Zealand), Kevon Rhiney (Jamaica), Timmons
Roberts (USA), Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Arjan van Rooij (Netherlands), Roland Seferian (France),
Drew Shindell (USA), Jana Sillmann (Germany/Norway), Chandni Singh (India), Raphael Slade (UK), Gerd
Sparovek (Brazil), Pablo Suarez (Argentina), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas), Evelina Trutnevyte (Switzerland/
Lithuania), Anne van Valkengoed (Netherlands), Maria Virginia Vilarino (Argentina), Eva Wollenberg (USA)

Review Editors:
Amjad Abdulla (Maldives), Rizaldi Boer (Indonesia), Mark Howden (Australia), Diana Urge-Vorsatz
(Hungary)

Chapter Scientists:
Kiane de Kleijne (Netherlands/EU), Chandni Singh (India)
This chapter should be cited as:
de Coninck, H., A. Revi, M. Babiker, P. Bertoldi, M. Buckeridge, A. Cartwright, W. Dong, J. Ford, S. Fuss, J.-C. Hourcade, D. Ley,
R. Mechler, P. Newman, A. Revokatova, S. Schultz, L. Steg, and T. Sugiyama, 2018: Strengthening and Implementing the
Global Response. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [MassonDelmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock,
S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In
Press.

313

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table of Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................315
4.1


Accelerating the Global Response
to Climate Change.........................................................319

4.2


Pathways Compatible with 1.5C: Starting
Points for Strengthening Implementation.............320

4.2.1


Implications for Implementation of
1.5C-Consistent Pathways.........................................320

4.2.2

System Transitions and Rates of Change.....................322

4.3


Systemic Changes
for 1.5C-Consistent Pathways.................................323

Enabling Lifestyle and Behavioural Change................362

Box 4.5 | How Pricing Policy has Reduced Car Use
in Singapore, Stockholm and London....................................366
Box 4.6 | Bottom-up Initiatives: Adaptation
Responses Initiated by Individuals and Communities.........368
4.4.4

Enabling Technological Innovation..............................369

Box 4.7 | Bioethanol in Brazil: Innovation and
Lessons for Technology Transfers...........................................371
4.4.5


Strengthening Policy Instruments and Enabling
Climate Finance...........................................................372

Box 4.8 | Investment Needs and the Financial
Challenge of Limiting Warming to 1.5C...............................373
Box 4.9 | Emerging Cities and `Peak Car Use':
Evidence of Decoupling in Beijing.........................................376

4.3.1

Energy System Transitions...........................................324

4.3.2

Land and Ecosystem Transitions..................................327

4.3.3

Urban and Infrastructure System Transitions...............330

4.5

4.3.4

Industrial Systems Transitions......................................324

4.3.5


Overarching Adaptation Options Supporting
Adaptation Transitions................................................336

4.5.1
Assessing Feasibility of Options for Accelerated
 Transitions...................................................................380

Cross-Chapter Box 9 | Risks, Adaptation Interventions,
and Implications for Sustainable Development
and Equity Across Four Social-Ecological Systems:
Arctic, Caribbean, Amazon, and Urban..................................338

4

4.4.3

4.3.6

Short-Lived Climate Forcers.........................................341

4.3.7

Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)...................................342

4.3.8

Solar Radiation Modification (SRM)............................347

Cross-Chapter Box 10 | Solar Radiation Modification
in the Context of 1.5C Mitigation Pathways.......................349

4.4

Implementing Far-Reaching and Rapid Change...352

4.4.1

Enhancing Multilevel Governance...............................352

Box 4.1 | Multilevel Governance in the EU Covenant
of Mayors: Example of the Provincia di Foggia....................355
Box 4.2 | Watershed Management in a 1.5C World.............356
Cross-Chapter Box 11 | Consistency Between
Nationally Determined Contributions and
1.5C Scenarios.........................................................................357
4.4.2

Enhancing Institutional Capacities..............................359

Box 4.3 | Indigenous Knowledge and Community
Adaptation................................................................................360
Box 4.4 | Manizales, Colombia: Supportive National
Government and Localized Planning and Integration
as an Enabling Condition for Managing Climate
and Development Risks...........................................................361

314

Integration and Enabling Transformation..............380

4.5.2

Implementing Mitigation............................................381

4.5.3

Implementing Adaptation...........................................383

4.5.4


Synergies and Trade-Offs between
Adaptation and Mitigation..........................................386

Box 4.10 | Bhutan: Synergies and Trade-Offs in Economic
Growth, Carbon Neutrality and Happiness...........................387

4.6

Knowledge Gaps and Key Uncertainties................387

Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 4.1: What Transitions Could Enable Limiting
Global Warming to 1.5C?...................................................392
FAQ 4.2: What are Carbon Dioxide Removal and
Negative Emissions?...........................................................394
FAQ 4.3: Why is Adaptation Important in a
1.5C-Warmer World?..........................................................396

References ....................................................................................398

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Executive Summary
Limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels would
require transformative systemic change, integrated with
sustainable development. Such change would require the
upscaling and acceleration of the implementation of farreaching, multilevel and cross-sectoral climate mitigation
and addressing barriers. Such systemic change would need
to be linked to complementary adaptation actions, including
transformational adaptation, especially for pathways that
temporarily overshoot 1.5C (medium evidence, high agreement)
{Chapter 2, Chapter 3, 4.2.1, 4.4.5, 4.5}. Current national pledges
on mitigation and adaptation are not enough to stay below the Paris
Agreement temperature limits and achieve its adaptation goals. While
transitions in energy efficiency, carbon intensity of fuels, electrification
and land-use change are underway in various countries, limiting
warming to 1.5C will require a greater scale and pace of change to
transform energy, land, urban and industrial systems globally. {4.3, 4.4,
Cross-Chapter Box 9 in this Chapter}
Although multiple communities around the world are
demonstrating the possibility of implementation consistent with
1.5C pathways {Boxes 4.1-4.10}, very few countries, regions,
cities, communities or businesses can currently make such
a claim (high confidence). To strengthen the global response,
almost all countries would need to significantly raise their level
of ambition. Implementation of this raised ambition would
require enhanced institutional capabilities in all countries,
including building the capability to utilize indigenous and local
knowledge (medium evidence, high agreement). In developing
countries and for poor and vulnerable people, implementing the
response would require financial, technological and other forms of
support to build capacity, for which additional local, national and
international resources would need to be mobilized (high confidence).
However, public, financial, institutional and innovation capabilities
currently fall short of implementing far-reaching measures at scale in
all countries (high confidence). Transnational networks that support
multilevel climate action are growing, but challenges in their scale-up
remain. {4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.4, 4.4.5, Box 4.1, Box 4.2, Box 4.7}
Adaptation needs will be lower in a 1.5C world compared to
a 2C world (high confidence) {Chapter 3; Cross-Chapter Box 11
in this chapter}. Learning from current adaptation practices and
strengthening them through adaptive governance {4.4.1}, lifestyle
and behavioural change {4.4.3} and innovative financing mechanisms
{4.4.5} can help their mainstreaming within sustainable development
practices. Preventing maladaptation, drawing on bottom-up approaches
{Box 4.6} and using indigenous knowledge {Box 4.3} would effectively
engage and protect vulnerable people and communities. While
adaptation finance has increased quantitatively, significant further
expansion would be needed to adapt to 1.5C. Qualitative gaps in the
distribution of adaptation finance, readiness to absorb resources, and
monitoring mechanisms undermine the potential of adaptation finance
to reduce impacts. {Chapter 3, 4.4.2, 4.4.5, 4.6}

Chapter 4

System Transitions
The energy system transition that would be required to limit
global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial conditions is
underway in many sectors and regions around the world
(medium evidence, high agreement). The political, economic, social
and technical feasibility of solar energy, wind energy and electricity
storage technologies has improved dramatically over the past few
years, while that of nuclear energy and carbon dioxide capture
and storage (CCS) in the electricity sector have not shown similar
improvements. {4.3.1}
Electrification, hydrogen, bio-based feedstocks and substitution,
and, in several cases, carbon dioxide capture, utilization and
storage (CCUS) would lead to the deep emissions reductions
required in energy-intensive industries to limit warming to
1.5C. However, those options are limited by institutional, economic and
technical constraints, which increase financial risks to many incumbent
firms (medium evidence, high agreement). Energy efficiency in industry
is more economically feasible and helps enable industrial system
transitions but would have to be complemented with greenhouse gas
(GHG)-neutral processes or carbon dioxide removal (CDR) to make
energy-intensive industries consistent with 1.5C (high confidence).
{4.3.1, 4.3.4}
Global and regional land-use and ecosystems transitions and
associated changes in behaviour that would be required to
limit warming to 1.5C can enhance future adaptation and
land-based agricultural and forestry mitigation potential. Such
transitions could, however, carry consequences for livelihoods
that depend on agriculture and natural resources {4.3.2, CrossChapter Box 6 in Chapter 3}. Alterations of agriculture and forest
systems to achieve mitigation goals could affect current ecosystems
and their services and potentially threaten food, water and livelihood
security. While this could limit the social and environmental feasibility
of land-based mitigation options, careful design and implementation
could enhance their acceptability and support sustainable development
objectives (medium evidence, medium agreement). {4.3.2, 4.5.3}
Changing agricultural practices can be an effective climate
adaptation strategy. A diversity of adaptation options exists,
including mixed crop-livestock production systems which can be a
cost-effective adaptation strategy in many global agriculture systems
(robust evidence, medium agreement). Improving irrigation efficiency
could effectively deal with changing global water endowments,
especially if achieved via farmers adopting new behaviours and waterefficient practices rather than through large-scale infrastructural
interventions (medium evidence, medium agreement). Well-designed
adaptation processes such as community-based adaptation can be
effective depending upon context and levels of vulnerability. {4.3.2,
4.5.3}
Improving the efficiency of food production and closing yield
gaps have the potential to reduce emissions from agriculture,
reduce pressure on land, and enhance food security and future

315

4

Chapter 4

mitigation potential (high confidence). Improving productivity of
existing agricultural systems generally reduces the emissions intensity
of food production and offers strong synergies with rural development,
poverty reduction and food security objectives, but options to reduce
absolute emissions are limited unless paired with demand-side
measures. Technological innovation including biotechnology, with
adequate safeguards, could contribute to resolving current feasibility
constraints and expand the future mitigation potential of agriculture.
{4.3.2, 4.4.4}
Shifts in dietary choices towards foods with lower emissions
and requirements for land, along with reduced food loss and
waste, could reduce emissions and increase adaptation options
(high confidence). Decreasing food loss and waste and changing
dietary behaviour could result in mitigation and adaptation (high
confidence) by reducing both emissions and pressure on land, with
significant co-benefits for food security, human health and sustainable
development {4.3.2, 4.4.5, 4.5.2, 4.5.3, 5.4.2}, but evidence of
successful policies to modify dietary choices remains limited.

Mitigation and Adaptation Options and Other Measures

4

A mix of mitigation and adaptation options implemented in a
participatory and integrated manner can enable rapid, systemic
transitions - in urban and rural areas - that are necessary
elements of an accelerated transition consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C. Such options and changes are most effective
when aligned with economic and sustainable development,
and when local and regional governments are supported by
national governments {4.3.3, 4.4.1, 4.4.3}. Various mitigation
options are expanding rapidly across many geographies. Although
many have development synergies, not all income groups have so
far benefited from them. Electrification, end-use energy efficiency
and increased share of renewables, amongst other options, are
lowering energy use and decarbonizing energy supply in the built
environment, especially in buildings. Other rapid changes needed in
urban environments include demotorization and decarbonization of
transport, including the expansion of electric vehicles, and greater use
of energy-efficient appliances (medium evidence, high agreement).
Technological and social innovations can contribute to limiting
warming to 1.5C, for example, by enabling the use of smart grids,
energy storage technologies and general-purpose technologies, such
as information and communication technology (ICT) that can be
deployed to help reduce emissions. Feasible adaptation options include
green infrastructure, resilient water and urban ecosystem services,
urban and peri-urban agriculture, and adapting buildings and land use
through regulation and planning (medium evidence, medium to high
agreement). {4.3.3, 4.4.3, 4.4.4}
Synergies can be achieved across systemic transitions through
several overarching adaptation options in rural and urban areas.
Investments in health, social security and risk sharing and spreading
are cost-effective adaptation measures with high potential for scaling
up (medium evidence, medium to high agreement). Disaster risk
management and education-based adaptation have lower prospects of
scalability and cost-effectiveness (medium evidence, high agreement)
but are critical for building adaptive capacity. {4.3.5, 4.5.3}
316

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Converging adaptation and mitigation options can lead to
synergies and potentially increase cost-effectiveness, but
multiple trade-offs can limit the speed of and potential for
scaling up. Many examples of synergies and trade-offs exist in
all sectors and system transitions. For instance, sustainable water
management (high evidence, medium agreement) and investment in
green infrastructure (medium evidence, high agreement) to deliver
sustainable water and environmental services and to support urban
agriculture are less cost-effective than other adaptation options but
can help build climate resilience. Achieving the governance, finance
and social support required to enable these synergies and to avoid
trade-offs is often challenging, especially when addressing multiple
objectives, and attempting appropriate sequencing and timing of
interventions. {4.3.2, 4.3.4, 4.4.1, 4.5.2, 4.5.3, 4.5.4}
Though CO2 dominates long-term warming, the reduction of
warming short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs), such as methane
and black carbon, can in the short term contribute significantly to
limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Reductions
of black carbon and methane would have substantial co-benefits
(high confidence), including improved health due to reduced air
pollution. This, in turn, enhances the institutional and sociocultural feasibility of such actions. Reductions of several warming
SLCFs are constrained by economic and social feasibility (low evidence,
high agreement). As they are often co-emitted with CO2, achieving the
energy, land and urban transitions necessary to limit warming to 1.5C
would see emissions of warming SLCFs greatly reduced. {2.3.3.2, 4.3.6}
Most CDR options face multiple feasibility constraints, which
differ between options, limiting the potential for any single
option to sustainably achieve the large-scale deployment
required in the 1.5C-consistent pathways described in
Chapter 2 (high confidence). Those 1.5C pathways typically rely
on bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), afforestation
and reforestation (AR), or both, to neutralize emissions that are
expensive to avoid, or to draw down CO2 emissions in excess of the
carbon budget {Chapter 2}. Though BECCS and AR may be technically
and geophysically feasible, they face partially overlapping yet different
constraints related to land use. The land footprint per tonne of CO2
removed is higher for AR than for BECCS, but given the low levels of
current deployment, the speed and scales required for limiting warming
to 1.5C pose a considerable implementation challenge, even if the
issues of public acceptance and absence of economic incentives were
to be resolved (high agreement, medium evidence). The large potential
of afforestation and the co-benefits if implemented appropriately (e.g.,
on biodiversity and soil quality) will diminish over time, as forests
saturate (high confidence). The energy requirements and economic
costs of direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS) and enhanced
weathering remain high (medium evidence, medium agreement). At the
local scale, soil carbon sequestration has co-benefits with agriculture
and is cost-effective even without climate policy (high confidence). Its
potential feasibility and cost-effectiveness at the global scale appears
to be more limited. {4.3.7}
Uncertainties surrounding solar radiation modification
(SRM) measures constrain their potential deployment. These
uncertainties include: technological immaturity; limited physical

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

understanding about their effectiveness to limit global warming; and
a weak capacity to govern, legitimize, and scale such measures. Some
recent model-based analysis suggests SRM would be effective but that
it is too early to evaluate its feasibility. Even in the uncertain case that
the most adverse side-effects of SRM can be avoided, public resistance,
ethical concerns and potential impacts on sustainable development
could render SRM economically, socially and institutionally undesirable
(low agreement, medium evidence). {4.3.8, Cross-Chapter Box 10 in
this chapter}

Enabling Rapid and Far-Reaching Change
The speed of transitions and of technological change required
to limit warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels has been
observed in the past within specific sectors and technologies
{4.2.2.1}. But the geographical and economic scales at which
the required rates of change in the energy, land, urban,
infrastructure and industrial systems would need to take place
are larger and have no documented historic precedent (limited
evidence, medium agreement). To reduce inequality and alleviate
poverty, such transformations would require more planning and
stronger institutions (including inclusive markets) than observed in the
past, as well as stronger coordination and disruptive innovation across
actors and scales of governance. {4.3, 4.4}
Governance consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C and the
political economy of adaptation and mitigation can enable and
accelerate systems transitions,behavioural change,innovation and
technology deployment (medium evidence, medium agreement).
For 1.5C-consistent actions, an effective governance framework
would include: accountable multilevel governance that includes nonstate actors, such as industry, civil society and scientific institutions;
coordinated sectoral and cross-sectoral policies that enable collaborative
multi-stakeholder partnerships; strengthened global-to-local financial
architecture that enables greater access to finance and technology;
addressing climate-related trade barriers; improved climate education
and greater public awareness; arrangements to enable accelerated
behaviour change; strengthened climate monitoring and evaluation
systems; and reciprocal international agreements that are sensitive
to equity and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). System
transitions can be enabled by enhancing the capacities of public, private
and financial institutions to accelerate climate change policy planning
and implementation, along with accelerated technological innovation,
deployment and upkeep. {4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.4.3, 4.4.4}
Behaviour change and demand-side management can
significantly reduce emissions, substantially limiting the
reliance on CDR to limit warming to 1.5C {Chapter 2, 4.4.3}.
Political and financial stakeholders may find climate actions more costeffective and socially acceptable if multiple factors affecting behaviour
are considered, including aligning these actions with people's core
values (medium evidence, high agreement). Behaviour- and lifestylerelated measures and demand-side management have already led
to emission reductions around the world and can enable significant
future reductions (high confidence). Social innovation through bottom1

Chapter 4

up initiatives can result in greater participation in the governance of
systems transitions and increase support for technologies, practices
and policies that are part of the global response to limit warming to
1.5C . {Chapter 2, 4.4.1, 4.4.3, Figure 4.3}
This rapid and far-reaching response required to keep warming
below 1.5C and enhance the capacity to adapt to climate risks
would require large increases of investments in low-emission
infrastructure and buildings, along with a redirection of financial
flows towards low-emission investments (robust evidence, high
agreement). An estimated mean annual incremental investment of
around 1.5% of global gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) for the
energy sector is indicated between 2016 and 2035, as well as about
2.5% of global GFCF for other development infrastructure that could
also address SDG implementation. Though quality policy design and
effective implementation may enhance efficiency, they cannot fully
substitute for these investments. {2.5.2, 4.2.1, 4.4.5}
Enabling this investment requires the mobilization and better
integration of a range of policy instruments that include the
reduction of socially inefficient fossil fuel subsidy regimes and innovative
price and non-price national and international policy instruments. These
would need to be complemented by de-risking financial instruments
and the emergence of long-term low-emission assets. These instruments
would aim to reduce the demand for carbon-intensive services and shift
market preferences away from fossil fuel-based technology. Evidence
and theory suggest that carbon pricing alone, in the absence of
sufficient transfers to compensate their unintended distributional crosssector, cross-nation effects, cannot reach the incentive levels needed
to trigger system transitions (robust evidence, medium agreement).
But, embedded in consistent policy packages, they can help mobilize
incremental resources and provide flexible mechanisms that help reduce
the social and economic costs of the triggering phase of the transition
(robust evidence, medium agreement). {4.4.3, 4.4.4, 4.4.5}
Increasing evidence suggests that a climate-sensitive
realignment of savings and expenditure towards low-emission,
climate-resilient infrastructure and services requires an
evolution of global and national financial systems. Estimates
suggest that, in addition to climate-friendly allocation of public
investments, a potential redirection of 5% to 10% of the annual
capital revenues1 is necessary for limiting warming to 1.5C {4.4.5,
Table 1 in Box 4.8}. This could be facilitated by a change of incentives
for private day-to-day expenditure and the redirection of savings
from speculative and precautionary investments towards longterm productive low-emission assets and services. This implies the
mobilization of institutional investors and mainstreaming of climate
finance within financial and banking system regulation. Access by
developing countries to low-risk and low-interest finance through
multilateral and national development banks would have to be
facilitated (medium evidence, high agreement). New forms of public-
private partnerships may be needed with multilateral, sovereign and
sub-sovereign guarantees to de-risk climate-friendly investments,
support new business models for small-scale enterprises and help
households with limited access to capital. Ultimately, the aim is to

Annual capital revenues are paid interests plus an increase of asset value.

317

4

Chapter 4

promote a portfolio shift towards long-term low-emission assets that
would help redirect capital away from potentially stranded assets
(medium evidence, medium agreement). {4.4.5}

Knowledge Gaps
Knowledge gaps around implementing and strengthening the
global response to climate change would need to be urgently
resolved if the transition to a 1.5C world is to become reality.
Remaining questions include: how much can be realistically expected
from innovation and behavioural and systemic political and economic
changes in improving resilience, enhancing adaptation and reducing
GHG emissions? How can rates of changes be accelerated and scaled
up? What is the outcome of realistic assessments of mitigation and
adaptation land transitions that are compliant with sustainable
development, poverty eradication and addressing inequality? What are
life-cycle emissions and prospects of early-stage CDR options? How
can climate and sustainable development policies converge, and how
can they be organised within a global governance framework and
financial system, based on principles of justice and ethics (including
`common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities'
(CBDR-RC)), reciprocity and partnership? To what extent would
limiting warming to 1.5C require a harmonization of macro-financial
and fiscal policies, which could include financial regulators such as
central banks? How can different actors and processes in climate
governance reinforce each other, and hedge against the fragmentation
of initiatives? {4.1, 4.3.7, 4.4.1, 4.4.5, 4.6}

4

318

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

4.1

Accelerating the Global Response
to Climate Change

This chapter discusses how the global economy and socio-technical
and socio-ecological systems can transition to 1.5C-consistent
pathways and adapt to warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels.
In the context of systemic transitions, the chapter assesses adaptation
and mitigation options, including carbon dioxide removal (CDR), and
potential solar radiation modification (SRM) remediative measures
(Section 4.3), as well as the enabling conditions that would be required
for implementing the rapid and far-reaching global response of limiting
warming to 1.5C (Section 4.4), and render the options more or less
feasible (Section 4.5).
The impacts of a 1.5C-warmer world, while less than in a 2C-warmer
world, would require complementary adaptation and development
action, typically at local and national scale. From a mitigation
perspective, 1.5C-consistent pathways require immediate action on
a greater and global scale so as to achieve net zero emissions by midcentury, or earlier (Chapter 2). This chapter and Chapter 5 highlight
the potential that combined mitigation, development and poverty
reduction offer for accelerated decarbonization.
The global context is an increasingly interconnected world, with the
human population growing from the current 7.6 billion to over 9 billion
by mid-century (UN DESA, 2017). There has been a consistent growth of
global economic output, wealth and trade with a significant reduction
in extreme poverty. These trends could continue for the next few
decades (Burt et al., 2014), potentially supported by new and disruptive
information and communication, and nano- and bio-technologies.
However, these trends co-exist with rising inequality (Piketty, 2014),
exclusion and social stratification, and regions locked in poverty traps
(Deaton, 2013) that could fuel social and political tensions.
The aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis generated a challenging
environment in which leading economists have issued repeated alerts
about the `discontents of globalisation' (Stiglitz, 2002), `depression
economics' (Krugman, 2009), an excessive reliance of export-led
development strategies (Rajan, 2011), and risks of `secular stagnation'
due to the `saving glut' that slows down the flow of global savings
towards productive 1.5C-consistent investments (Summers, 2016).
Each of these affects the implementation of both 1.5C-consistent
pathways and sustainable development (Chapter 5).
The range of mitigation and adaptation actions that can be deployed in
the short run are well-known: for example, low-emission technologies,
new infrastructure, and energy efficiency measures in buildings,
industry and transport; transformation of fiscal structures; reallocation
of investments and human resources towards low-emission assets;
sustainable land and water management; ecosystem restoration;
enhancement of adaptive capacities to climate risks and impacts;
disaster risk management; research and development; and mobilization
of new, traditional and indigenous knowledge.
The convergence of short-term development co-benefits from
mitigation and adaptation to address `everyday development failures'

Chapter 4

(e.g., institutions, market structures and political processes) (Hallegatte
et al., 2016; Pelling et al., 2018) could enhance the adaptive capacity
of key systems at risk (e.g., water, energy, food, biodiversity, urban,
regional and coastal systems) to 1.5C climate impacts (Chapter
3). The issue is whether aligning 1.5C-consistent pathways with
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will secure support for
accelerated change and a new growth cycle (Stern, 2013, 2015). It is
difficult to imagine how a 1.5C world would be attained unless the
SDG on cities and sustainable urbanization is achieved in developing
countries (Revi, 2016), or without reforms in the global financial
intermediation system.
Unless affordable and environmentally and socially acceptable
CDR becomes feasible and available at scale well before 2050,
1.5C-consistent pathways will be difficult to realize, especially in
overshoot scenarios. The social costs and benefits of 1.5C-consistent
pathways depend on the depth and timing of policy responses and
their alignment with short term and long-term development objectives,
through policy packages that bring together a diversity of policy
instruments, including public investment (Grubb et al., 2014; Winkler
and Dubash, 2015; Campiglio, 2016).
Whatever its potential long-term benefits, a transition to a 1.5C
world may suffer from a lack of broad political and public support,
if it exacerbates existing short-term economic and social tensions,
including unemployment, poverty, inequality, financial tensions,
competitiveness issues and the loss of economic value of carbonintensive assets (Mercure et al., 2018). The challenge is therefore how
to strengthen climate policies without inducing economic collapse or
hardship, and to make them contribute to reducing some of the `fault
lines' of the world economy (Rajan, 2011).
This chapter reviews literature addressing the alignment of climate
with other public policies (e.g., fiscal, trade, industrial, monetary, urban
planning, infrastructure, and innovation) and with a greater access to
basic needs and services, defined by the SDGs. It also reviews how
de-risking low-emission investments and the evolution of the financial
intermediation system can help reduce the `savings glut' (Arezki et
al., 2016) and the gap between cash balances and long-term assets
(Aglietta et al., 2015b) to support more sustainable and inclusive
growth.
As the transitions associated with 1.5C-consistent pathways require
accelerated and coordinated action, in multiple systems across all
world regions, they are inherently exposed to risks of freeriding and
moral hazards. A key governance challenge is how the convergence
of voluntary domestic policies can be organized via aligned global,
national and sub-national governance, based on reciprocity (Ostrom
and Walker, 2005) and partnership (UN, 2016), and how different
actors and processes in climate governance can reinforce each other
to enable this (Gupta, 2014; Andonova et al., 2017). The emergence of
polycentric sources of climate action and transnational and subnational
networks that link these efforts (Abbott, 2012) offer the opportunity to
experiment and learn from different approaches, thereby accelerating
approaches led by national governments (Cole, 2015; Jordan et al.,
2015).

319

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Section 4.2 of this chapter outlines existing rates of change and
attributes of accelerated change. Section 4.3 identifies global systems,
and their components, that offer options for this change. Section 4.4
documents the enabling conditions that influence the feasibility of
those options, including economic, financial and policy instruments that

could trigger the transition to 1.5C-consistent pathways. Section 4.5
assesses mitigation and adaptation options for feasibility, strategies for
implementation and synergies and trade-offs between mitigation and
adaptation.

4.2

Pathways Compatible with 1.5C: Starting
Points for Strengthening Implementation

4.2.1

Implications for Implementation of
1.5C-Consistent Pathways

land-use change. Both the detailed integrated modelling pathway
literature and a number of broader sectoral and bottom-up studies
provide examples of how these sectoral technological and policy
characteristics can be broken down sectorally for 1.5C-consistent
pathways (see Table 4.1).

The 1.5C-consistent pathways assessed in Chapter 2 form the
basis for the feasibility assessment in section 4.5. A wide range of
1.5C-consistent pathways from integrated assessment modelling
(IAM), supplemented by other literature, are assessed in Chapter 2
(Sections 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5). The most common feature shared
by these pathways is their requirement for faster and more radical
changes compared to 2C and higher warming pathways.
A variety of 1.5C-consistent technological options and policy targets
is identified in the assessed modelling literature (Sections 2.3, 2.4, 2.5).
These technology and policy options include energy demand reduction,
greater penetration of low-emission and carbon-free technologies
as well as electrification of transport and industry, and reduction of

4

Both the integrated pathway literature and the sectoral studies agree
on the need for rapid transitions in the production and use of energy
across various sectors, to be consistent with limiting global warming
to 1.5C. The pace of these transitions is particularly significant for
the supply mix and electrification (Table 4.1). Individual, sectoral
studies may show higher rates of change compared to IAMs (Figueres
et al., 2017; Rockstrom et al., 2017; WBCSD, 2017; Kuramochi et al.,
2018). These trends and transformation patterns create opportunities
and challenges for both mitigation and adaptation (Sections 4.2.1.1
and 4.2.1.2) and have significant implications for the assessment of
feasibility and enablers, including governance, institutions, and policy
instruments addressed in Sections 4.3 and 4.4.

Table 4.1 | Sectoral indicators of the pace of transformation in 1.5C-consistent pathways, based on selected integrated pathways assessed in Chapter 2 (from the scenario database)
and several other studies reviewed in Chapter 2 that assess mitigation transitions consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C. Values for `1.5C-no or -low-OS' and `1.5C-highOS' indicate the median and the interquartile ranges for 1.5C scenarios. If a number in square brackets is indicated, this is the number of scenarios for this indicator. S1, S2, S5
and LED represent the four illustrative pathway archetypes selected for this assessment (see Chapter 2, Section 2.1 and Supplementary Material 4.SM.1 for detailed description).
Energy

Other
Studies
2030

IAM
Pathways
2050

Other
Studies
2050

320

Transport

Industry

Change
in energy
demand for
buildings (2010
baseline) [%]

Share of lowcarbon fuels
(electricity,
hydrogen and
biofuel) in
transport [%]

Share of
electricity in
transport [%]

54 (65; 47)

0 (7; -7) [42]

12 (18; 9) [29]

5 (7; 3) [49]

42 (55; 34) [42]

43 (54; 37)

-17 (-12; -20) [29]

7 (8; 6) [23]

3 (5; 3)

18 (28; -13) [29]

Number
of
scenarios

Share of
renewables
in primary
energy [%]

Share of
renewables in
electricity [%]

1.5C-no or low-OS

50

29 (37; 26)

1.5C-high-OS

35

24 (27; 20)

S1

29

58

-8

S2

29

48

-14

S5

14

25

Pathways

IAM
Pathways
2030

Buildings

LED

37

60

Loffler et al. (2017)

46

79

IEA (2017c) (ETP)

31

47

2

IEA (2017g) (WEM)

27

50

-6

Industrial
emissions
reductions
(2010 baseline)
[%]

4

49

5

4

19

3

1

30

21

42

14

5

22

17

6

15

1.5C-no or low-OS

50

60 (67; 52)

77 (86; 69)

-17 (3; -36) [42]

55 (66; 35) [29]

23 (29; 17) [49]

79 (91; 67) [42]

1.5C-high-OS

35

38 (44; 27) [23]

18 (23; 14)

68 (81; 54) [29]

34

74

26

23

73

53

10

62 (68; 47)

82 (88; 64)

-37 (-13; -51) [29]

S1

58

81

-21

S2

53

63

-25

S5

67

70

LED

73

77

Loffler et al. (2017)

100

100

IEA (2017c) (ETP)

58

74

5

IEA (2017g) (WEM)

47

69

-5

45

59

91

55

30

57

58

32

55

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

4.2.1.1

Challenges and Opportunities for Mitigation Along
the Reviewed Pathways

Greater scale, speed and change in investment patterns. There
is agreement in the literature reviewed by Chapter 2 that staying
below 1.5C would entail significantly greater transformation in terms
of energy systems, lifestyles and investments patterns compared
to 2C-consistent pathways. Yet there is limited evidence and low
agreement regarding the magnitudes and costs of the investments
(Sections 2.5.1, 2.5.2 and 4.4.5). Based on the IAM literature reviewed
in Chapter 2, climate policies in line with limiting warming to 1.5C
would require a marked upscaling of supply-side energy system
investments between now and mid-century, reaching levels of between
1.6-3.8 trillion USD yr-1 globally with an average of about 3.5 trillion
USD yr-1 over 2016-2050 (see Figure 2.27). This can be compared to
an average of about 3.0 trillion USD yr-1 over the same period for
2C-consistent pathways (also in Figure 2.27).
Not only the level of investment but also the type and speed of
sectoral transformation would be impacted by the transitions
associated with 1.5C-consistent pathways. IAM literature projects
that investments in low-emission energy would overtake fossil
fuel investments globally by 2025 in 1.5C-consistent pathways
(Chapter 2, Section 2.5.2). The projected low-emission investments
in electricity generation allocations over the period 2016-2050 are:
solar (0.09-1.0 trillion USD yr-1), wind (0.1-0.35 trillion USD yr-1),
nuclear (0.1-0.25 trillion USD yr-1), and transmission, distribution,
and storage (0.3-1.3 trillion USD yr-1). In contrast, investments in
fossil fuel extraction and unabated fossil electricity generation along
a 1.5C-consistent pathway are projected to drop by 0.3-0.85 trillion
USD yr-1 over the period 2016-2050, with investments in unabated
coal generation projected to halt by 2030 in most 1.5C-consistent
pathways (Chapter 2, Section 2.5.2). Estimates of investments in
other infrastructure are currently unavailable, but they could be
considerably larger in volume than solely those in the energy sector
(Section 4.4.5).
Greater policy design and decision-making implications. The
1.5C-consistent pathways raise multiple challenges for effective
policy design and responses to address the scale, speed, and pace
of mitigation technology, finance and capacity building needs. These
policies and responses would also need to deal with their distributional
implications while addressing adaptation to residual climate impacts
(see Chapter 5). The available literature indicates that 1.5C-consistent
pathways would require robust, stringent and urgent transformative
policy interventions targeting the decarbonization of energy supply,
electrification, fuel switching, energy efficiency, land-use change, and
lifestyles (Chapter 2, Section 2.5, 4.4.2, 4.4.3). Examples of effective
approaches to integrate mitigation with adaptation in the context of
sustainable development and to deal with distributional implications
proposed in the literature include the utilization of dynamic adaptive
policy pathways (Haasnoot et al., 2013; Mathy et al., 2016) and
transdisciplinary knowledge systems (Bendito and Barrios, 2016).
Yet, even with good policy design and effective implementation,
1.5C-consistent pathways would incur higher costs. Projections of the
magnitudes of global economic costs associated with 1.5C-consistent
pathways and their sectoral and regional distributions from the

Chapter 4

currently assessed literature are scant, yet suggestive. For example, IAM
simulations assessed in Chapter 2 project (with a probability greater
than 50%) that marginal abatement costs, typically represented in
IAMs through a carbon price, would increase by about 3-4 times by
2050 under a 1.5C-consistent pathway compared to a 2C-consistent
pathway (Chapter 2, Section 2.5.2, Figure 2.26). Managing these
costs and distributional effects would require an approach that takes
account of unintended cross-sector, cross-nation, and cross-policy
trade-offs during the transition (Droste et al., 2016; Stiglitz et al., 2017;
Pollitt, 2018; Sands, 2018; Siegmeier et al., 2018).
Greater sustainable development implications. Few studies
address the relations between the Shared Socio-Economic Pathways
(SSPs) and the Sustainable Developments Goals (SDGs) (O'Neill et al.,
2015; Riahi et al., 2017). Nonetheless, literature on potential synergies
and trade-offs between 1.5C-consistent mitigation pathways and
sustainable development dimensions is emerging (Chapter 2, Section
2.5.3, Chapter 5, Section 5.4). Areas of potential trade-offs include
reduction in final energy demand in relation to SDG 7 (the universal
clean energy access goal) and increase of biomass production in
relation to land use, water resources, food production, biodiversity
and air quality (Chapter 2, Sections 2.4.3, 2.5.3). Strengthening the
institutional and policy responses to deal with these challenges is
discussed in Section 4.4 together with the linkage between disruptive
changes in the energy sector and structural changes in other
infrastructure (transport, building, water and telecommunication)
sectors. A more in-depth assessment of the complexity and interfaces
between 1.5C-consistent pathways and sustainable development is
presented in Chapter 5.

4.2.1.2

Implications for Adaptation Along the Reviewed
Pathways

4

Climate variability and uncertainties in the underlying assumptions
in Chapter 2's IAMs as well as in model comparisons complicate
discerning the implications for climate impacts, adaptation options and
avoided adaptation investments at the global level of 2C compared to
1.5C warming (James et al., 2017; Mitchell et al., 2017).
Incremental warming from 1.5C to 2C would lead to significant
increases in temperature and precipitation extremes in many regions
(Chapter 3, Section 3.3.2, 3.3.3). Those projected changes in climate
extremes under both warming levels, however, depend on the
emissions pathways, as they have different greenhouse gas (GHG)/
aerosol forcing ratios. Impacts are sector-, system- and region-specific,
as described in Chapter 3. For example, precipitation-related impacts
reveal distinct regional differences (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.3, 3.3.4,
3.3.5, 3.4.2). Similarly, regional reduction in water availability and
the lengthening of regional dry spells have negative implications for
agricultural yields depending on crop types and world regions (see for
example Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.4, 3.4.2, 3.4.6).
Adaptation helps reduce impacts and risks. However, adaptation has
limits. Not all systems can adapt, and not all impacts can be reversed
(Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5). For example, tropical coral reefs
are projected to be at risk of severe degradation due to temperatureinduced bleaching (Chapter 3, Box 3.4).
321

Chapter 4

4.2.2

System Transitions and Rates of Change

Society-wide transformation involves socio-technical transitions
and social-ecological resilience (Gillard et al., 2016). Transitional
adaptation pathways would need to respond to low-emission
energy and economic systems, and the socio-technical transitions
for mitigation involve removing barriers in social and institutional
processes that could also benefit adaptation (Pant et al., 2015; Geels
et al., 2017; Ickowitz et al., 2017). In this chapter, transformative
change is framed in mitigation around socio-technical transitions, and
in adaptation around socio-ecological transitions. In both instances,
emphasis is placed on the enabling role of institutions (including
markets, and formal and informal regulation). 1.5C-consistent
pathways and adaptation needs associated with warming of 1.5C
imply both incremental and rapid, disruptive and transformative
changes.

4.2.2.1

Mitigation: historical rates of change and state
of decoupling

Realizing 1.5C-consistent pathways would require rapid and
systemic changes on unprecedented scales (see Chapter 2 and
Section 4.2.1). This section examines whether the needed rates of
change have historical precedents and are underway.

4

Some studies conduct a de-facto validation of IAM projections. For CO2
emission intensity over 1990-2010, this resulted in the IAMs projecting
declining emission intensities while actual observations showed an
increase. For individual technologies (in particular solar energy), IAM
projections have been conservative regarding deployment rates and
cost reductions (Creutzig et al., 2017), suggesting that IAMs do not
always impute actual rates of technological change resulting from
influence of shocks, broader changes and mutually reinforcing factors
in society and politics (Geels and Schot, 2007; Daron et al., 2015;
Sovacool, 2016; Battiston et al., 2017).
Other studies extrapolate historical trends into the future (Hook et al.,
2011; Fouquet, 2016), or contrast the rates of change associated with
specific temperature limits in IAMs (such as those in Chapter 2) with
historical trends to investigate plausibility of emission pathways and
associated temperature limits (Wilson et al., 2013; Gambhir et al., 2017;
Napp et al., 2017). When metrics are normalized to gross domestic
product (GDP; as opposed to other normalization metrics such as
primary energy), low-emission technology deployment rates used by
IAMs over the course of the coming century are shown to be broadly
consistent with past trends, but rates of change in emission intensity
are typically overestimated (Wilson et al., 2013; Loftus et al., 2014; van
Sluisveld et al., 2015). This bias is consistent with the findings from
the `validation' studies cited above, suggesting that IAMs may underreport the potential for supply-side technological change assumed
in 1.5-consistent pathways, but may be more optimistic about the
systemic ability to realize incremental changes in reduction of emission
intensity as a consequence of favourable energy efficiency payback
times (Wilson et al., 2013). This finding suggests that barriers and
enablers other than costs and climate limits play a role in technological
change, as also found in the innovation literature (Hekkert et al., 2007;
Bergek et al., 2008; Geels et al., 2016b).
322

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

One barrier to a greater rate of change in energy systems is that
economic growth in the past has been coupled to the use of fossil
fuels. Disruptive innovation and socio-technical changes could enable
the decoupling of economic growth from a range of environmental
drivers, including the consumption of fossil fuels, as represented by
1.5C-consistent pathways (UNEP, 2014; Newman, 2017). This may
be relative decoupling due to rebound effects that see financial
savings generated by renewable energy used in the consumption of
new products and services (Jackson and Senker, 2011; Gillingham et
al., 2013), but in 2015 and 2016 total global GHG emissions have
decoupled absolutely from economic growth (IEA, 2017g; Peters
et al., 2017). A longer data trend would be needed before stable
decoupling can be established. The observed decoupling in 2015
and 2016 was driven by absolute declines in both coal and oil use
since the early 2000s in Europe, in the past seven years in the United
States and Australia, and more recently in China (Newman, 2017).
In 2017, decoupling in China reversed by 2% due to a drought
and subsequent replacement of hydropower with coal-fired power
(Tollefson, 2017), but this reversal is expected to be temporary (IEA,
2017c). Oil consumption in China is still rising slowly, but absolute
decoupling is ongoing in megacities like Beijing (Gao and Newman,
2018) (see Box 4.9).

4.2.2.2

Transformational adaptation

In some regions and places, incremental adaptation would not
be sufficient to mitigate the impacts of climate change on socialecological systems (see Chapter 3). Transformational adaptation
would then be required (Bahadur and Tanner, 2014; Pant et al.,
2015; Gillard, 2016; Gillard et al., 2016; Colloff et al., 2017; Termeer
et al., 2017). Transformational adaptation refers to actions aiming
at adapting to climate change resulting in significant changes in
structure or function that go beyond adjusting existing practices
(Dowd et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014a; Few et al., 2017), including
approaches that enable new ways of decision-making on adaptation
(Colloff et al., 2017). Few studies have assessed the potentially
transformative character of adaptation options (Pelling et al., 2015;
Rippke et al., 2016; Solecki et al., 2017), especially in the context of
warming of 1.5C.
Transformational adaptation can be adopted at a large scale, can lead
to new strategies in a region or resource system, transform places
and potentially shift locations (Kates et al., 2012). Some systems
might require transformational adaptation at 1.5C. Implementing
adaptation policies in anticipation of 1.5C would require
transformation and flexible planning of adaptation (sometimes
called adaptation pathways) (Rothman et al., 2014; Smucker et
al., 2015; Holland, 2017; Gajjar et al., 2018), an understanding of
the varied stakeholders involved and their motives, and knowledge
of less visible aspects of vulnerability based on social, cultural,
political, and economic factors (Holland, 2017). Transformational
adaptation would seek deep and long-term societal changes that
influence sustainable development (Chung Tiam Fook, 2017; Few
et al., 2017).
Adaptation requires multidisciplinary approaches integrating
scientific, technological and social dimensions. For example, a

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

framework for transformational adaptation and the integration
of mitigation and adaptation pathways can transform rural
indigenous communities to address risks of climate change and
other stressors (Thornton and Comberti, 2017). In villages in rural
Nepal, transformational adaptation has taken place, with villagers
changing their agricultural and pastoralist livelihood strategies after
years of lost crops due to changing rain patterns and degradation
of natural resources (Thornton and Comberti, 2017). Instead, they
are now opening stores, hotels, and tea shops. In another case, the
arrival of an oil pipeline altered traditional Alaskan communities'
livelihoods. With growth of oil production, investments were made
for rural development. A later drop in oil production decreased these
investments. Alaskan indigenous populations are also dealing with
impacts of climate change, such as sea level rise, which is altering
their livelihood sources. Transformational adaptation is taking
place by changing the energy matrix to renewable energy, in which
indigenous people apply their knowledge to achieve environmental,
economic, and social benefits (Thornton and Comberti, 2017).

4.2.2.3

Chapter 4

Innovations that disrupt entire systems may leave firms and utilities
with stranded assets, as the transition can happen very quickly (IPCC,
2014b; Kossoy et al., 2015). This may have consequences for fossil
fuels that are rendered `unburnable' (McGlade and Ekins, 2015) and
fossil fuel-fired power and industry assets that would become obsolete
(Caldecott, 2017; Farfan and Breyer, 2017). The presence of multiple
barriers and enablers operating in a system implies that rapid change,
whether the product of many small changes (Termeer et al., 2017)
or large-scale disruptions, is seldom an insular or discrete process
(Sterling et al., 2017). This finding informs the multidimensional nature
of feasibility in Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1 which is applied in
Section 4.5. Climate responses that are aligned with multiple feasibility
dimensions and combine adaptation and mitigation interventions with
non-climate benefits can accelerate change and reduce risks and costs
(Fazey et al., 2018). Also political, social and technological influences on
energy transitions, for example, can accelerate them faster than narrow
techno-economic analysis suggests is possible (Kern and Rogge, 2016),
but could also introduce new constraints and risks (Geels et al., 2016b;
Sovacool, 2016; Eyre et al., 2018).

Disruptive innovation

Demand-driven disruptive innovations that emerge as the product
of political and social changes across multiple scales can be
transformative (Seba, 2014; Christensen et al., 2015; Green and
Newman, 2017a). Such innovations would lead to simultaneous,
profound changes in behaviour, economies and societies (Seba, 2014;
Christensen et al. 2015), but are difficult to predict in supply-focused
economic models (Geels et al., 2016a; Pindyck, 2017). Rapid sociotechnical change has been observed in the solar industry (Creutzig et
al. (2017). Similar changes to socio-ecological systems can stimulate
adaptation and mitigation options that lead to more climate-resilient
systems (Adger et al., 2005; Ostrom, 2009; Gillard et al., 2016) (see
the Alaska and Nepal examples in Section 4.2.2.2). The increase in
roof-top solar and energy storage technology as well as the increase in
passive housing and net zero-emissions buildings are further examples
of such disruptions (Green and Newman, 2017b). Both roof-top solar
and energy storage have benefitted from countries' economic growth
strategies and associated price declines in photovoltaic technologies,
particularly in China (Shrivastava and Persson, 2018), as well as from
new information and communication technologies (Koomey et al.,
2013), rising demand for electricity in urban areas, and global concern
regarding greenhouse gas emissions (Azeiteiro and Leal Filho, 2017;
Lutz and Muttarak, 2017; Wamsler, 2017).
System co-benefits can create the potential for mutually enforcing
and demand-driven climate responses (Jordan et al., 2015;
Hallegatte and Mach, 2016; Pelling et al., 2018), and for rapid and
transformational change (Cole, 2015; Geels et al., 2016b; Hallegatte
and Mach, 2016). Examples of co-benefits include gender equality,
agricultural productivity (Nyantakyi-Frimpong and Bezner-Kerr, 2015),
reduced indoor air pollution (Satterthwaite and Bartlett, 2017), flood
buffering (Colenbrander et al., 2017), livelihood support (Shaw et
al., 2014; Urge-Vorsatz et al., 2014), economic growth (GCEC, 2014;
Stiglitz et al., 2017), social progress (Steg et al., 2015; Hallegatte and
Mach, 2016) and social justice (Ziervogel et al., 2017; Patterson et
al., 2018).

Disruptive innovation and technological change may play a role in
mitigation and in adaptation. The next section assesses mitigation
and adaptation options in energy, land and ecosystem, urban and
infrastructure and industrial systems.

4.3

Systemic Changes for 1.5C-Consistent
Pathways

Section 4.2 emphasizes the importance of systemic change for
1.5C-consistent pathways. This section translates this into four
main system transitions: energy, land and ecosystem, urban and
infrastructure, and industrial system transitions. This section assesses
the mitigation, adaptation and carbon dioxide removal options that
offer the potential for such change within those systems, based on
options identified by Chapter 2 and risks and impacts in Chapter 3.
The section puts more emphasis on those adaptation options (Sections
4.3.1-4.3.5) and mitigation options (Sections 4.3.1-4.3.4, 4.3.6
and 4.3.7) that are 1.5C-relevant and have developed considerably
since AR5. They also form the basis for the mitigation and adaptation
feasibility assessments in Section 4.5. Section 4.3.8 discusses solar
radiation modification methods.
This section emphasizes that no single solution or option can enable a
global transition to 1.5C-consistent pathways or adapting to projected
impacts. Rather, accelerating change, much of which is already starting
or underway, in multiple global systems, simultaneously and at different
scales, could provide the impetus for these system transitions. The
feasibility of individual options as well as the potential for synergies
and reducing trade-offs will vary according to context and the local
enabling conditions. These are explored at a high level in Section 4.5.
Policy packages that bring together multiple enabling conditions can
provide building blocks for a strategy to scale up implementation and
intervention impacts.

323

4

Chapter 4

4.3.1

Energy System Transitions

This section discusses the feasibility of mitigation and adaptation
options related to the energy system transition. Only options relevant
to 1.5C and with significant changes since AR5 are discussed, which
means that for options like hydropower and geothermal energy,
the chapter refers to AR5 and does not provide a discussion. Sociotechnical inertia of energy options for 1.5C-consistent pathways are
increasingly being surmounted as fossil fuels start to be phased out.
Supply-side mitigation and adaptation options and energy demandside options, including energy efficiency in buildings and transportation,
are discussed in Section 4.3.3; options around energy use in industry
are discussed in Section 4.3.4.
Section 4.5 assesses the feasibility in a systematic manner based on
the approach outlined in Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1.

4.3.1.1

Renewable electricity: solar and wind

All renewable energy options have seen considerable advances over
the years since AR5, but solar energy and both onshore and offshore
wind energy have had dramatic growth trajectories. They appear well
underway to contribute to 1.5C-consistent pathways (IEA, 2017c;
IRENA, 2017b; REN21, 2017).

4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

(Yenneti and Day, 2016; Rand and Hoen, 2017; Gorayeb et al., 2018)
that raise landscape management (Nadai and Labussiere, 2017) and
distributional justice (Yenneti and Day, 2016) challenges. Research
indicates that financial participation and community engagement can
be effective in mitigating resistance (Brunes and Ohlhorst, 2011; Rand
and Hoen, 2017) (see Section 4.4.3).
Bottom-up studies estimating the use of renewable energy in the future,
either at the global or at the national level, are plentiful, especially in
the grey literature. It is hotly debated whether a fully renewable energy
or electricity system, with or without biomass, is possible (Jacobson et
al., 2015, 2017) or not (Clack et al., 2017; Heard et al., 2017), and by
what year. Scale-up estimates vary with assumptions about costs and
technological maturity, as well as local geographical circumstances
and the extent of storage used (Ghorbani et al., 2017; REN21, 2017).
Several countries have adopted targets of 100% renewable electricity
(IEA, 2017c) as this meets multiple social, economic and environmental
goals and contributes to mitigation of climate change (REN21, 2017).

4.3.1.2

Bioenergy and biofuels

The feasibility of renewable energy options depends to a large
extent on geophysical characteristics of the area where the option is
implemented. However, technological advances and policy instruments
make renewable energy options increasingly attractive in other areas.
For example, solar PV is deployed commercially in areas with low solar
insolation, like northwest Europe (Nyholm et al., 2017). Feasibility also
depends on grid adaptations (e.g., storage, see below) as renewables
grow (IEA, 2017c). For regions with high energy needs, such as
industrial areas (see Section 4.3.4), high-voltage DC transmission
across long distances would be needed (MacDonald et al., 2016).

Bioenergy is renewable energy from biomass. Biofuel is biomass-based
energy used in transport. Chapter 2 suggests that pathways limiting
warming to 1.5C would enable supply of 67-310 (median 150)
EJ yr-1 (see Table 2.8) from biomass. Most scenarios find that bioenergy
is combined with carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS, BECCS) if it
is available but also find robust deployment of bioenergy independent
of the availability of CCS (see Chapter 2, Section 2.3.4.2 and Section
4.3.7 for a discussion of BECCS). Detailed assessments indicate that
deployment is similar for pathways limiting global warming to below
2C (Chum et al., 2011; P. Smith et al., 2014; Creutzig et al., 2015b).
There is however high agreement that the sustainable bioenergy
potential in 2050 would be restricted to around 100 EJ yr-1 (Slade
et al., 2014; Creutzig et al., 2015b). Sustainable deployment at such
or higher levels envisioned by 1.5C-consistent pathways may put
significant pressure on available land, food production and prices
(Popp et al., 2014b; Persson, 2015; Kline et al., 2017; Searchinger et
al., 2017), preservation of ecosystems and biodiversity (Creutzig et
al., 2015b; Holland et al., 2015; Santangeli et al., 2016), and potential
water and nutrient constraints (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2009; Gheewala
et al., 2011; Bows and Smith, 2012; Smith and Torn, 2013; Bonsch et
al., 2016; Lampert et al., 2016; Mouratiadou et al., 2016; Smith et al.,
2016b; Wei et al., 2016; Mathioudakis et al., 2017); but there is still low
agreement on these interactions (Robledo-Abad et al., 2017). Some
of the disagreement on the sustainable capacity for bioenergy stems
from global versus local assessments. Global assessments may mask
local dynamics that exacerbate negative impacts and shortages while
at the same time niche contexts for deployment may avoid trade-offs
and exploit co-benefits more effectively. In some regions of the world
(e.g., the case of Brazilian ethanol, see Box 4.7, where land may be less
of a constraint, the use of bioenergy is mature and the industry is well
developed), land transitions could be balanced with food production
and biodiversity to enable a global impact on CO2 emissions (Jaiswal
et al., 2017).

Another important factor affecting feasibility is public acceptance, in
particular for wind energy and other large-scale renewable facilities

The carbon intensity of bioenergy, key for both bioenergy as an
emission-neutral energy option and BECCS as a CDR measure, is

The largest growth driver for renewable energy since AR5 has been
the dramatic reduction in the cost of solar photovoltaics (PV) (REN21,
2017). This has made rooftop solar competitive in sunny areas between
45 north and south latitude (Green and Newman, 2017b), though
IRENA (2018) suggests it is cost effective in many other places too. Solar
PV with batteries has been cost effective in many rural and developing
areas (Pueyo and Hanna, 2015; Szabo et al., 2016; Jimenez, 2017),
for example 19 million people in Bangladesh now have solar-battery
electricity in remote villages and are reporting positive experiences on
safety and ease of use (Kabir et al., 2017). Small-scale distributed energy
projects are being implemented in developed and developing cities
where residential and commercial rooftops offer potential for consumers
becoming producers (called prosumers) (ACOLA, 2017; Kotilainen and
Saari, 2018). Such prosumers could contribute significantly to electricity
generation in sun-rich areas like California (Kurdgelashvili et al., 2016)
or sub-Saharan Africa in combination with micro-grids and mini-grids
(Bertheau et al., 2017). It could also contribute to universal energy
access (SDG 7) as shown by (IEA, 2017c).

324

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

still a matter of debate (Buchholz et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018) and
depends on management (Pyorala et al., 2014; Torssonen et al., 2016;
Baul et al., 2017; Kilpelainen et al., 2017); direct and indirect land-use
change emissions (Plevin et al., 2010; Schulze et al., 2012; Harris et
al., 2015; Repo et al., 2015; DeCicco et al., 2016; Qin et al., 2016)2; the
feedstock considered; and time frame (Zanchi et al., 2012; Daioglou et
al., 2017; Booth, 2018; Sterman et al., 2018), as well as the availability
of coordinated policies and management to minimize negative
side effects and trade-offs, particularly those around food security
(Stevanovi et al., 2017) and livelihood and equity considerations
(Creutzig et al., 2013; Calvin et al., 2014) .
Biofuels are a part of the transport sector in some cities and countries,
and may be deployed as a mitigation option for aviation, shipping
and freight transport (see Section 4.3.3.5) as well as industrial
decarbonization (IEA, 2017g) (Section 4.3.4), though only Brazil has
mainstreamed ethanol as a substantial, commercial option. Lower
emissions and reduced urban air pollution have been achieved there
by use of ethanol and biodiesel as fuels (Hill et al., 2006; Salvo et al.,
2017) (see Box 4.7).

4.3.1.3

Nuclear energy

Many scenarios in Chapter 2 and in AR5 (Bruckner et al., 2014)
project an increase in the use of nuclear power, while others project
a decrease. The increase can be realized through existing mature
nuclear technologies or new options (generation III/IV reactors,
breeder reactors, new uranium and thorium fuel cycles, small reactors
or nuclear cogeneration).
Even though scalability and speed of scaling of nuclear plants have
historically been high in many nations, such rates are currently not
achieved anymore. In the 1960s and 1970s, France implemented a
programme to rapidly get 80% of its power from nuclear in about
25 years (IAEA, 2018), but the current time lag between the decision
date and the commissioning of plants is observed to be 10-19 years
(Lovins et al., 2018). The current deployment pace of nuclear energy is
constrained by social acceptability in many countries due to concerns
over risks of accidents and radioactive waste management (Bruckner
et al., 2014). Though comparative risk assessment shows health risks
are low per unit of electricity production (Hirschberg et al., 2016), and
land requirement is lower than that of other power sources (Cheng and
Hammond, 2017), the political processes triggered by societal concerns
depend on the country-specific means of managing the political
debates around technological choices and their environmental impacts
(Gregory et al., 1993). Such differences in perception explain why the
2011 Fukushima incident resulted in a confirmation or acceleration of
phasing out nuclear energy in five countries (Roh, 2017) while 30 other
countries have continued using nuclear energy, amongst which 13 are
building new nuclear capacity, including China, India and the United
Kingdom (IAEA, 2017; Yuan et al., 2017).
Costs of nuclear power have increased over time in some developed
nations, principally due to market conditions where increased
2

Chapter 4

investment risks of high-capital expenditure technologies have
become significant. `Learning by doing' processes often failed to
compensate for this trend because they were slowed down by the
absence of standardization and series effects (Grubler, 2010). What
the costs of nuclear power are and have been is debated in the
literature (Lovering et al., 2016; Koomey et al., 2017). Countries with
liberalized markets that continue to develop nuclear employ de-risking
instruments through long-term contracts with guaranteed sale prices
(Finon and Roques, 2013). For instance, the United Kingdom works
with public guarantees covering part of the upfront investment costs
of newly planned nuclear capacity. This dynamic differs in countries
such as China and South Korea, where monopolistic conditions in
the electric system allow for reducing investment risks, deploying
series effects and enhancing the engineering capacities of users
due to stable relations between the security authorities and builders
(Schneider et al., 2017).
The safety of nuclear plants depends upon the public authorities of
each country. However, because accidents affect worldwide public
acceptance of this industry, questions have been raised about the risk
of economic and political pressures weakening the safety of the plants
(Finon, 2013; Budnitz, 2016). This raises the issue of international
governance of civil nuclear risks and reinforced international
cooperation involving governments, companies and engineering
(Walker and Lonnroth, 1983; Thomas, 1988; Finon, 2013), based on the
experience of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

4.3.1.4

Energy storage

The growth in electricity storage for renewables has been around grid
flexibility resources (GFR) that would enable several places to source
more than half their power from non-hydro renewables (Komarnicki,
2016). Ten types of GFRs within smart grids have been developed
(largely since AR5)(Blaabjerg et al., 2004; IRENA, 2013; IEA, 2017d;
Majzoobi and Khodaei, 2017), though how variable renewables
can be balanced without hydro or natural gas-based power backup at a larger scale would still need demonstration. Pumped hydro
comprised 150 GW of storage capacity in 2016, and grid-connected
battery storage just 1.7 GW, but the latter grew between 2015 to
2016 by 50% (REN21, 2017). Battery storage has been the main
growth feature in energy storage since AR5 (Breyer et al., 2017).
This appears to the result of significant cost reductions due to mass
production for electric vehicles (EVs) (Nykvist and Nilsson, 2015; Dhar
et al., 2017). Although costs and technical maturity look increasingly
positive, the feasibility of battery storage is challenged by concerns
over the availability of resources and the environmental impacts of
its production (Peters et al., 2017). Lithium, a common element in
the earth's crust, does not appear to be restricted and large increases
in production have happened in recent years with eight new mines
in Western Australia where most lithium is produced (GWA, 2016).
Emerging battery technologies may provide greater efficiency and
recharge rates (Belmonte et al., 2016) but remain significantly more
expensive due to speed and scale issues compared to lithium ion
batteries (Dhar et al., 2017; IRENA, 2017a).

While there is high agreement that indirect land use change (iLUC) could occur, there is low agreement about the actual extent of iLUC (P. Smith et al., 2014; Verstegen et
al., 2015; Zilberman, 2017)

325

4

Chapter 4

Research and demonstration of energy storage in the form of thermal
and chemical systems continues, but large-scale commercial systems
are rare (Pardo et al., 2014). Renewably derived synthetic liquid (like
methanol and ammonia) and gas (like methane and hydrogen) are
increasingly being seen as a feasible storage options for renewable
energy (producing fuel for use in industry during times when solar
and wind are abundant) (Bruce et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2010; Ezeji,
2017) but, in the case of carbonaceous storage media, would need a
renewable source of carbon to make a positive contribution to GHG
reduction (von der Assen et al., 2013; Abanades et al., 2017) (see also
Section 4.3.4.5). The use of electric vehicles as a form of storage has
been modelled and evaluated as an opportunity, and demonstrations
are emerging (Dhar et al., 2017; Green and Newman, 2017a), but
challenges to upscaling remain.

4.3.1.5

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

plants can reduce emissions and water needs (Eisenack and Stecker,
2012; van Vliet et al., 2016), but applying CCS would increase water
consumption (Koornneef et al., 2012). The technological, economic,
social and institutional feasibility of efficiency improvements is high,
but insufficient to limit temperature rise to 1.5C (van Vliet et al., 2016).
In addition, a number of options for water cooling management
systems have been proposed, such as hydraulic measures (Eisenack
and Stecker, 2012) and alternative cooling technologies (Chandel et al.,
2011; Eisenack and Stecker, 2012; Bartos and Chester, 2015; Murrant
et al., 2015; Bustamante et al., 2016; van Vliet et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2017b). There is high agreement on the technological and economic
feasibility of these technologies, as their absence can severely impact
the functioning of the power plant as well as safety and security
standards.

Options for adapting electricity systems to 1.5C
4.3.1.6

Climate change has started to disrupt electricity generation and, if
climate change adaptation options are not considered, it is predicted
that these disruptions will be lengthier and more frequent (JahandidehTehrani et al., 2014; Bartos and Chester, 2015; Kraucunas et al., 2015;
van Vliet et al., 2016). Adaptation would both secure vulnerable
infrastructure and ensure the necessary generation capacity (Minville
et al., 2009; Eisenack and Stecker, 2012; Schaeffer et al., 2012; Cortekar
and Groth, 2015; Murrant et al., 2015; Panteli and Mancarella, 2015;
Goytia et al., 2016). The literature shows high agreement that climate
change impacts need to be planned for in the design of any kind of
infrastructure, especially in the energy sector (Nierop, 2014), including
interdependencies with other sectors that require electricity to function,
including water, data, telecommunications and transport (Fryer, 2017).

4

Recent research has developed new frameworks and models that
aim to assess and identify vulnerabilities in energy infrastructure
and create more proactive responses (Francis and Bekera, 2014;
Ouyang and Duenas-Osorio, 2014; Arab et al., 2015; Bekera and
Francis, 2015; Knight et al., 2015; Jeong and An, 2016; Panteli et al.,
2016; Perrier, 2016; Erker et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2017). Assessments of
energy infrastructure adaptation, while limited, emphasize the need
for redundancy (Liu et al., 2017). The implementation of controllable
and islandable microgrids, including the use of residential batteries,
can increase resiliency, especially after extreme weather events (Qazi
and Young Jr., 2014; Liu et al., 2017). Hybrid renewables-based power
systems with non-hydro capacity, such as with high-penetration wind
generation, could provide the required system flexibility (Canales et
al., 2015). Overall, there is high agreement that hybrid systems, taking
advantage of an array of sources and time of use strategies, can help
make electricity generation more resilient (Parkinson and Djilali, 2015),
given that energy security standards are in place (Almeida Prado et
al., 2016).
Interactions between water and energy are complex (IEA, 2017g).
Water scarcity patterns and electricity disruptions will differ across
regions. There is high agreement that mitigation and adaptation
options for thermal electricity generation (if that remains fitted with
CCS) need to consider increasing water shortages, taking into account
other factors such as ambient water resources and demand changes in
irrigation water (Hayashi et al., 2018). Increasing the efficiency of power
326

Carbon dioxide capture and storage in the power sector

The AR5 (IPCC, 2014b) as well as Chapter 2, Section 2.4.2, assign
significant emission reductions over the course of this century to CO2
capture and storage (CCS) in the power sector. This section focuses
on CCS in the fossil-fuelled power sector; Section 4.3.4 discusses
CCS in non-power industry, and Section 4.3.7 discusses bioenergy
with CCS (BECCS). Section 2.4.2 puts the cumulative CO2 stored
from fossil-fuelled power at 410 (199-470 interquartile range) GtCO2
over this century. Such modelling suggests that CCS in the power
sector can contribute to cost-effective achievement of emission
reduction requirements for limiting warming to 1.5C. CCS may also
offer employment and political advantages for fossil fuel-dependent
economies (Kern et al., 2016), but may entail more limited co-benefits
than other mitigation options (that, e.g., generate power) and therefore
relies on climate policy incentives for its business case and economic
feasibility. Since 2017, two CCS projects in the power sector capture
2.4 MtCO2 annually, while 30 MtCO2 is captured annually in all CCS
projects (Global CCS Institute, 2017).
The technological maturity of CO2 capture options in the power sectors
has improved considerably (Abanades et al., 2015; Bui et al., 2018),
but costs have not come down between 2005 and 2015 due to limited
learning in commercial settings and increased energy and resources
costs (Rubin et al., 2015). Storage capacity estimates vary greatly, but
Section 2.4.2 as well as literature (V. Scott et al., 2015) indicate that
perhaps 10,000 GtCO2 could be stored in underground reservoirs.
Regional availability of this may not be sufficient, and it requires
efforts to have this storage and the corresponding infrastructure
available at the necessary rates and times (de Coninck and Benson,
2014). CO2 retention in the storage reservoir was recently assessed
as 98% over 10,000 years for well-managed reservoirs, and 78%
for poorly regulated ones (Alcalde et al., 2018). A paper reviewing
42 studies on public perception of CCS (Seigo et al., 2014) found that
social acceptance of CCS is predicted by trust, perceived risks and
benefits. The technology itself mattered less than the social context of
the project. Though insights on communication of CCS projects to the
general public and inhabitants of the area around the CO2 storage sites
have been documented over the years, project stakeholders are not
consistently implementing these lessons, although some projects have
observed good practices (Ashworth et al., 2015).

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

CCS in the power sector is hardly being realized at scale, mainly
because the incremental costs of capture, and the development of
transport and storage infrastructures are not sufficiently compensated
by market or government incentives (IEA, 2017c). In the two full-scale
projects in the power sector mentioned above, part of the capture costs
are compensated for by revenues from enhanced oil recovery (EOR)
(Global CCS Institute, 2017), demonstrating that EOR helps developing
CCS further. EOR is a technique that uses CO2 to mobilize more oil
out of depleting oil fields, leading to additional CO2 emissions by
combusting the additionally recovered oil (Cooney et al., 2015).

4.3.2

Land and Ecosystem Transitions

This section assesses the feasibility of mitigation and adaptation options
related to land use and ecosystems. Land transitions are grouped around
agriculture and food, ecosystems and forests, and coastal systems.

4.3.2.1

Agriculture and food

In a 1.5C world, local yields are projected to decrease in tropical
regions that are major food producing areas of the world (West Africa,
Southeast Asia, South Asia, and Central and northern South America)
(Schleussner et al., 2016). Some high-latitude regions may benefit from
the combined effects of elevated CO2 and temperature because their
average temperatures are below optimal temperature for crops. In both
cases there are consequences for food production and quality (CrossChapter Box 6 in Chapter 3 on Food Security), conservation agriculture,
irrigation, food wastage, bioenergy and the use of novel technologies.
Food production and quality. Increased temperatures, including
1.5C warming, would affect the production of cereals such as wheat
and rice, impacting food security (Schleussner et al., 2016). There is
medium agreement that elevated CO2 concentrations can change food
composition, with implications for nutritional security (Taub et al.,
2008; Hogy et al., 2009; DaMatta et al., 2010; Loladze, 2014; De Souza
et al., 2015), with the effects being different depending on the region
(Medek et al., 2017).
Meta-analyses of the effects of drought, elevated CO2, and temperature
conclude that at 2C local warming and above, aggregate production of
wheat, maize, and rice are expected to decrease in both temperate and
tropical areas (Challinor et al., 2014). These production losses could be
lowered if adaptation measures are taken (Challinor et al., 2014), such
as developing varieties better adapted to changing climate conditions.
Adaptation options can help ensure access to sufficient, quality food.
Such options include conservation agriculture, improved livestock
management, increasing irrigation efficiency, agroforestry and
management of food loss and waste. Complementary adaptation and
mitigation options, for example, the use of climate services (Section
4.3.5), bioenergy (Section 4.3.1) and biotechnology (Section 4.4.4) can
also serve to reduce emissions intensity and the carbon footprint of food
production.
Conservation agriculture (CA) is a soil management approach
that reduces the disruption of soil structure and biotic processes by
minimising tillage. A recent meta-analysis showed that no-till practices

Chapter 4

work well in water-limited agroecosystems when implemented jointly
with residue retention and crop rotation, but when used independently,
may decrease yields in other situations (Pittelkow et al., 2014).
Additional climate adaptations include adjusting planting times and
crop varietal selection and improving irrigation efficiency. Adaptations
such as these may increase wheat and maize yields by 7-12% under
climate change (Challinor et al., 2014). CA can also help build adaptive
capacity (medium evidence, medium agreement) (H. Smith et al., 2017;
Pradhan et al., 2018) and have mitigation co-benefits through improved
fertiliser use or efficient use of machinery and fossil fuels (Harvey et al.,
2014; Cui et al., 2018; Pradhan et al., 2018). CA practices can also raise
soil carbon and therefore remove CO2 from the atmosphere (Aguilera
et al., 2013; Poeplau and Don, 2015; Vicente-Vicente et al., 2016).
However, CA adoption can be constrained by inadequate institutional
arrangements and funding mechanisms (Harvey et al., 2014; Baudron
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Dougill et al., 2017; H. Smith et al., 2017).
Sustainable intensification of agriculture consists of agricultural
systems with increased production per unit area but with management
of the range of potentially adverse impacts on the environment (Pretty
and Bharucha, 2014). Sustainable intensification can increase the
efficiency of inputs and enhance health and food security (Ramankutty
et al., 2018).
Livestock management. Livestock are responsible for more GHG
emissions than all other food sources. Emissions are caused by feed
production, enteric fermentation, animal waste, land-use change
and livestock transport and processing. Some estimates indicate that
livestock supply chains could account for 7.1 GtCO2 per year, equivalent
to 14.5% of global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (Gerber
et al., 2013). Cattle (beef, milk) are responsible for about two-thirds
of that total, largely due to methane emissions resulting from rumen
fermentation (Gerber et al., 2013; Opio et al., 2013).
Despite ongoing gains in livestock productivity and volumes, the
increase of animal products in global diets is restricting overall
agricultural efficiency gains because of inefficiencies in the conversion
of agricultural primary production (e.g., crops) in the feed-animal
products pathway (Alexander et al., 2017), offsetting the benefits of
improvements in livestock production systems (Clark and Tilman, 2017).
There is increasing agreement that overall emissions from food systems
could be reduced by targeting the demand for meat and other livestock
products, particularly where consumption is higher than suggested
by human health guidelines. Adjusting diets to meet nutritional
targets could bring large co-benefits, through GHG mitigation and
improvements in the overall efficiency of food systems (Erb et al., 2009;
Tukker et al., 2011; Tilman and Clark, 2014; van Dooren et al., 2014;
Ranganathan et al., 2016). Dietary shifts could contribute one-fifth of
the mitigation needed to hold warming below 2C, with one-quarter of
low-cost options (Griscom et al., 2017). There, however, remains limited
evidence of effective policy interventions to achieve such large-scale
shifts in dietary choices, and prevailing trends are for increasing rather
than decreasing demand for livestock products at the global scale
(Alexandratos and Bruinsma, 2012; OECD/FAO, 2017). How the role
of dietary shift could change in 1.5C-consistent pathways is also not
clear (see Chapter 2).
327

4

Chapter 4

Adaptation of livestock systems can include a suite of strategies such
as using different breeds and their wild relatives to develop a genetic
pool resilient to climatic shocks and longer-term temperature shifts
(Thornton and Herrero, 2014), improving fodder and feed management
(Bell et al., 2014; Havet et al., 2014) and disease prevention and control
(Skuce et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2016). Most interventions that
improve the productivity of livestock systems and enhance adaptation
to climate changes would also reduce the emissions intensity of food
production, with significant co-benefits for rural livelihoods and the
security of food supplies (Gerber et al., 2013; FAO and NZAGRC, 2017a,
b, c). Whether such reductions in emission intensity result in lower
or higher absolute GHG emissions depends on overall demand for
livestock products, indicating the relevance of integrating supply-side
with demand-side measures within food security objectives (Gerber
et al., 2013; Bajelj et al., 2014). Transitions in livestock production
systems (e.g., from extensive to intensive) can also result in significant
emission reductions as part of broader land-based mitigation strategies
(Havlik et al., 2014).

4

Overall, there is high agreement that farm strategies that integrate
mixed crop-livestock systems can improve farm productivity and
have positive sustainability outcomes (Havet et al., 2014; Thornton
and Herrero, 2014; Herrero et al., 2015; Weindl et al., 2015). Shifting
towards mixed crop-livestock systems is estimated to reduce
agricultural adaptation costs to 0.3% of total production costs while
abating deforestation by 76 Mha globally, making it a highly costeffective adaptation option with mitigation co-benefits (Weindl et
al., 2015). Evidence from various regions supports this (Thornton and
Herrero, 2015), although the feasible scale varies between regions and
systems, as well as being moderated by overall demand in specific
food products. In Australia, some farmers have successfully shifted
to crop-livestock systems where, each year, they allocate land and
forage resources in response to climate and price trends (Bell et al.,
2014) . However, there can be some unintended negative impacts
of such integration, including increased burdens on women, higher
requirements of capital, competing uses of crop residues (e.g., feed
vs. mulching vs. carbon sequestration) and higher requirements
of management skills, which can be a challenge across several low
income countries (Thornton and Herrero, 2015; Thornton et al., 2018).
Finally, the feasibility of improving livestock efficiency is dependent
on socio-cultural context and acceptability: there remain significant
issues around widespread adoption of crossbred animals, especially by
smallholders (Thornton et al., 2018).
Irrigation efficiency. Irrigation efficiency is especially critical since
water endowments are expected to change, with 20-60 Mha of
global cropland being projected to revert from irrigated to rain-fed
land, while other areas will receive higher precipitation in shorter time
spans, thus affecting irrigation demand (Elliott et al., 2014). While
increasing irrigation system efficiency is necessary, there is mixed
evidence on how to enact efficiency improvements (Fader et al., 2016;
Herwehe and Scott, 2018). Physical and technical strategies include
building large-scale reservoirs or dams, renovating or deepening
irrigation channels, building on-farm rainwater harvesting structures,
lining ponds, channels and tanks to reduce losses through percolation
and evaporation, and investing in small infrastructure such as sprinkler
or drip irrigation sets (Varela-Ortega et al., 2016; Sikka et al., 2018).
328

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Each strategy has differing costs and benefits relating to unique
biophysical, social, and economic contexts. Also, increasing irrigation
efficiency may foster higher dependency on irrigation, resulting in a
heightened sensitivity to climate that may be maladaptive in the long
term (Lindoso et al., 2014).
Improvements in irrigation efficiency would need to be supplemented
with ancillary activities, such as shifting to crops that require less water
and improving soil and moisture conservation (Fader et al., 2016;
Hong and Yabe, 2017; Sikka et al., 2018). Currently, the feasibility of
improving irrigation efficiency is constrained by issues of replicability
across scale and sustainability over time (Burney and Naylor, 2012),
institutional barriers and inadequate market linkages (Pittock et al.,
2017).
Growing evidence suggests that investing in behavioural shifts
towards using irrigation technology such as micro-sprinklers or drip
irrigation, is an effective and quick adaptation strategy (Varela-Ortega
et al., 2016; Herwehe and Scott, 2018; Sikka et al., 2018) as opposed
to large dams which have high financial, ecological and social costs
(Varela-Ortega et al., 2016). While improving irrigation efficiency is
technically feasible (R. Fishman et al., 2015) and has clear benefits for
environmental values (Pfeiffer and Lin, 2014; R. Fishman et al., 2015),
feasibility is regionally differentiated as shown by examples as diverse
as Kansas (Jagermeyr et al., 2015), India (R. Fishman et al., 2015) and
Africa (Pittock et al., 2017).
Agroforestry. The integration of trees and shrubs into crop and
livestock systems, when properly managed, can potentially restrict soil
erosion, facilitate water infiltration, improve soil physical properties
and buffer against extreme events (Lasco et al., 2014; Mbow et al.,
2014; Quandt et al., 2017; Sida et al., 2018). There is medium evidence
and high agreement on the feasibility of agroforestry practices that
enhance productivity, livelihoods and carbon storage (Lusiana et al.,
2012; Murthy, 2013; Coulibaly et al., 2017; Sida et al., 2018), including
from indigenous production systems (Coq-Huelva et al., 2017), with
variation by region, agroforestry type, and climatic conditions (Place
et al., 2012; Coe et al., 2014; Mbow et al., 2014; Iiyama et al., 2017;
Abdulai et al., 2018). Long-term studies examining the success of
agroforestry, however, are rare (Coe et al., 2014; Meijer et al., 2015;
Brockington et al., 2016; Zomer et al., 2016).
The extent to which agroforestry practices employed at the farm level
could be scaled up globally while satisfying growing food demand
is relatively unknown. Agroforestry adoption has been relatively low
and uneven (Jacobi et al., 2017; Hernandez-Morcillo et al., 2018), with
constraints including the expense of establishment and lack of reliable
financial support, insecure land tenure, landowner's lack of experience
with trees, complexity of management practices, fluctuating market
demand and prices for different food and fibre products, the time and
knowledge required for management, low intermediate benefits to
offset revenue lags, and inadequate market access (Pattanayak et al.,
2003; Mercer, 2004; Sendzimir et al., 2011; Valdivia et al., 2012; Coe et
al., 2014; Meijer et al., 2015; Coulibaly et al., 2017; Jacobi et al., 2017).
Managing food loss and waste. The way food is produced,
processed and transported strongly influences GHG emissions. Around

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

one-third of the food produced on the planet is not consumed (FAO,
2013), affecting food security and livelihoods (See Cross-Chapter Box
6 on Food Security in Chapter 3). Food wastage is a combination
of food loss - the decrease in mass and nutritional value of food
due to poor infrastructure, logistics, and lack of storage technologies
and management - and food waste that derives from inappropriate
human consumption that leads to food spoilage associated with
inferior quality or overproduction. Food wastage could lead to an
increase in emissions estimated to 1.9-2.5 GtCO2-eq yr-1 (Hic et al.,
2016).

fibre resources, and could reduce impacts on land and conventional
agriculture (Greene et al., 2017).

Decreasing food wastage has high mitigation and adaptation potential
and could play an important role in land transitions towards 1.5C,
provided that reduced food waste results in lower production-side
emissions rather than increased consumption (Foley et al., 2011). There
is medium agreement that a combination of individual-institutional
behaviour (Refsgaard and Magnussen, 2009; Thornton and Herrero,
2014), and improved technologies and management (Lin et al., 2013;
Papargyropoulou et al., 2014) can transform food waste into products
with marketable value. Institutional behaviour depends on investment
and policies, which if adequately addressed could enable mitigation
and adaptation co-benefits in a relatively short time.

4.3.2.2

Novel technologies. New molecular biology tools have been
developed that can lead to fast and precise genome modification (De
Souza et al., 2016; Scheben et al., 2016) (e.g., CRISPR Cas9; Ran et
al., 2013; Schaeffer and Nakata, 2015). Such genome editing tools
may moderately assist in mitigation and adaptation of agriculture
in relation to climate changes, elevated CO2, drought and flooding
(DaMatta et al., 2010; De Souza et al., 2015, 2016). These tools could
contribute to developing new plant varieties that can adapt to warming
of 1.5C and overshoot, potentially avoiding some of the costs of crop
shifting (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; De Souza et al., 2016). However,
biosafety concerns and government regulatory systems can be a major
barrier to the use of these tools as this increases the time and cost
of turning scientific discoveries into ready applicable technologies
(Andow and Zwahlen, 2006; Maghari and Ardekani, 2011).
The strategy of reducing enteric methane emissions by ruminants
through the development of inhibitors or vaccines has already been
attempted with some successes, although the potential for application
at scale and in different situations remains uncertain. A methane
inhibitor has been demonstrated to reduce methane from feedlot
systems by 30% over a 12-week period (Hristov et al., 2015) with
some productivity benefits, but the ability to apply it in grazing systems
will depend on further technological developments as well as costs
and incentives. A vaccine could potentially modify the microbiota of
the rumen and be applicable even in extensive grazing systems by
reducing the presence of methanogenic micro-organisms (Wedlock et
al., 2013) but has not yet been successfully demonstrated to reduce
emissions in live animals. Selective breeding for lower-emitting
ruminants is becoming rapidly feasible, offering small but cumulative
emissions reductions without requiring substantial changes in farm
systems (Pickering et al., 2015).
Technological innovation in culturing marine and freshwater micro
and macro flora has significant potential to expand food, fuel and

Technological innovation could assist in increased agricultural efficiency
(e.g., via precision agriculture), decrease food wastage and genetics
that enhance plant adaptation traits (Section 4.4.4). Technological and
associated management improvements may be ways to increase the
efficiency of contemporary agriculture to help produce enough food
to cope with population increases in a 1.5C warmer world, and help
reduce the pressure on natural ecosystems and biodiversity.

Forests and other ecosystems

Ecosystem restoration. Biomass stocks in tropical, subtropical,
temperate and boreal biomes currently hold 1085, 194, 176, 190 Gt CO2,
respectively. Conservation and restoration can enhance these natural
carbon sinks (Erb et al., 2017).
Recent studies explore options for conservation, restoration and
improved land management estimating up to 23 GtCO2 (Griscom et
al., 2017). Mitigation potentials are dominated by reduced rates of
deforestation, reforestation and forest management, and concentrated
in tropical regions (Houghton, 2013; Canadell and Schulze, 2014; Grace
et al., 2014; Houghton et al., 2015; Griscom et al., 2017). Much of the
literature focuses on REDD+ (reducing emissions from deforestation and
forest degradation) as an institutional mechanism. However, restoration
and management activities need not be limited to REDD+, and locally
adapted implementation may keep costs low, capitalize on co-benefits
and ensure consideration of competing for socio-economic goals (Jantke
et al., 2016; Ellison et al., 2017; Perugini et al., 2017; Spencer et al., 2017).
Half of the estimated potential can be achieved at <100 USD/tCO2; and
a third of the cost-effective potential at <10 USD/tCO2 (Griscom et al.,
2017). Variation of costs in projects aiming to reduce emissions from
deforestation is high when considering opportunity and transaction
costs (Dang Phan et al., 2014; Overmars et al., 2014; Ickowitz et al.,
2017; Rakatama et al., 2017).
However, the focus on forests raises concerns of cross-biome leakage
(medium evidence, low agreement) (Popp et al., 2014a; Strassburg
et al., 2014; Jayachandran et al., 2017) and encroachment on other
ecosystems (Veldman et al., 2015). Reducing rates of deforestation
constrains the land available for agriculture and grazing, with tradeoffs between diets, higher yields and food prices (Erb et al., 2016a;
Kreidenweis et al., 2016). Forest restoration and conservation are
compatible with biodiversity (Rey Benayas et al., 2009; Jantke et al.,
2016) and available water resources; in the tropics, reducing rates of
deforestation maintains cooler surface temperatures (Perugini et al.,
2017) and rainfall (Ellison et al., 2017).
Its multiple potential co-benefits have made REDD+ important for local
communities, biodiversity and sustainable landscapes (Ngendakumana
et al., 2017; Turnhout et al., 2017). There is low agreement on whether
climate impacts will reverse mitigation benefits of restoration (Le Page
et al., 2013) by increasing the likelihood of disturbance (Anderegg et
al., 2015), or reinforce them through carbon fertilization (P. Smith et
al., 2014).
329

4

Chapter 4

4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Emerging regional assessments offer new perspectives for upscaling.
Strengthening coordination, additional funding sources, and access
and disbursement points increase the potential of REDD+ in working
towards 2C and 1.5C limits (Well and Carrapatoso, 2017). While
there are indications that land tenure has a positive impact (Sunderlin
et al., 2014), a meta-analysis by Wehkamp et al. (2018a) shows that
there is medium evidence and low agreement on which aspects of
governance improvements are supportive of conservation. Local
benefits, especially for indigenous communities, will only be accrued if
land tenure is respected and legally protected, which is not often the
case (Sunderlin et al., 2014; Brugnach et al., 2017). Although payments
for reduced rates of deforestation may benefit the poor, the most
vulnerable populations could have limited, uneven access (Atela et al.,
2014) and face lower opportunity costs from deforestation (Ickowitz
et al., 2017).

hardening through the building of seawalls and the re-establishment
of coastal ecosystems such as mangroves (Andre et al., 2016; Cooper
et al., 2016). While the feasibility of the solutions is high, they are
expensive to scale (robust evidence, medium agreement).

Community-based adaptation (CbA). There is medium evidence
and high agreement for the use of CbA. The specific actions to take
will depend upon the location, context, and vulnerability of the specific
community. CbA is defined as `a community-led process, based on
communities' priorities, needs, knowledge, and capacities, which aim
to empower people to plan for and cope with the impacts of climate
change' (Reid et al., 2009). The integration of CbA with ecosystemsbased adaptation (EbA) has been increasingly promoted, especially in
efforts to alleviate poverty (Mannke, 2011; Reid, 2016).

Working with coastal communities has the potential for improving
the resilience of coastal ecosystems. Combined with the advantages
of using indigenous knowledge to guide transitions, solutions can be
more effective when undertaken in partnership with local communities,
cultures, and knowledge (See Box 4.3).

Despite the potential and advantages of both CbA and EbA, including
knowledge exchange, information access and increased social capital
and equity; institutional and governance barriers still constitute a
challenge for local adaptation efforts (Wright et al., 2014; FernandezGimenez et al., 2015).
Wetland management. In wetland ecosystems, temperature rise has
direct and irreversible impacts on species functioning and distribution,
ecosystem equilibrium and services, and second-order impacts on local
livelihoods (see Chapter 3, Section 3.4.3). The structure and function
of wetland systems are changing due to climate change. Wetland
management strategies, including adjustments in infrastructural,
behavioural, and institutional practices have clear implications for
adaptation (Colloff et al., 2016b; Finlayson et al., 2017; Wigand et al.,
2017)
Despite international initiatives on wetland restoration and
management through the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, policies
have not been effective (Finlayson, 2012; Finlayson et al., 2017).
Institutional reform, such as flexible, locally relevant governance,
drawing on principles of adaptive co-management, and multistakeholder participation becomes increasingly necessary for effective
wetland management (Capon et al., 2013; Finlayson et al., 2017).

4.3.2.3

Coastal systems

Managing coastal stress. Particularly to allow for the landward
relocation of coastal ecosystems under a transition to a 1.5C warmer
world, planning for climate change would need to be integrated with
the use of coastlines by humans (Saunders et al., 2014; Kelleway et al.,
2017). Adaptation options for managing coastal stress include coastal
330

There is low evidence and high agreement that reducing the impact
of local stresses (Halpern et al., 2015) will improve the resilience of
marine ecosystems as they transition to a 1.5C world (O'Leary et
al., 2017). Approaches to reducing local stresses are considered
feasible, cost-effective and highly scalable. Ecosystem resilience
may be increased through alternative livelihoods (e.g., sustainable
aquaculture), which are among a suite of options for building resilience
in coastal ecosystems. These options enjoy high levels of feasibility yet
are expensive, which stands in the way of scalability (robust evidence,
medium agreement) (Hiwasaki et al., 2015; Brugnach et al., 2017).

Restoration of coastal ecosystems and fisheries. Marine
restoration is expensive compared to terrestrial restoration, and the
survival of projects is currently low, with success depending on the
ecosystem and site, rather than the size of the financial investment
(Bayraktarov et al., 2016). Mangrove replanting shows evidence
of success globally, with numerous examples of projects that have
established forests (Kimball et al., 2015; Bayraktarov et al., 2016).
Efforts with reef-building corals have been attempted with a low level
of success (Bayraktarov et al., 2016). Technologies to help re-establish
coral communities are limited (Rinkevich, 2014), as are largely
untested disruptive technologies (e.g., genetic manipulation, assisted
evolution) (van Oppen et al., 2015). Current technologies also have
trouble scaling given the substantial costs and investment required
(Bayraktarov et al., 2016).
Johannessen and Macdonald (2016) report the `blue carbon' sink to
be 0.4-0.8% of global anthropogenic emissions. However, this does
not adequately account for post-depositional processes and could
overestimate removal potentials, subject to a risk of reversal. Seagrass
beds will thus not contribute significantly to enabling 1.5C-consistent
pathways.

4.3.3

Urban and Infrastructure System Transitions

There will be approximately 70 million additional urban residents every
year through to the middle part of this century (UN DESA, 2014). The
majority of these new urban citizens will reside in small and mediumsized cities in low- and middle-income countries (Cross-Chapter Box
13 in Chapter 5). The combination of urbanization and economic
and infrastructure development could account for an additional
226 GtCO2 by 2050 (Bai et al. 2018). However, urban systems can
harness the mega-trends of urbanization, digitalization, financialization
and growing sub-national commitment to smart cities, green cities,
resilient cities, sustainable cities and adaptive cities, for the type of

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

transformative change required by 1.5C-consistent pathways (SDSN,
2013; Parag and Sovacool, 2016; Roberts, 2016; Wachsmuth et al., 2016;
Revi, 2017; Solecki et al., 2018). There is a growing number of urban
climate responses driven by cost-effectiveness, development, work
creation and inclusivity considerations (Solecki et al., 2013; Ahern et
al., 2014; Floater et al., 2014; Revi et al., 2014a; Villarroel Walker et
al., 2014; Kennedy et al., 2015; Rodriguez, 2015; McGranahan et al.,
2016; Dodman et al., 2017a; Newman et al., 2017; UN-Habitat, 2017;
Westphal et al., 2017).
In addition, low-carbon cities could reduce the need to deploy carbon
dioxide removal (CDR) and solar radiation modification (SRM) (Fink,
2013; Thomson and Newman, 2016).
Cities are also places in which the risks associated with warming of
1.5C, such as heat stress, terrestrial and coastal flooding, new disease
vectors, air pollution and water scarcity, will coalesce (see Chapter 3,
Section 3.3) (Dodman et al., 2017a; Satterthwaite and Bartlett, 2017).
Unless adaptation and mitigation efforts are designed around the need
to decarbonize urban societies in the developed world and provide
low-carbon solutions to the needs of growing urban populations in
developing countries, they will struggle to deliver the pace or scale
of change required by 1.5C-consistent pathways (Hallegatte et al.,
2013; Villarroel Walker et al., 2014; Roberts, 2016; Solecki et al., 2018).
The pace and scale of urban climate responses can be enhanced by
attention to social equity (including gender equity), urban ecology
(Brown and McGranahan, 2016; Wachsmuth et al., 2016; Ziervogel
et al., 2016a) and participation in sub-national networks for climate
action (Cole, 2015; Jordan et al., 2015).
The long-lived urban transport, water and energy systems that will be
constructed in the next three decades to support urban populations in
developing countries and to retrofit cities in developed countries will
have to be different to those built in Europe and North America in the
20th century, if they are to support the required transitions (Freire et al.,
2014; Cartwright, 2015; McPhearson et al., 2016; Roberts, 2016; Lwasa,
2017). Recent literature identifies energy, infrastructure, appliances,
urban planning, transport and adaptation options as capable of
facilitating systemic change. It is these aspects of the urban system that
are discussed below and from which options in Section 4.5 are selected.

4.3.3.1

Urban energy systems

Urban economies tend to be more energy intensive than national
economies due to higher levels of per capita income, mobility and
consumption (Kennedy et al., 2015; Broto, 2017; Gota et al., 2018).
However, some urban systems have begun decoupling development
from the consumption of fossil fuel-powered energy through energy
efficiency, renewable energy and locally managed smart grids
(Dodman, 2009; Freire et al., 2014; Eyre et al., 2018; Glazebrook and
Newman, 2018).
The rapidly expanding cities of Africa and Asia, where energy poverty
currently undermines adaptive capacity (Westphal et al., 2017;
Satterthwaite et al., 2018), have the opportunity to benefit from recent
3

Chapter 4

price changes in renewable energy technologies to enable clean
energy access to citizens (SDG 7) (Cartwright, 2015; Watkins, 2015;
Lwasa, 2017; Kennedy et al., 2018; Teferi and Newman, 2018). This will
require strengthened energy governance in these countries (Eberhard
et al., 2017). Where renewable energy displaces paraffin, wood fuel
or charcoal feedstocks in informal urban settlements, it provides
the co-benefits of improved indoor air quality, reduced fire risk and
reduced deforestation, all of which can enhance adaptive capacity
and strengthen demand for this energy (Newham and Conradie, 2013;
Winkler, 2017; Kennedy et al., 2018; Teferi and Newman, 2018).

4.3.3.2

Urban infrastructure, buildings and appliances

Buildings are responsible for 32% of global energy consumption (IEA,
2016c) and have a large energy saving potential with available and
demonstrated technologies such as energy efficiency improvements
in technical installations and in thermal insulation (Toleikyte et al.,
2018) and energy sufficiency (Thomas et al., 2017). Kuramochi et
al. (2018) show that 1.5C-consistent pathways require building
emissions to be reduced by 80-90% by 2050, new construction to
be fossil-free and near-zero energy by 2020, and an increased rate of
energy refurbishment of existing buildings to 5% per annum in OECD
(Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries
(see also Section 4.2.1).
Based on the IEA-ETP (IEA, 2017g), Chapter 2 identifies large saving
potential in heating and cooling through improved building design,
efficient equipment, lighting and appliances. Several examples of
net zero energy in buildings are now available (Wells et al., 2018).
In existing buildings, refurbishment enables energy saving (Semprini
et al., 2017; Brambilla et al., 2018; D'Agostino and Parker, 2018; Sun
et al., 2018) and cost savings (Toleikyte et al., 2018; Zangheri et al.,
2018).
Reducing the energy embodied in building materials provides further
energy and GHG savings (Cabeza et al., 2013; Oliver and Morecroft,
2014; Koezjakov et al., 2018), in particular through increased use of biobased materials (Lupiek et al., 2015) and wood construction (Ramage
et al., 2017). The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP3)
estimates that improving embodied energy, thermal performance, and
direct energy use of buildings can reduce emissions by 1.9 GtCO2e yr -1
(UNEP, 2017b), with an additional reduction of 3 GtCO2e yr-1 through
energy efficient appliances and lighting (UNEP, 2017b). Further
increasing the energy efficiency of appliances and lighting, heating
and cooling offers the potential for further savings (Parikh and Parikh,
2016; Garg et al., 2017).
Smart technology, drawing on the internet of things (IoT) and building
information modelling, offers opportunities to accelerate energy
efficiency in buildings and cities (Moreno-Cruz and Keith, 2013; Hoy,
2016) (see also Section 4.4.4). Some cities in developing countries
are drawing on these technologies to adopt `leapfrog' infrastructure,
buildings and appliances to pursue low-carbon development (Newman
et al., 2017; Teferi and Newman, 2017) (Cross-Chapter Box 13 in
Chapter 5).

Currently called UN Environment.

331

4

Chapter 4

4.3.3.3

Urban transport and urban planning

Urban form impacts demand for energy (Sims et al., 2014) and other
welfare related factors: a meta-analysis of 300 papers reported
energy savings of 26 USD per person per year attributable to a 10%
increase in urban population density (Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani,
2017). Significant reductions in car use are associated with dense,
pedestrianized cities and towns and medium-density transit corridors
(Newman and Kenworthy, 2015; Newman et al., 2017) relative to lowdensity cities in which car dependency is high (Schiller and Kenworthy,
2018). Combined dense urban forms and new mass transit systems
in Shanghai and Beijing have yielded less car use (Gao and Newman,
2018) (see Box 4.9). Compact cities also create the passenger density
required to make public transport more financially viable (Rode et al.,
2017; Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani, 2017) and enable combinations of
cleaner fuel feedstocks and urban smart grids, in which vehicles form
part of the storage capacity (Oldenbroek et al., 2017). Similarly, the
spatial organization of urban energy influenced the trajectories of
urban development in cities as diverse as Hong Kong, Bengaluru and
Maputo (Broto, 2017).
The informal settlements of middle- and low-income cities, where urban
density is more typically associated with a range of water- and vectorborne health risks, may provide a notable exception to the adaptive
advantages of urban density (Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2013; Lilford et
al., 2017) unless new approaches and technologies are harnessed to
accelerate slum upgrading (Teferi and Newman, 2017).

4

Scenarios consistent with 1.5C depend on a roughly 15% reduction
in final energy use by the transport sector by 2050 relative to 2015
(Chapter 2, Figure 2.12). In one analysis the phasing out of fossil fuel
passenger vehicle sales by 2035-2050 was identified as a benchmark
for aligning with 1.5C-consistent pathways (Kuramochi et al., 2018).
Reducing emissions from transport has lagged the power sector (Sims
et al., 2014; Creutzig et al., 2015a), but evidence since AR5 suggests
that cities are urbanizing and re-urbanizing in ways that coordinate
transport sector adaptation and mitigation (Colenbrander et al., 2017;
Newman et al., 2017; Salvo et al., 2017; Gota et al., 2018). The global
transport sector could reduce 4.7 GtCO2e yr-1 (4.1-5.3) by 2030.
This is significantly more than is predicted by integrated assessment
models (UNEP, 2017b). Such a transition depends on cities that
enable modal shifts and avoided journeys and that provide incentives
for uptake of improved fuel efficiency and changes in urban design
that encourage walkable cities, non-motorized transport and shorter
commuter distances (IEA, 2016a; Mittal et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2016; Li and Loo, 2017). In at least 4 African cities, 43 Asian cities
and 54 Latin American cities, transit-oriented development (TOD),
has emerged as an organizing principle for urban growth and spatial
planning (Colenbrander et al., 2017; Lwasa, 2017; BRTData, 2018).
This trend is important to counter the rising demand for private cars in
developing-country cities (AfDB/OECD/UNDP, 2016). In India, TOD has
been combined with localized solar PV installations and new ways of
financing rail expansion (Sharma, 2018).
Cities pursuing sustainable transport benefit from reduced air pollution,
congestion and road fatalities and are able to harness the relationship
between transport systems, urban form, urban energy intensity
332

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

and social cohesion (Goodwin and Van Dender, 2013; Newman and
Kenworthy, 2015; Wee, 2015).
Technology and electrification trends since AR5 make carbon-efficient
urban transport easier (Newman et al., 2016), but realizing urban
transport's contribution to a 1.5C-consistent pathways will require
the type of governance that can overcome the financial, institutional,
behavioural and legal barriers to change (Geels, 2014; Bakker et al.,
2017).
Adaptation to a 1.5C world is enabled by urban design and spatial
planning policies that consider extreme weather conditions and reduce
displacement by climate related disasters (UNISDR, 2009; UN-Habitat,
2011; Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2013).
Building codes and technology standards for public lighting,
including traffic lights (Beccali et al., 2015), play a critical role in
reducing carbon emissions, enhancing urban climate resilience and
managing climate risk (Steenhof and Sparling, 2011; Parnell, 2015;
Shapiro, 2016; Evans et al., 2017). Building codes can support the
convergence to zero emissions from buildings (Wells et al., 2018) and
can be used retrofit the existing building stock for energy efficiency
(Ruparathna et al., 2016).
The application of building codes and standards for 1.5C-consistent
pathways will require improved enforcement, which can be a challenge
in developing countries where inspection resources are often limited
and codes are poorly tailored to local conditions (Ford et al., 2015c;
Chandel et al., 2016; Eisenberg, 2016; Shapiro, 2016; Hess and Kelman,
2017; Mavhura et al., 2017). In all countries, building codes can be
undermined by industry interests and can be maladaptive if they
prevent buildings or land use from evolving to reduce climate impacts
(Eisenberg, 2016; Shapiro, 2016).
The deficit in building codes and standards in middle-income
and developing-country cities need not be a constraint to more
energy-efficient and resilient buildings (Tait and Euston-Brown,
2017). For example, the relatively high price that poor households
pay for unreliable and at times dangerous household energy
in African cities has driven the uptake of renewable energy and
energy efficiency technologies in the absence of regulations or
fiscal incentives (Eberhard et al., 2011, 2016; Cartwright, 2015;
Watkins, 2015). The Kuyasa Housing Project in Khayelitsha, one of
Cape Town's poorest suburbs, created significant mitigation and
adaptation benefits by installing ceilings, solar water heaters and
energy-efficient lightbulbs in houses independent of the formal
housing or electrification programme (Winkler, 2017).

4.3.3.4

Electrification of cities and transport

The electrification of urban systems, including transport, has shown
global progress since AR5 (IEA, 2016a; Kennedy et al., 2018; Schiller
and Kenworthy, 2018). High growth rates are now appearing in
electric vehicles (Figure 4.1), electric bikes and electric transit (IEA,
2018), which would need to displace fossil fuel-powered passenger
vehicles by 2035-2050 to remain in line with 1.5C-consistent
pathways. China's 2017 Road Map calls for 20% of new vehicle

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

in IAMs (Bows-Larkin, 2015), but could be reduced by between a third
and two-thirds through energy efficiency measures and operational
changes (Dahlmann et al., 2016). On shorter intercity trips, aviation
could be replaced by high-speed electric trains drawing on renewable
energy (Akerman, 2011). Some progress has been made on the use
of electricity in planes and shipping (Grewe et al., 2017) though no
commercial applications have arisen. Studies indicate that biofuels are
the most viable means of decarbonizing intercontinental travel, given
their technical characteristics, energy content and affordability (Wise
et al., 2017). The lifecycle emissions of bio-based jet fuels and marine
fuels can be considerable (Cox et al., 2014; IEA, 2017g) depending on
their location (Elshout et al., 2014), but can be reduced by feedstock
and conversion technology choices (de Jong et al., 2017).
Figure 4.1 | Increase of the global electric car stock by country (2013-
2017). The grey line is battery electric vehicles (BEV) only while the black line includes
both BEV and plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEV). Source: (IEA, 2018). Based on IEA data
from Global EV Outlook 2018 (c) OECD/IEA 2018, IEA Publishing.

sales to be electric. India is aiming for exclusively electric vehicles
(EVs) by 2032 (NITI Aayog and RMI, 2017). Globally, EV sales were
up 42% in 2016 relative to 2015, and in the United States EV sales
were up 36% over the same period (Johnson and Walker, 2016).
The extent of electric railways in and between cities has expanded
since AR5 (IEA, 2016a; Mittal et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Li and
Loo, 2017). In high-income cities there is medium evidence for the
decoupling of car use and wealth since AR5 (Newman, 2017). In cities
where private vehicle ownership is expected to increase, less carbonintensive fuel sources and reduced car journeys will be necessary as
well as electrification of all modes of transport (Mittal et al., 2016;
van Vuuren et al., 2017). Some recent urban data show a decoupling
of urban growth and GHG emissions (Newman and Kenworthy, 2015)
and that `peak car' has been reached in Shanghai and Beijing (Gao and
Kenworthy, 2017) and beyond (Manville et al., 2017) (also see Box 4.9).
An estimated 800 cities globally have operational bike-share schemes (E.
Fishman et al., 2015), and China had 250 million electric bicycles in 2017
(Newman et al., 2017). Advances in information and communication
technologies (ICT) offer cities the chance to reduce urban transport
congestion and fuel consumption by making better use of the urban
vehicle fleet through car sharing, driverless cars and coordinated public
transport, especially when electrified (Wee, 2015; Glazebrook and
Newman, 2018). Advances in `big-data' can assist in creating a better
understanding of the connections between cities, green infrastructure,
environmental services and health (Jennings et al., 2016) and improve
decision-making in urban development (Lin et al., 2017).

4.3.3.5

Shipping, freight and aviation

International transport hubs, including airports and ports, and the
associated mobility of people are major economic contributors to most
large cities even while under the governance of national authorities
and international legislation. Shipping, freight and aviation systems
have grown rapidly, and little progress has been made since AR5 on
replacing fossil fuels, though some trials are continuing (Zhang, 2016;
Bouman et al., 2017; EEA, 2017). Aviation emissions do not yet feature

In recent years the potential for transport to use synfuels, such as
ethanol, methanol, methane, ammonia and hydrogen, created from
renewable electricity and CO2, has gained momentum but has not yet
demonstrated benefits on a scale consistent with 1.5C pathways (Ezeji,
2017; Fasihi et al., 2017). Decarbonizing the fuel used by the world's
60,000 large ocean vessels faces governance barriers and the need for
a global policy (Bows and Smith, 2012; IRENA, 2015; Rehmatulla and
Smith, 2015). Low-emission marine fuels could simultaneously address
sulphur and black carbon issues in ports and around waterways and
accelerate the electrification of all large ports (Bouman et al., 2017;
IEA, 2017g).

4.3.3.6

Climate-resilient land use

Urban land use influences energy intensity, risk exposure and adaptive
capacity (Carter et al., 2015; Araos et al., 2016a; Ewing et al., 2016;
Newman et al., 2016; Broto, 2017). Accordingly, urban land-use
planning can contribute to climate mitigation and adaptation (Parnell,
2015; Francesch-Huidobro et al., 2017) and the growing number of
urban climate adaptation plans provide instruments to do this (Carter
et al., 2015; Dhar and Khirfan, 2017; Siders, 2017; Stults and Woodruff,
2017). Adaptation plans can reduce exposure to urban flood risk
(which, in a 1.5C world, could double relative to 1976-2005; Alfieri
et al., 2017), heat stress (Chapter 3, Section 3.5.5.8), fire risk (Chapter
3, Section 3.4.3.4) and sea level rise (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.5.1)
(Schleussner et al., 2016).
Cities can reduce their risk exposure by considering investment in
infrastructure and buildings that are more resilient to warming of
1.5C or beyond. Where adaptation planning and urban planning
generate the type of local participation that enhances capacity to cope
with risks, they can be mutually supportive processes (Archer et al.,
2014; Kettle et al., 2014; Campos et al., 2016; Chu et al., 2017; Siders,
2017; Underwood et al., 2017). Not all adaptation plans are reported
as effective (Measham et al., 2011; Hetz, 2016; Woodruff and Stults,
2016; Mahlkow and Donner, 2017), especially in developing-country
cities (Kiunsi, 2013). In cases where adaptation planning may further
marginalize poor citizens, either through limited local control over
adaptation priorities or by displacing impacts onto poorer communities,
successful urban risk management would need to consider factors
such as justice, equity, and inclusive participation, as well as recognize
the political economy of adaptation (Archer, 2016; Shi et al., 2016;
Ziervogel et al., 2016a, 2017; Chu et al., 2017).
333

4

Chapter 4

4.3.3.7

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Green urban infrastructure and ecosystem services

Integrating and promoting green urban infrastructure (including
street trees, parks, green roofs and facades, and water features) into
city planning can be difficult (Leck et al., 2015) but increases urban
resilience to impacts of 1.5C warming (Table 4.2) in ways that can be
more cost-effective than conventional infrastructure (Cartwright et al.,
2013; Culwick and Bobbins, 2016).
Realizing climate benefits from urban green infrastructure sometimes
requires a city-region perspective (Wachsmuth et al., 2016). Where
the urban impact on ecological systems in and beyond the city is
appreciated, the potential for transformative change exists (Soderlund
and Newman, 2015; Ziervogel et al., 2016a), and a locally appropriate
combination of green space, ecosystem goods and services and the
built environment can increase the set of urban adaptation options
(Puppim de Oliveira et al., 2013).
Milan, Italy, a city with deliberate urban greening policies, planted
10,000 hectares of new forest and green areas over the last two
decades (Sanesi et al., 2017). The accelerated growth of urban trees,
relative to rural trees, in several regions of the world is expected to
decrease tree longevity (Pretzsch et al., 2017), requiring monitoring
and additional management of urban trees if their contribution to
urban ecosystem-based adaptation and mitigation is to be maintained
in a 1.5C world (Buckeridge, 2015; Pretzsch et al., 2017).

4.3.3.8

4

Sustainable urban water and environmental services

Urban water supply and wastewater treatment is energy intensive and
currently accounts for significant GHG emissions (Nair et al., 2014).
Cities can integrate sustainable water resource management and the
supply of water services in ways that support mitigation, adaptation
and development through waste water recycling and storm water
diversion (Xue et al., 2015; Poff et al., 2016). Governance and finance
challenges complicate balancing sustainable water supply and rising
urban demand, particularly in low-income cities (Bettini et al., 2015;
Deng and Zhao, 2015; Hill Clarvis and Engle, 2015; Lemos, 2015;
Margerum and Robinson, 2015).

Urban surface-sealing with impervious materials affects the volume
and velocity of runoff and flooding during intense rainfall (Skougaard
Kaspersen et al., 2015), but urban design in many cities now seeks
to mediate runoff, encourage groundwater recharge and enhance
water quality (Liu et al., 2014; Lamond et al., 2015; Voskamp and
Van de Ven, 2015; Costa et al., 2016; Mguni et al., 2016; Xie et al.,
2017). Challenges remain for managing intense rainfall events that are
reported to be increasing in frequency and intensity in some locations
(Ziervogel et al., 2016b), and urban flooding is expected to increase at
1.5C of warming (Alfieri et al., 2017). This risk falls disproportionately
on women and poor people in cities (Mitlin, 2005; Chu et al., 2016;
Ziervogel et al., 2016b; Chant et al., 2017; Dodman et al., 2017a, b).
Nexus approaches that highlight urban areas as socio-ecological
systems can support policy coherence (Rasul and Sharma, 2016) and
sustainable urban livelihoods (Biggs et al., 2015). The water-energy-
food (WEF) nexus is especially important to growing urban populations
(Tacoli et al., 2013; Lwasa et al., 2014; Villarroel Walker et al., 2014).

4.3.4

Industrial Systems Transitions

Industry consumes about one-third of global final energy and contributes,
directly and indirectly, about one-third of global GHG emissions (IPCC,
2014b). If the increase in global mean temperature is to remain under
1.5C, modelling indicates that industry cannot emit more than 2
GtCO2 in 2050, corresponding to a reduction of between 67 and 91%
(interquartile range) in GHG emissions compared to 2010 (see Chapter
2, Figures 2.20 and 2.21, and Table 4.1). Moreover, the consequences
of warming of 1.5C or more pose substantial challenges for industrial
diversity. This section will first briefly discuss the limited literature on
adaptation options for industry. Subsequently, new literature since AR5
on the feasibility of industrial mitigation options will be discussed.
Research assessing adaptation actions by industry indicates that only
a small fraction of corporations has developed adaptation measures.
Studies of adaptation in the private sector remain limited (Agrawala et
al., 2011; Linnenluecke et al., 2015; Averchenkova et al., 2016; Bremer
and Linnenluecke, 2016; Pauw et al., 2016a) and for 1.5C are largely

Table 4.2 | Green urban infrastructure and benefits
Green
Infrastructure

Adaptation
Benefits

Mitigation
Benefits

References

Urban tree planting,
urban parks

Reduced heat island
effect, psychological
benefits

Permeable surfaces

Water recharge

Less cement in city,
some bio-sequestration,
less water pumping

Liu et al., 2014; Lamond et al., 2015; Skougaard Kaspersen et al., 2015; Voskamp
and Van de Ven, 2015; Costa et al., 2016; Mguni et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2017

Forest retention, urban
agricultural land

Flood mediation,
healthy lifestyles

Reduced air pollution

Nowak et al., 2006; Tallis et al., 2011; Elmqvist et al., 2013; Buckeridge, 2015; Culwick and
Bobbins, 2016; Panagopoulos et al., 2016; Stevenson et al., 2016; R. White et al., 2017

Wetland restoration,
riparian buffer zones

Reduced urban flooding, low-skilled local
work, sense of place

Some bio-sequestration,
less energy spent on
water treatment

Cartwright et al., 2013; Elmqvist et al., 2015; Brown and McGranahan, 2016;
Camps-Calvet et al., 2016; Culwick and Bobbins, 2016; McPhearson et al.,
2016; Ziervogel et al., 2016b; Collas et al., 2017; F. Li et al., 2017

Biodiverse urban habitat

Psychological benefits,
inner-city recreation

Carbon sequestration

Beatley, 2011; Elmqvist et al., 2015; Brown and McGranahan, 2016; Camps-Calvet et al., 2016;
McPhearson et al., 2016; Collas et al., 2017; F. Li et al., 2017

334

Less cement, reduced
air-conditioning use

Demuzere et al., 2014; Mullaney et al., 2015; Soderlund and Newman, 2015;
Beaudoin and Gosselin, 2016; Green et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2017

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

absent. This knowledge gap is particularly evident for medium-sized
enterprises and in low- and middle-income nations (Surminski, 2013).
Depending on the industrial sector, mitigation consistent with 1.5C
would mean, across industries, a reduction of final energy demand
by one-third, an increase of the rate of recycling of materials and the
development of a circular economy in industry (Lewandowski, 2016;
Linder and Williander, 2017), the substitution of materials in highcarbon products with those made up of renewable materials (e.g., wood
instead of steel or cement in the construction sector, natural textile
fibres instead of plastics), and a range of deep emission reduction
options, including use of bio-based feedstocks, low-emission heat
sources, electrification of production processes, and/or capture and
storage of all CO2 emissions by 2050 (Ahman et al., 2016). Some of the
choices for mitigation options and routes for GHG-intensive industry
are discrete and potentially subject to path dependency: if an industry
goes one way (e.g., in keeping existing processes), it will be harder to
transition to process change (e.g., electrification) (Bataille et al., 2018).
In the context of rising demand for construction, an increasing share
of industrial production may be based in developing countries (N. Li et
al., 2017), where current efficiencies may be lower than in developed
countries, and technical and institutional feasibility may differ (Ma et
al., 2015).
Except for energy efficiency, costs of disruptive change associated
with hydrogen- or electricity-based production, bio-based feedstocks
and carbon dioxide capture, (utilization) and storage (CC(U)S) for
trade-sensitive industrial sectors (in particular the iron and steel,
petrochemical and refining industries) make policy action by individual
countries challenging because of competitiveness concerns (Ahman et
al., 2016; Nabernegg et al., 2017).
Table 4.3 provides an overview of applicable mitigation options for key
industrial sectors.

4.3.4.1

Energy efficiency

are available. In general, their feasibility depends on lowering capital
costs and raising awareness and expertise (Wesseling et al., 2017).
General-purpose technologies, such as ICT, and energy management
tools can improve the prospects of energy efficiency in industry (see
Section 4.4.4).
Cross-sector technologies and practices, which play a role in all
industrial sectors including small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and non-energy intensive industry, also offer potential for considerable
energy efficiency improvements. They include: (i) motor systems (for
example electric motors, variable speed drives, pumps, compressors
and fans), responsible for about 10% of worldwide industrial energy
consumption, with a global energy efficiency improvement potential of
around 20-25% (Napp et al., 2014); and (ii) steam systems, responsible
for about 30% of industrial energy consumption and energy saving
potentials of about 10% (Hasanbeigi et al., 2014; Napp et al., 2014).
Waste heat recovery from industry has substantial potential for energy
efficiency and emission reduction (Forman et al., 2016). Low awareness
and competition from other investments limit the feasibility of such
options (Napp et al., 2014).

4.3.4.2

Recycling materials and developing a circular economy can be
institutionally challenging, as it requires advanced capabilities (Henry et
al., 2006) and organizational changes (Cooper-Searle et al., 2018), but
has advantages in terms of cost, health, governance and environment
(Ali et al., 2017). An assessment of the impacts on energy use and
environmental issues is not available, but substitution could play a large
role in reducing emissions (Ahman et al., 2016) although its potential
depends on the demand for material and the turnover rate of, for
example, buildings (Haas et al., 2015). Material substitution and CO2
storage options are under development, for example, the use of algae
and renewable energy for carbon fibre production, which could become
a net sink of CO2 (Arnold et al., 2018).

4.3.4.3
Isolated efficiency implementation in energy-intensive industries is a
necessary but insufficient condition for deep emission reductions (Napp
et al., 2014; Aden, 2018). Various options specific to different industries

Substitution and circularity

Bio-based feedstocks

Bio-based feedstock processes could be seen as part of the circular
materials economy (see section above). In several sectors, bio-based

Table 4.3 | Overview of different mitigation options potentially consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C and applicable to main industrial sectors, including examples of
application (Napp et al., 2014; Boulamanti and Moya, 2017; Wesseling et al., 2017).
Industrial mitigation option
Process and Energy
Efficiency
Bio-based
Circularity & Substitution
Electrification & Hydrogen
Carbon dioxide capture,
utilization and storage

Iron/Steel

Cement

Refineries and
Petrochemicals

Chemicals

Can make a difference of between 10% and 50%, depending on the plant. Relevant but not enough for 1.5C
Coke can be made from biomass
instead of coal

Partial (only energy-related
emissions)

More recycling and replacement by low-emission materials,
including alternative chemistries for cement
Direct reduction with hydrogen
Heat generation through electricity

Partial (only electrified heat
generation)

Possible for process emissions and energy. Reduces
emissions by 80-95%, and net emissions can become
negative when combined with biofuel

Biomass can replace fossil feedstocks
Limited potential
Electrified heat and hydrogen generation
Can be applied to energy emissions and different stacks but not on
emissions of products in the use phase (e.g., gasoline)

335

4

Chapter 4

feedstocks would leave the production process of materials relatively
untouched, and a switch would not affect the product quality,
making the option more attractive. However, energy requirements
for processing bio-based feedstocks are often high, costs are also
still higher, and the emissions over the full life cycle, both upstream
and downstream, could be significant (Wesseling et al., 2017). Biobased feedstocks may put pressure on natural resources by increasing
land demand by biodiversity impacts beyond bioenergy demand for
electricity, transport and buildings (Slade et al., 2014), and, partly as a
result, face barriers in public acceptance (Sleenhoff et al., 2015).

4.3.4.4

Electrification and hydrogen

Electrification of manufacturing processes would constitute a
significant technological challenge and would entail a more disruptive
innovation in industry than bio-based or CCS options to get to very low
or zero emissions, except potentially in steel-making (Philibert, 2017).
The disruptive characteristics could potentially lead to stranded assets,
and could reduce political feasibility and industry support (Ahman
et al., 2016). Electrification of manufacturing would require further
technological development in industry, as well as an ample supply of
cost-effective low-emission electricity (Philibert, 2017).

4

Low-emission hydrogen can be produced by natural gas with CCS,
by electrolysis of water powered by zero-emission electricity, or
potentially in the future by generation IV nuclear reactors. Feasibility of
electrification and use of hydrogen in production processes or fuel cells
is affected by technical development (in terms of efficient hydrogen
production and electrification of processes), by geophysical factors
related to the availability of low-emission electricity (MacKay, 2013),
by associated public perception and by economic feasibility, except
in areas with ample solar and/or wind resources (Philibert, 2017;
Wesseling et al., 2017).

4.3.4.5

CO2 capture, utilization and storage in industry

CO2 capture in industry is generally considered more feasible than CCS
in the power sector (Section 4.3.1) or from bioenergy sources (Section
4.3.7), although CCS in industry faces similar barriers. Almost all of
the current full-scale (>1MtCO2 yr-1) CCS projects capture CO2 from
industrial sources, including the Sleipner project in Norway, which has
been injecting CO2 from a gas facility in an offshore saline formation
since 1996 (Global CCS Institute, 2017). Compared to the power
sector, retrofitting CCS on existing industrial plants would leave the
production process of materials relatively untouched (Ahman et al.,
2016), though significant investments and modifications still have to
be made. Some industries, in particular cement, emit CO2 as inherent
process emissions and can therefore not reduce emissions to zero
without CC(U)S. CO2 stacks in some industries have a high economic
and technical feasibility for CO2 capture as the CO2 concentration in
the exhaust gases is relatively high (IPCC, 2005b; Leeson et al., 2017),
but others require strong modifications in the production process,
limiting technical and economic feasibility, though costs remain
lower than other deep GHG reduction options (Rubin et al., 2015).
There are indications that the energy use in CO2 capture through
amine solvents (for solvent regeneration) can decrease by around
60%, from 5 GJ tCO2-1 in 2005 to 2 GJ tCO2-1 in the best-performing
336

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

current pilot plants (Idem et al., 2015), increasing both technical and
economic potential for this option. The heterogeneity of industrial
production processes might point to the need for specific institutional
arrangements to incentivize industrial CCS (Mikunda et al., 2014), and
may decrease institutional feasibility.
Whether carbon dioxide utilization (CCU) can contribute to limiting
warming to 1.5C depends on the origin of the CO2 (fossil, biogenic
or atmospheric), the source of electricity for converting the CO2
or regenerating catalysts, and the lifetime of the product. Review
studies indicate that CO2 utilization in industry has a small role to
play in limiting warming to 1.5C because of the limited potential of
reusing CO2 with currently available technologies and the re-emission
of CO2 when used as a fuel (IPCC, 2005b; Mac Dowell et al., 2017).
However, new developments could make CCU more feasible, in
particular in CO2 use as a feedstock for carbon-based materials that
would isolate CO2 from the atmosphere for a long time, and in lowcost, low-emission electricity that would make the energy use of CO2
capture more sustainable. The conversion of CO2 to fuels using zeroemission electricity has a lower technical, economic and environmental
feasibility than direct CO2 capture and storage from industry (Abanades
et al., 2017), although the economic prospects have improved recently
(Philibert, 2017).

4.3.5

Overarching Adaptation Options Supporting
Adaptation Transitions

This section assesses overarching adaptation options -specific solutions
from which actors can choose and make decisions to reduce climate
vulnerability and build resilience. We examine their feasibility in
the context of transitions of energy, land and ecosystem, urban and
infrastructure, and industrial systems here, and further in Section 4.5.
These options can contribute to creating an enabling environment for
adaptation (see Table 4.4 and Section 4.4).

4.3.5.1

Disaster risk management (DRM)

DRM is a process for designing, implementing and evaluating strategies,
policies and measures to improve the understanding of disaster risk,
and promoting improvement in disaster preparedness, response and
recovery (IPCC, 2012). There is increased demand to integrate DRM and
adaptation (Howes et al., 2015; Kelman et al., 2015; Serrao-Neumann
et al., 2015; Archer, 2016; Rose, 2016; van der Keur et al., 2016; Kelman,
2017; Wallace, 2017) to reduce vulnerability, but institutional, technical
and financial capacity challenges in frontline agencies constitute
constraints (medium evidence, high agreement) (Eakin et al., 2015; Kita,
2017; Wallace, 2017).

4.3.5.2

Risk sharing and spreading

Risks associated with 1.5C warming (Chapter 3, Section 3.4) may
increase the demand for options that share and spread financial
burdens. Formal, market-based (re)insurance spreads risk and
provides a financial buffer against the impacts of climate hazards
(Linnerooth-Bayer and Hochrainer-Stigler, 2015; Wolfrom and YokoiArai, 2015; O'Hare et al., 2016; Glaas et al., 2017; Patel et al., 2017).
As an alternative to traditional indemnity-based insurance, index-

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

based micro-crop and livestock insurance programmes have been
rolled out in regions with less developed insurance markets (Akter et
al., 2016, 2017; Jensen and Barrett, 2017). There is medium evidence
and medium agreement on the feasibility of insurance for adaptation,
with financial, social, and institutional barriers to implementation and
uptake, especially in low-income nations (Garcia Romero and Molina,
2015; Joyette et al., 2015; Lashley and Warner, 2015; Jin et al., 2016).
Social protection programmes include cash and in-kind transfers to
protect poor and vulnerable households from the impact of economic
shocks, natural disasters and other crises (World Bank, 2017b), and
can build generic adaptive capacity and reduce vulnerability when
combined with a comprehensive climate risk management approach
(medium evidence, medium agreement) (Devereux, 2016; Lemos et al.,
2016).

4.3.5.3

Education and learning

Educational adaptation options motivate adaptation through building
awareness (Butler et al., 2016; Myers et al., 2017), leveraging multiple
knowledge systems (Pearce et al., 2015; Janif et al., 2016), developing
participatory action research and social learning processes (Butler and
Adamowski, 2015; Ensor and Harvey, 2015; Butler et al., 2016; Thi
Hong Phuong et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2018), strengthening extension
services, and building mechanisms for learning and knowledge sharing
through community-based platforms, international conferences and
knowledge networks (Vinke-de Kruijf and Pahl-Wostl, 2016) (medium
evidence, high agreement).

4.3.5.4

Population health and health system adaptation options

Climate change will exacerbate existing health challenges (Chapter 3,
Section 3.4.7). Options for enhancing current health services include
providing access to safe water and improved sanitation, enhancing
access to essential services such as vaccination, and developing or
strengthening integrated surveillance systems (WHO, 2015). Combining
these with iterative management can facilitate effective adaptation
(medium evidence, high agreement).

4.3.5.5

Chapter 4

4.3.5.6

Human migration

Human migration, whether planned, forced or voluntary, is increasingly
gaining attention as a response, particularly where climatic risks are
becoming severe (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.10.2). There is medium
evidence and low agreement as to whether migration is adaptive,
in relation to cost effectiveness concerns (Grecequet et al., 2017)
and scalability (Brzoska and Frohlich, 2016; Gemenne and Blocher,
2017; Grecequet et al., 2017). Migrating can have mixed outcomes
on reducing socio-economic vulnerability (Birk and Rasmussen,
2014; Kothari, 2014; Adger et al., 2015; Betzold, 2015; Kelman, 2015;
Grecequet et al., 2017; Melde et al., 2017; World Bank, 2017a; Kumari
Rigaud et al., 2018) and its feasibility is constrained by low political
and legal acceptability and inadequate institutional capacity (Betzold,
2015; Methmann and Oels, 2015; Brzoska and Frohlich, 2016; Gemenne
and Blocher, 2017; Grecequet et al., 2017; Yamamoto et al., 2017).

4.3.5.7

Climate services

There is medium evidence and high agreement that climate services
can play a critical role in aiding adaptation decision-making (Vaughan
and Dessai, 2014; Wood et al., 2014; Lourenco et al., 2016; Trenberth et
al., 2016; Singh et al., 2017; Vaughan et al., 2018). The higher uptake
of short-term climate information such as weather advisories and
daily forecasts contrast with lesser use of longer-term information
such as seasonal forecasts and multi-decadal projections (Singh et al.,
2017; Vaughan et al., 2018). Climate service interventions have met
challenges with scaling up due to low capacity, inadequate institutions,
and difficulties in maintaining systems beyond pilot project stage
(Sivakumar et al., 2014; Tall et al., 2014; Gebru et al., 2015; Singh et
al., 2016b), and technical, institutional, design, financial and capacity
barriers to the application of climate information for better decisionmaking remain (Briley et al., 2015; WMO, 2015; L. Jones et al., 2016;
Lourenco et al., 2016; Snow et al., 2016; Harjanne, 2017; Singh et al.,
2017; C.J. White et al., 2017).

Indigenous knowledge

There is medium evidence and high agreement that indigenous
knowledge is critical for adaptation, underpinning adaptive capacity
through the diversity of indigenous agro-ecological and forest
management systems, collective social memory, repository of
accumulated experience and social networks (Hiwasaki et al., 2015;
Pearce et al., 2015; Mapfumo et al., 2016; Sherman et al., 2016; Ingty,
2017) (Box 4.3). Indigenous knowledge is threatened by acculturation,
dispossession of land rights and land grabbing, rapid environmental
changes, colonization and social change, resulting in increasing
vulnerability to climate change - which climate policy can exacerbate
if based on limited understanding of indigenous worldviews (Thornton
and Manasfi, 2010; Ford, 2012; Nakashima et al., 2012; McNamara
and Prasad, 2014). Many scholars argue that recognition of indigenous
rights, governance systems and laws is central to adaptation, mitigation
and sustainable development (Magni, 2017; Thornton and Comberti,
2017; Pearce, 2018).

337

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.4 | Assessment of overarching adaptation options in relation to enabling conditions. For more details, see Supplementary Material 4.SM.2.
Option
Disaster risk
management
(DRM)

Enabling Conditions

Examples

Governance and institutional capacity: supports post-disaster
recovery and reconstruction (Kelman et al., 2015; Kull et al., 2016).

Early warning systems (Anacona et al., 2015), and monitoring of dangerous lakes and
surrounding slopes (including using remote sensing) offer DRM opportunities
(Emmer et al., 2016; Milner et al., 2017).

Institutional capacity and finance: buffers climate risk
(Wolfrom and Yokoi-Arai, 2015; O'Hare et al., 2016; Glaas
et al., 2017; Jenkins et al., 2017; Patel et al., 2017).

In 2007, the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility was formed to pool risk from
tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and excess rainfalls (Murphy et al., 2012; CCRIF, 2017).

Social safety nets

Institutional capacity and finance: builds generic adaptive capacity
and reduces social vulnerability (Weldegebriel and Prowse, 2013;
Eakin et al., 2014; Lemos et al., 2016; Schwan and Yu, 2017).

In sub-Saharan Africa, cash transfer programmes targeting poor communities have proven
successful in smoothing household welfare and food security during droughts, strengthening
community ties, and reducing debt levels (del Ninno et al., 2016; Asfaw et al., 2017;
Asfaw and Davis, 2018).

Education and
learning

Behavioural change and institutional capacity: social learning
strengthens adaptation and affects longer-term change (Clemens
et al., 2015; Ensor and Harvey, 2015; Henly-Shepard et al., 2015).

Participatory scenario planning is a process by which multiple stakeholders work together
to envision future scenarios under a range of climatic conditions (Oteros-Rozas et al.,
2015; Butler et al., 2016; Flynn et al., 2018).

Institutional capacity: 1.5C warming will primarily exacerbate
existing health challenges (K.R. Smith et al., 2014), which can
be targeted by enhancing health services.

Heatwave early warning and response systems coordinate the implementation of multiple
measures in response to predicted extreme temperatures (e.g., public announcements,
opening public cooling shelters, distributing information on heat stress symptoms)
(Knowlton et al., 2014; Takahashi et al., 2015; Nitschke et al., 2016, 2017).

Indigenous
knowledge

Institutional capacity and behavioural change: knowledge of
environmental conditions helps communities detect and monitor
change (Johnson et al., 2015; Mistry and Berardi, 2016;
Williams et al., 2017).

Options such as integration of indigenous knowledge into resource management systems
and school curricula, are identified as potential adaptations (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013;
McNamara and Prasad, 2014; MacDonald et al., 2015; Pearce et al., 2015; Chambers
et al., 2017; Inamara and Thomas, 2017).

Human migration

Governance: revising and adopting migration issues in national
disaster risk management policies, National Adaptation Plans
and NDCs (Kuruppu and Willie, 2015; Yamamoto et al., 2017).

In dryland India, populations in rural regions already experiencing 1.5C warming are
migrating to cities (Gajjar et al., 2018) but are inadequately covered by existing
policies (Bhagat, 2017).

Climate services

Technological innovation: rapid technical development (due to
increased financial inputs and growing demand) is improving
quality of climate information provided (Rogers and Tsirkunov,
2010; Clements et al., 2013; Perrels et al., 2013; Gasc et al., 2014;
WMO, 2015; Roudier et al., 2016).

Climate services are seeing wide application in sectors such as agriculture, health,
disaster management and insurance (Lourenco et al., 2016; Vaughan et al., 2018),
with implications for adaptation decision-making (Singh et al., 2017).

Risk sharing
and spreading:
insurance

Population health
and health system

4
Cross-Chapter Box 9 | Risks, Adaptation Interventions, and Implications for Sustainable Development
and Equity Across Four Social-Ecological Systems: Arctic, Caribbean, Amazon, and Urban
Authors:
Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Malcolm E. Araos (Canada), Amir Bazaz (India), Marcos Buckeridge (Brazil), Ines Camilloni
(Argentina), James Ford (UK/Canada), Bronwyn Hayward (New Zealand), Shagun Mehrotra (USA/India), Antony Payne (UK), Patricia
Pinho (Brazil), Aromar Revi (India), Kevon Rhiney (Jamaica), Chandni Singh (India), William Solecki (USA), Avelino Suarez (Cuba),
Michael Taylor (Jamaica), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas).
This box presents four case studies from different social-ecological systems as examples of risks of 1.5C warming and higher
(Chapter 3); adaptation options that respond to these risks (Chapter 4); and their implications for poverty, livelihoods and
sustainability (Chapter 5). It is not yet possible to generalize adaptation effectiveness across regions due to a lack of empirical
studies and monitoring and evaluation of current efforts.
Arctic
The Arctic is undergoing the most rapid climate change globally (Larsen et al., 2014), warming by 1.9C over the last 30 years
(Walsh, 2014; Grosse et al., 2016). For 2C of global warming relative to pre-industrial levels, chances of an ice-free Arctic during
summer are substantially higher than at 1.5C (see Chapter 3, Sections 3.3.5 and 3.3.8), with permafrost melt, increased instances
of storm surge, and extreme weather events anticipated along with later ice freeze up, earlier break up, and a longer ice-free open
water season (Bring et al., 2016; DeBeer et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2016; Chadburn et al., 2017; Melvin et al., 2017). Negative impacts
on health, infrastructure, and economic sectors (AMAP, 2017a, b, 2018) are projected, although the extension of the summer oceanshipping season has potential economic opportunities (Ford et al., 2015b; Dawson et al., 2016; Ng et al., 2018).

338

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Cross Chapter Box 9 (continued)

Communities, many with indigenous roots, have adapted to environmental change, developing or shifting harvesting activities and
patterns of travel and transitioning economic systems (Forbes et al., 2009; Wenzel, 2009; Ford et al., 2015b; Pearce et al., 2015),
although emotional and psychological effects have been documented (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018). Besides
climate change (Keskitalo et al., 2011; Loring et al., 2016), economic and social conditions can constrain the capacity to adapt unless
resources and cooperation are available from public and private sector actors (AMAP, 2017a, 2018) (see Chapter 5, Box 5.3). In
Alaska, the cumulative economic impacts of climate change on public infrastructure are projected at 4.2 billion USD to 5.5 billion
USD from 2015 to 2099, with adaptation efforts halving these estimates (Melvin et al., 2017). Marginalization, colonization, and
land dispossession provide broader underlying challenges facing many communities across the circumpolar north in adapting to
change (Ford et al., 2015a; Sejersen, 2015) (see Section 4.3.5).
Adaptation opportunities include alterations to building codes and infrastructure design, disaster risk management, and surveillance
(Ford et al., 2014a; AMAP, 2017a, b; Labbe et al., 2017). Most adaptation initiatives are currently occurring at local levels in response
to both observed and projected environmental changes as well as social and economic stresses (Ford et al., 2015a). In a recent study
of Canada, most adaptations were found to be in the planning stages (Labbe et al., 2017). Studies have suggested that a number of
the adaptation actions are not sustainable, lack evaluation frameworks, and hold potential for maladaptation (Loboda, 2014; Ford et
al., 2015a; Larsson et al., 2016). Utilizing indigenous and local knowledge and stakeholder engagement can aid the development of
adaptation policies and broader sustainable development, along with more proactive and regionally coherent adaptation plans and
actions, and regional cooperation (e.g., through the Arctic Council) (Larsson et al., 2016; AMAP, 2017a; Melvin et al., 2017; Forbis Jr
and Hayhoe, 2018) (see Section 4.3.5).
Caribbean Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and Territories
Extreme weather, linked to tropical storms and hurricanes, represent one of the largest risks facing Caribbean island nations
(Chapter 3, Section 3.4.5.3). Non-economic damages include detrimental health impacts, forced displacement and destruction of
cultural heritages. Projections of increased frequency of the most intense storms at 1.5C and higher warming levels (Wehner et
al., 2018; Chapter 3, Section 3.3.6; Box 3.5) are a significant cause for concern, making adaptation a matter of survival (Mycoo and
Donovan, 2017).
Despite a shared vulnerability arising from commonalities in location, circumstance and size (Bishop and Payne, 2012; Nurse et al.,
2014), adaptation approaches are nuanced by differences in climate governance, affecting vulnerability and adaptive capacity (see
Section 4.4.1). Three cases exemplify differences in disaster risk management.

4

Cuba: Together with a robust physical infrastructure and human-resource base (Kirk, 2017), Cuba has implemented an effective
civil defence system for emergency preparedness and disaster response, centred around community mobilization and preparedness
(Kirk, 2017). Legislation to manage disasters, an efficient and robust early warning system, emergency stockpiles, adequate shelter
system and continuous training and education of the population help create a `culture of risk' (Isayama and Ono, 2015; Lizarralde
et al., 2015) which reduces vulnerability to extreme events (Pichler and Striessnig, 2013). Cuba's infrastructure is still susceptible to
devastation, as seen in the aftermath of the 2017 hurricane season.
United Kingdom Overseas Territories (UKOT): All UKOT have developed National Disaster Preparedness Plans (PAHO/WHO,
2016) and are part of the Caribbean Disaster Risk Management Program which aims to improve disaster risk management
within the health sector. Different vulnerability levels across the UKOT (Lam et al., 2015) indicate the benefits of greater regional
cooperation and capacity-building, not only within UKOT, but throughout the Caribbean (Forster et al., 2011). While sovereign states
in the region can directly access climate funds and international support, Dependent Territories are reliant on their controlling
states (Bishop and Payne, 2012). There tends to be low-scale management for environmental issues in UKOT, which increases
UKOT's vulnerability. Institutional limitations, lack of human and financial resources, and limited long-term planning are identified
as barriers to adaptation (Forster et al., 2011).
Jamaica: Disaster management is coordinated through a hierarchy of national, parish and community disaster committees under the
leadership of the Office of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management (ODPEM). ODPEM coordinates disaster preparedness
and risk-reduction efforts among key state and non-state agencies (Grove, 2013). A National Disaster Committee provides technical
and policy oversight to the ODPEM and is composed of representatives from multiple stakeholders (Osei, 2007). Most initiatives
are primarily funded through a mix of multilateral and bilateral loan and grant funding focusing on strengthening technical and
institutional capacities of state- and research-based institutions and supporting integration of climate change considerations into
national and sectoral development plans (Robinson, 2017).

339

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Cross Chapter Box 9 (continued)

To improve climate change governance in the region, Pittman et al. (2015) suggest incorporating holistic and integrated management
systems, improving flexibility in collaborative processes, implementing monitoring programs, and increasing the capacity of local
authorities. Implementation of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) can
contribute to addressing the risks related with extreme events (Chapter 5, Box 5.3).
The Amazon
Terrestrial forests, such as the Amazon, are sensitive to changes in the climate, particularly drought (Laurance and Williamson, 2001)
which might intensify through the 21st century (Marengo and Espinoza, 2016) (Chapter 3, Section 3.5.5.6).
The poorest communities in the region face substantial risks with climate change, and barriers and limits to adaptive capacity (Maru
et al., 2014; Pinho et al., 2014, 2015; Brondizio et al., 2016). The Amazon is considered a hotspot, with interconnections between
increasing temperature, decreased precipitation and hydrological flow (Betts et al., 2018) (Sections 3.3.2.2, 3.3.3.2 and 3.3.5); low
levels of socio-economic development (Pinho et al., 2014); and high levels of climate vulnerability (Darela et al., 2016). Limiting
global warming to 1.5C could increase food and water security in the region compared to 2C (Betts et al., 2018), reduce the impact
on poor people and sustainable development, and make adaptation easier (O'Neill et al., 2017), particularly in the Amazon (Bathiany
et al., 2018) (Chapter 5, Section 5.2.2).
Climate policy in many Amazonian nations has focused on forests as carbon sinks (Soares-Filho et al., 2010). In 2009, the Brazilian
National Policy on Climate Change acknowledged adaptation as a concern, and the government sought to mainstream adaptation
into public administration. Brazil's National Adaptation Plan sets guidelines for sectoral adaptation measures, primarily by developing
capacity building, plans, assessments and tools to support adaptive decision-making. Adaptation is increasingly being presented
as having mitigation co-benefits in the Brazilian Amazon (Gregorio et al., 2016), especially within ecosystem-based adaptation
(Locatelli et al., 2011). In Peru's Framework Law for Climate Change, every governmental sector will consider climatic conditions as
potential risks and/or opportunities to promote economic development and to plan adaptation.
Drought and flood policies have had limited effectiveness in reducing vulnerability (Marengo et al., 2013). In the absence of effective
adaptation, achieving the SDGs will be challenging, mainly in poverty, health, water and sanitation, inequality and gender equality
(Chapter 5, Section 5.2.3).

4

Urban systems
Around 360 million people reside in urban coastal areas where precipitation variability is exposing inadequacies of urban infrastructure
and governance, with the poor being especially vulnerable (Reckien et al., 2017) (Cross-Chapter Box 13 in Chapter 5). Urban systems
have seen growing adaptation action (Revi et al., 2014b; Araos et al., 2016b; Amundsen et al., 2018). Developing cities spend more
on health and agriculture-related adaptation options while developed cities spend more on energy and water (Georgeson et al.,
2016). Current adaptation activities are lagging in emerging economies, which are major centres of population growth facing complex
interrelated pressures on investment in health, housing and education (Georgeson et al., 2016; Reckien et al., 2017).
New York, United States: Adaptation plans are undertaken across government levels, sectors and departments (NYC Parks, 2010;
Vision 2020 Project Team, 2011; PlaNYC, 2013), and have been advanced by an expert science panel that is obligated by local city
law to provide regular updates on policy-relevant climate science (NPCC, 2015). Federal initiatives include 2013's Rebuild By Design
competition to promote resilience through infrastructural projects (HSRTF, 2013). In 2013 the Mayor's office, in response to Hurricane
Sandy, published the city's adaptation strategy (PlaNYC, 2013). In 2015, the OneNYC Plan for a Strong and Just City (OneNYC Team,
2015) laid out a strategy for urban planning through a justice and equity lens. In 2017, new climate resiliency guidelines proposed
that new construction must include sea level rise projections into planning and development (ORR, 2018). Although this attention
to climate-resilient development may help reduce income inequality, its full effect could be constrained if a policy focus on resilience
obscures analysis of income redistribution for the poor (Fainstein, 2018).
Kampala, Uganda: Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) has the statutory responsibility for managing the city. The Kampala
Climate Change Action Strategy (KCCAS) is responding to climatic impacts of elevated temperature and more intense, erratic rain.
KCCAS has considered multi-scale and temporal aspects of response (Chelleri et al., 2015; Douglas, 2017; Fraser et al., 2017),
strengthened community adaptation (Lwasa, 2010; Dobson, 2017), responded to differential adaptive capacities (Waters and
Adger, 2017) and believes in participatory processes and bridging of citywide linkages (KCCA, 2016). Analysis of the implications
of uniquely adapted local solutions (e.g., motorcycle taxis) suggests sustainability can be enhanced when planning recognizes the
need to adapt to uniquely local solutions (Evans et al., 2018).

340

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Cross Chapter Box 9 (continued)

Rotterdam, The Netherlands: The Rotterdam Climate Initiative (RCI) was launched to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
climate-proof Rotterdam (RCI, 2017). Rotterdam has an integrated adaptation strategy, built on flood management, accessibility,
adaptive building, urban water systems and urban climate, defined through the Rotterdam Climate Proof programme and the
Rotterdam Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (RCI, 2008, 2013). Governance mechanisms that enabled integration of flood
risk management plans with other policies, citizen participation, institutional eco-innovation, and focusing on green infrastructure
(Albers et al., 2015; Dircke and Molenaar, 2015; de Boer et al., 2016a; Huang-Lachmann and Lovett, 2016) have contributed to
effective adaptation (Ward et al., 2013). Entrenched institutional characteristics constrain the response framework (FranceschHuidobro et al., 2017), but emerging evidence suggests that new governance arrangements and structures can potentially overcome
these barriers in Rotterdam (Holscher et al., 2018).

4.3.6

Short-Lived Climate Forcers

The main short-lived climate forcer (SLCF) emissions that cause
warming are methane (CH4), other precursors of tropospheric ozone
(i.e., carbon monoxide (CO), non-methane volatile organic compounds
(NMVOC), black carbon (BC) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs); Myhre et
al., 2013). SLCFs also include emissions that lead to cooling, such as
sulphur dioxide (SO2) and organic carbon (OC). Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
can have both warming and cooling effects, by affecting ozone (O3)
and CH4, depending on time scale and location (Myhre et al., 2013).
Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1 provides a discussion of role of
SLCFs in comparison to long-lived GHGs. Chapter 2 shows that
1.5C-consistent pathways require stringent reductions in CO2 and
CH4, and that non-CO2 climate forcers reduce carbon budgets by
about 2200 GtCO2 per degree of warming attributed to them (see the
Supplementary Material to Chapter 2).
Reducing non-CO2 emissions is part of most mitigation pathways
(IPCC, 2014c). All current GHG emissions and other forcing agents
affect the rate and magnitude of climate change over the next few
decades, while long-term warming is mainly driven by CO2 emissions.
CO2 emissions result in a virtually permanent warming, while
temperature change from SLCFs disappears within decades after
emissions of SLCFs are ceased. Any scenario that fails to reduce CO2
emissions to net zero would not limit global warming, even if SLCFs are
reduced, due to accumulating CO2-induced warming that overwhelms
SLCFs' mitigation benefits in a couple of decades (Shindell et al., 2012;
Schmale et al., 2014) (and see Chapter 2, Section 2.3.3.2).
Mitigation options for warming SLCFs often overlap with other
mitigation options, especially since many warming SLCFs are
co-emitted with CO2. SLCFs are generally mitigated in 1.5C- or
2C-consistent pathways as an integral part of an overall mitigation
strategy (Chapter 2). For example, Section 2.3 indicates that most verylow-emissions pathways include a transition away from the use of coal
and natural gas in the energy sector and oil in transportation, which
coincides with emission-reduction strategies related to methane from
the fossil fuel sector and BC from the transportation sector. Much SLCF
emission reduction aims at BC-rich sectors and considers the impacts
of several co-emitted SLCFs (Bond et al., 2013; Sand et al., 2015; Stohl
et al., 2015). The benefits of such strategies depend greatly upon the
assumed level of progression of access to modern energy for the

poorest populations who still rely on biomass fuels, as this affects the
reference level of BC emissions (Rogelj et al., 2014).
Some studies have evaluated the focus on SLCFs in mitigation strategies
and point towards trade-offs between short-term SLCF benefits
and lock-in of long-term CO2 warming (Smith and Mizrahi, 2013;
Pierrehumbert, 2014). Reducing fossil fuel combustion will reduce
aerosols levels, and thereby cause warming from removal of aerosol
cooling effects (Myhre et al., 2013; Xu and Ramanathan, 2017; Samset
et al., 2018). While some studies have found a lower temperature effect
from BC mitigation, thus questioning the effectiveness of targeted BC
mitigation for climate change mitigation (Myhre et al., 2013; Baker et
al., 2015; Stjern et al., 2017; Samset et al., 2018), other models and
observationally constrained estimates suggest that these widely-used
models do not fully capture observed effects of BC and co-emissions
on climate (e.g., Bond et al., 2013; Cui et al., 2016; Peng et al., 2016).
Table 4.5 provides an overview of three warming SLCFs and their
emission sources, with examples of options for emission reductions
and associated co-benefits.
A wide range of options to reduce SLCF emissions was extensively
discussed in AR5 (IPCC, 2014b). Fossil fuel and waste sector methane
mitigation options have high cost-effectiveness, producing a net profit
over a few years, considering market costs only. Moreover, reducing
roughly one-third to one-half of all human-caused emissions has
societal benefits greater than mitigation costs when considering
environmental impacts only (UNEP, 2011; Hoglund-Isaksson, 2012; IEA,
2017b; Shindell et al., 2017a). Since AR5, new options for methane,
such as those related to shale gas, have been included in mitigation
portfolios (e.g., Shindell et al., 2017a).
Reducing BC emissions and co-emissions has sustainable development
co-benefits, especially around human health (Stohl et al., 2015;
Haines et al., 2017; Aakre et al., 2018), avoiding premature deaths
and increasing crop yields (Scovronick et al., 2015; Peng et al., 2016).
Additional benefits include lower likelihood of non-linear climate
changes and feedbacks (Shindell et al., 2017b) and temporarily slowing
down the rate of sea level rise (Hu et al., 2013). Interventions to reduce
BC offer tangible local air quality benefits, increasing the likelihood of
local public support (Eliasson, 2014; Venkataraman et al., 2016) (see
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.2.1). Limited interagency co-ordination, poor
science-policy interactions (Zusman et al., 2015), and weak policy and
341

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.5 | Overview of main characteristics of three warming short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs) (core information based on Pierrehumbert, 2014 and Schmale et al., 2014;
rest of the details as referenced).
SLCF
Compound

Annual Global
Emission

Main Anthropogenic
Emission Sources

Examples of Options
to Reduce Emissions
Consistent with 1.5C
Managing manure from livestock;
Intermittent irrigation of rice;
Capture and usage of fugitive
methane;
Dietary change;
For more: see Section 4.3.2

Reduction of tropospheric ozone
(Shindell et al., 2017a);
Health benefits of dietary changes;
Increased crop yields;
Improved access to drinking water

Methane

On the order
of 10 years

0.3 GtCH4 (2010)
(Pierrehumbert, 2014)

HFCs

Months to decades,
depending on the gas

0.35 GtCO2-eq (2010)
(Velders et al., 2015)

Air conditioning; Refrigeration;
Construction material

Alternatives to HFCs in
air-conditioning and refrigeration
applications

Greater energy efficiency
(Mota-Babiloni et al., 2017)

~7 Mt (2010)
(Klimont et al., 2017)

Incomplete combustion of fossil
fuels or biomass in vehicles (esp.
diesel), cook stoves or kerosene
lamps;
Field and biomass burning

Fewer and cleaner vehicles; Reducing
agricultural biomass burning;
Cleaner cook stoves, gas-based
or electric cooking;
Replacing brick and coke ovens;
Solar lamps;
For more see Section 4.3.3

Health benefits of better air quality;
Increased education opportunities;
Reduced coal consumption for modern
brick kilns;
Reduced deforestation

Days

absence of inspections and enforcement (Kholod and Evans, 2016) are
among barriers that reduce the institutional feasibility of options to
reduce vehicle-induced BC emissions. A case study for India shows that
switching from biomass cook stoves to cleaner gas stoves (based on
liquefied petroleum gas or natural gas) or to electric cooking stoves is
technically and economically feasible in most areas, but faces barriers
in user preferences, costs and the organization of supply chains
(Jeuland et al., 2015). Similar feasibility considerations emerge in
switching from kerosene wick lamps for lighting to solar lanterns, from
current low-efficiency brick kilns and coke ovens to cleaner production
technologies; and from field burning of crop residues to agricultural
practices using deep-sowing and mulching technologies (Williams et
al., 2011; Wong, 2012).
The radiative forcing from HFCs are currently small but have been
growing rapidly (Myhre et al., 2013). The Kigali Amendment (from
2016) to the Montreal Protocol set out a global accord for phasing
out these compounds (Hoglund-Isaksson et al., 2017). HFC mitigation
options include alternatives with reduced warming effects, ideally
combined with improved energy efficiency so as to simultaneously
reduce CO2 and co-emissions (Shah et al., 2015). Costs for most
of HFC's mitigation potential are estimated to be below USD2010
60 tCO2-eq-1, and the remainder below roughly double that number
(Hoglund-Isaksson et al., 2017).
Reductions in SLCFs can provide large benefits towards sustainable
development, beneficial for social, institutional and economic
feasibility. Strategies that reduce SLCFs can provide benefits that
include improved air quality (e.g., Anenberg et al., 2012) and crop yields
(e.g., Shindell et al., 2012), energy access, gender equality and poverty
eradication (e.g.,Shindell et al., 2012; Haines et al., 2017). Institutional
feasibility can be negatively affected by an information deficit, with
4

Examples of Co-Benefits
Based on Haines et al. (2017)
Unless Specified Otherwise

Fossil fuel extraction and
transportation;
Land-use change;
Livestock and rice cultivation;
Waste and wastewater

Black Carbon

4

Atmospheric
Lifetime

the absence of international frameworks for integrating SLCFs into
emissions accounting and reporting mechanisms being a barrier to
developing policies for addressing SLCF emissions (Venkataraman et
al., 2016). The incentives for reducing SLCFs are particularly strong for
small groups of countries, and such collaborations could increase the
feasibility and effectiveness of SLCF mitigation options (Aakre et al.,
2018).

4.3.7

Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)

CDR methods refer to a set of techniques for removing CO2 from the
atmosphere. In the context of 1.5C-consistent pathways (Chapter 2),
they serve to offset residual emissions and, in most cases, achieve net
negative emissions to return to 1.5C from an overshoot. See CrossChapter Box 7 in Chapter 3 for a synthesis of land-based CDR options.
Cross-cutting issues and uncertainties are summarized in Table 4.6.

4.3.7.1

Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS)

BECCS has been assessed in previous IPCC reports (IPCC, 2005b,
2014b; P. Smith et al., 2014; Minx et al., 2017) and has been
incorporated into integrated assessment models (Clarke et al., 2014),
but also 1.5C-consistent pathways without BECCS have emerged
(Bauer et al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018; Mousavi and Blesl, 2018; van
Vuuren et al., 2018). Still, the overall set of pathways limiting global
warming to 1.5C with limited or no overshoot indicates that 0-1, 0-8,
and 0-16 GtCO2 yr-1 would be removed by BECCS by 2030, 2050 and
2100, respectively (Chapter 2, Section 2.3.4). BECCS is constrained by
sustainable bioenergy potentials (Section 4.3.1.2, Chapter 5, Section
5.4.1.3 and Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3), and availability of
safe storage for CO2 (Section 4.3.1.6). Literature estimates for BECCS
mitigation potentials in 2050 range from 1-85 GtCO24. Fuss et al.

As more bottom-up literature exists on bioenergy potentials, this exercise explored the bioenergy literature and converted those estimates to BECCS potential with 1EJ of
bioenergy yielding 0.02-0.05 GtCO2 emission reduction. For the bottom-up literature references for the potentials range, please refer to Supplementary Material 4.SM.3
Table 1.

342

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

(2018) narrow this range to 0.5-5 GtCO2 yr-1 (medium agreement,
high evidence) (Figure 4.3), meaning that BECCS mitigation potentials
are not necessarily sufficient for 1.5C-consistent pathways. This is,
among other things, related to sustainability concerns (Boysen et al.,
2017; Heck et al., 2018; Henry et al., 2018).
Assessing BECCS deployment in 2C pathways (of about 12
GtCO2-eq yr-1 by 2100, considered as a conservative deployment
estimate for BECCS-accepting pathways consistent with 1.5C), Smith
et al. (2016b) estimate a land-use intensity of 0.3-0.5 ha tCO2-eq-1 yr-1
using forest residues, 0.16 ha CO2-eq-1 yr-1 for agricultural residues,
and 0.03-0.1 ha tCO2-eq-1 yr-1 for purpose-grown energy crops. The
average amount of BECCS in these pathways requires 25-46% of
arable and permanent crop area in 2100. Land area estimates differ
in scale and are not necessarily a good indicator of competition with,
for example, food production, because requiring a smaller land area for
the same potential could indicate that high-productivity agricultural
land is used. In general, the literature shows low agreement on the
availability of land (Fritz et al., 2011; see Erb et al., 2016b for recent
advances). Productivity, food production and competition with other
ecosystem services and land use by local communities are important
factors for designing regulation. These potentials and trade-offs are not
homogenously distributed across regions. However, Robledo-Abad et
al. (2017) find that regions with higher potentials are understudied,
given their potential contribution. Researchers have expressed the
need to complement global assessments with regional, geographically
explicit bottom-up studies of biomass potentials and socio-economic
impacts (e.g., de Wit and Faaij, 2010; Kraxner et al., 2014; Baik et al.,
2018).
Energy production and land and water footprints show wide ranges
in bottom-up assessments due to differences in technology, feedstock
and other parameters (-1-150 EJ yr-1 of energy, 109-990 Mha, 6-79
MtN, 218-4758 km3 yr-1 of water per GtCO2 yr-1; Smith and Torn,
2013; Smith et al., 2016b; Fajardy and Mac Dowell, 2017) and are not
comparable to IAM pathways which consider system effects (Bauer
et al., 2018). Global impacts on nutrients and albedo are difficult to
quantify (Smith et al., 2016b). BECCS competes with other land-based
CDR and mitigation measures for resources (Chapter 2).
There is uncertainty about the feasibility of timely upscaling (Nemet et
al., 2018). CCS (see Section 4.3.1) is largely absent from the Nationally
Determined Contributions (Spencer et al., 2015) and lowly ranked in
investment priorities (Fridahl, 2017). Although there are dozens of smallscale BECCS demonstrations (Kemper, 2015) and a full-scale project
capturing 1 MtCO2 exists (Finley, 2014), this is well below the numbers
associated with 1.5C or 2C-compatible pathways (IEA, 2016a;
Peters et al., 2017). Although the majority of BECCS cost estimates are
below 200 USD tCO2-1 (Figure 4.2), estimates vary widely. Economic
incentives for ramping up large CCS or BECCS infrastructure are weak
(Bhave et al., 2017). The 2050 average investment costs for such a
BECCS infrastructure for bio-electricity and biofuels are estimated at
138 and 123 billion USD yr-1, respectively (Smith et al., 2016b).
BECCS deployment is further constrained by bioenergy's carbon
accounting, land, water and nutrient requirements (Section 4.3.1), its
compatibility with other policy goals and limited public acceptance of

Chapter 4

both bioenergy and CCS (Section 4.3.1). Current pathways are believed
to have inadequate assumptions on the development of societal
support and governance structures (Vaughan and Gough, 2016).
However, removing BECCS and CCS from the portfolio of available
options significantly raises modelled mitigation costs (Kriegler et al.,
2013; Bauer et al., 2018).

4.3.7.2

Afforestation and reforestation (AR)

Afforestation implies planting trees on land not forested for a long
time (e.g., over the last 50 years in the context of the Kyoto Protocol),
while reforestation implies re-establishment of forest formations after
a temporary condition with less than 10% canopy cover due to humaninduced or natural perturbations. Houghton et al. (2015) estimate
about 500 Mha could be available for the re-establishment of forests
on lands previously forested, but not currently used productively. This
could sequester at least 3.7 GtCO2 yr-1 for decades. The full literature
range gives 2050 potentials of 1-7 GtCO2 yr-1 (low evidence, medium
agreement), narrowed down to 0.5-3.6 GtCO2 yr-1 based on a number
of constraints (Fuss et al., 2018). Abatement costs are estimated to
be low compared to other CDR options, 5-50 USD tCO2-eq-1 (robust
evidence, high agreement). Yet, realizing such large potentials comes
at higher land and water footprints than BECCS, although there would
be a positive impact on nutrients and the energy requirement would
be negligible (Smith et al., 2016b; Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3).
The 2030 estimate by Griscom et al. (2017) is up to 17.9 GtCO2 yr-1
for reforestation with significant co-benefits (Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
Chapter 3).
Biogenic storage is not as permanent as emission reductions by
geological storage. In addition, forest sinks saturate, a process which
typically occurs in decades to centuries compared to the thousands
of years of residence time of CO2 stored geologically (Smith et al.,
2016a) and is subject to disturbances that can be exacerbated by
climate change (e.g., drought, forest fires and pests) (Seidl et al., 2017).
Handling these challenges requires careful forest management. There
is much practical experience with AR, facilitating upscaling but with
two caveats: AR potentials are heterogeneously distributed (Bala et al.,
2007), partly because the planting of less reflective forests results in
higher net absorbed radiation and localised surface warming in higher
latitudes (Bright et al., 2015; Jones et al., 2015), and forest governance
structures and monitoring capacities can be bottlenecks and are
usually not considered in models (Wang et al., 2016; Wehkamp et al.,
2018b). There is medium agreement on the positive impacts of AR on
ecosystems and biodiversity due to different forms of afforestation
discussed in the literature: afforestation of grassland ecosystems or
diversified agricultural landscapes with monocultures or invasive alien
species can have significant negative impacts on biodiversity, water
resources, etc. (P. Smith et al., 2014), while forest ecosystem restoration
(forestry and agroforestry) with native species can have positive social
and environmental impacts (Cunningham et al., 2015; Locatelli et al.,
2015; Paul et al., 2016; See Section 4.3.2).
Synergies with other policy goals are possible (see also Section 4.5.4);
for example, land spared by diet shifts could be afforested (Roos et al.,
2017) or used for energy crops (Grubler et al., 2018). Such land-sparing
strategies could also benefit other land-based CDR options.
343

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

4

Figure 4.2 | Evidence on carbon dioxide removal (CDR) abatement costs, 2050 deployment potentials, and key side effects. Panel A presents estimates
based on a systematic review of the bottom up literature (Fuss et al., 2018), corresponding to dashed blue boxes in Panel B. Dashed lines represent saturation limits for the
corresponding technology. Panel B shows the percentage of papers at a given cost or potential estimate. Reference year for all potential estimates is 2050, while all cost
estimates preceding 2050 have been included (as early as 2030, older estimates are excluded if they lack a base year and thus cannot be made comparable). Ranges have
been trimmed to show detail (see Fuss et al., 2018 for the full range). Costs refer only to abatement costs. Icons for side-effects are allocated only if a critical mass of papers
corroborates their occurrence
Notes: For references please see Supplementary Material Table 4.SM.3. Direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS) is theoretically only constrained by geological storage
capacity, estimates presented are considering upscaling and cost challenges (Nemet et al., 2018). BECCS potential estimates are based on bioenergy estimates in the literature
(EJ yr-1), converted to GtCO2 following footnote 4. Potentials cannot be added up, as CDR options would compete for resources (e.g., land). SCS - soil carbon sequestration; OA ocean alkalinization; EW- enhanced weathering; DACCS - direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage; BECCS - bioenergy with carbon capture and storage; AR - afforestation.

344

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

4.3.7.3

Soil carbon sequestration and biochar

Chapter 4

4.3.7.4

Enhanced weathering (EW) and ocean alkalinization

At local scales there is robust evidence that soil carbon sequestration
(SCS, e.g., agroforestry, De Stefano and Jacobson, 2018), restoration
of degraded land (Griscom et al., 2017), or conservation agriculture
management practices (Aguilera et al., 2013; Poeplau and Don, 2015;
Vicente-Vicente et al., 2016) have co-benefits in agriculture and that
many measures are cost-effective even without supportive climate
policy. Evidence at global scale for potentials and especially costs is
much lower. The literature spans cost ranges of -45-100 USD tCO2-1
(negative costs relating to the multiple co-benefits of SCS, such as
increased productivity and resilience of soils; P. Smith et al., 2014),
and 2050 potentials are estimated at between 0.5 and 11 GtCO2 yr-1,
narrowed down to 2.3-5.3 GtCO2 yr-1 considering that studies above
5 GtCO2 yr-1 often do not apply constraints, while estimates lower than
2 GtCO2 yr-1 mostly focus on single practices (Fuss et al., 2018).

Weathering is the natural process of rock decomposition via chemical
and physical processes in which CO2 is spontaneously consumed and
converted to solid or dissolved alkaline bicarbonates and/or carbonates
(IPCC, 2005a). The process is controlled by temperature, reactive
surface area, interactions with biota and, in particular, water solution
composition. CDR can be achieved by accelerating mineral weathering
through the distribution of ground-up rock material over land
(Hartmann and Kempe, 2008; Wilson et al., 2009; Kohler et al., 2010;
Renforth, 2012; ten Berge et al., 2012; Manning and Renforth, 2013;
Taylor et al., 2016), shorelines (Hangx and Spiers, 2009; Montserrat et
al., 2017) or the open ocean (House et al., 2007; Harvey, 2008; Kohler
et al., 2013; Hauck et al., 2016). Ocean alkalinization adds alkalinity to
marine areas to locally increase the CO2 buffering capacity of the ocean
(Gonzalez and Ilyina, 2016; Renforth and Henderson, 2017).

SCS has negligible water and energy requirements (Smith, 2016),
affects nutrients and food security favourably (high agreement, robust
evidence) and can be applied without changing current land use, thus
making it socially more acceptable than CDR options with a high land
footprint. However, soil sinks saturate after 10-100 years, depending
on the SCS option, soil type and climate zone (Smith, 2016).

In the case of land application of ground minerals, the estimated CDR
potential range is 0.72-95 GtCO2 yr-1 (low evidence, low agreement)
(Hartmann and Kempe, 2008; Kohler et al., 2010; Hartmann et al.,
2013; Taylor et al., 2016; Strefler et al., 2018a). Marine application
of ground minerals is limited by feasible rates of mineral extraction,
grinding and delivery, with estimates of 1-6 GtCO2 yr-1 (low evidence,
low agreement) (Kohler et al., 2013; Hauck et al., 2016; Renforth and
Henderson, 2017). Agreement is low due to a variety of assumptions
and unknown parameter ranges in the applied modelling procedures
that would need to be verified by field experiments (Fuss et al., 2018).
As with other CDR options, scaling and maturity are challenges, with
deployment at scale potentially requiring decades (NRC, 2015a),
considerable costs in transport and disposal (Hangx and Spiers, 2009;
Strefler et al., 2018a) and mining (NRC, 2015a; Strefler et al., 2018a)6.

Biochar is formed by recalcitrant (i.e., very stable) organic carbon
obtained from pyrolysis, which, applied to soil, can increase soil carbon
sequestration leading to improved soil fertility properties.5 Looking at
the full literature range, the global potential in 2050 lies between 1
and 35 Gt CO2 yr-1 (low agreement, low evidence), but considering
limitations in biomass availability and uncertainties due to a lack of
large-scale trials of biochar application to agricultural soils under field
conditions, Fuss et al. (2018) lower the 2050 range to 0.3-2 GtCO2 yr-1.
This potential is below previous estimates (e.g., Woolf et al., 2010),
which additionally consider the displacement of fossil fuels through
biochar. Permanence depends on soil type and biochar production
temperatures, varying between a few decades and several centuries
(Fang et al., 2014). Costs are 30- 120 USD tCO2-1 (medium agreement,
medium evidence) (McCarl et al., 2009; McGlashan et al., 2012;
McLaren, 2012; Smith, 2016).
Water requirements are low and at full theoretical deployment, up
to 65 EJ yr-1 of energy could be generated as a side product (Smith,
2016). Positive side effects include a favourable effect on nutrients and
reduced N2O emissions (Cayuela et al., 2014; Kammann et al., 2017).
However, 40-260 Mha are needed to grow the biomass for biochar
for implementation at 0.3 GtCO2-eq yr-1 (Smith, 2016), even though
it is also possible to use residues (e.g., Windeatt et al., 2014). Biochar
is further constrained by the maximum safe holding capacity of soils
(Lenton, 2010) and the labile nature of carbon sequestrated in plants
and soil at higher temperatures (Wang et al., 2013).

Site-specific cost estimates vary depending on the chosen technology
for rock grinding (an energy-intensive process; Kohler et al., 2013;
Hauck et al., 2016), material transport, and rock source (Renforth,
2012; Hartmann et al., 2013), and range from 15-40 USD tCO2-1 to
3,460 USD tCO2-1 (limited evidence, low agreement; Figure 4.2)
(Schuiling and Krijgsman, 2006; Kohler et al., 2010; Taylor et al.,
2016). The evidence base for costs of ocean alkalinization and marine
enhanced weathering is sparser than the land applications. The ocean
alkalinization potential is assessed to be 0.1-10 GtCO2 yr-1 with costs
of 14- >500 USD tCO2-1 (Renforth and Henderson, 2017).
The main side effects of terrestrial EW are an increase in water pH
(Taylor et al., 2016), the release of heavy metals like Ni and Cr and plant
nutrients like K, Ca, Mg, P and Si (Hartmann et al., 2013), and changes in
hydrological soil properties. Respirable particle sizes, though resulting in
higher potentials, can have impacts on health (Schuiling and Krijgsman,
2006; Taylor et al., 2016); utilization of wave-assisted decomposition
through deployment on coasts could avert the need for fine grinding
(Hangx and Spiers, 2009; Schuiling and de Boer, 2010). Side effects

5

Other pyrolysis products that can achieve net CO2 removals are bio-oil (pumped into geological storages) and permanent-pyrogas (capture and storage of CO2 from gas
combustion) (Werner et al., 2018)

6

It has also been suggested that ocean alkalinity can be increased through accelerated weathering of limestone (Rau and Caldeira, 1999; Rau, 2011; Chou et al., 2015) or
electrochemical processes (House et al., 2007; Rau, 2008; Rau et al., 2013; Lu et al., 2015). However, these techniques have not been proven at large scale either
(Renforth and Henderson, 2017).

345

4

Chapter 4

of marine EW and ocean alkalinization are the potential release of
heavy metals like Ni and Cr (Montserrat et al., 2017). Increasing ocean
alkalinity helps counter ocean acidification (Albright et al., 2016; Feng
et al., 2016). Ocean alkalinization could affect ocean biogeochemical
functioning (Gonzalez and Ilyina, 2016). A further caveat of relates to
saturation state and the potential to trigger spontaneous carbonate
precipitation.7 While the geochemical potential to remove and store
CO2 is quite large, limited evidence on the preceding topics makes it
difficult to assess the true capacity, net benefits and desirability of EW
and ocean alkalinity addition in the context of CDR.

4.3.7.5

Direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS)

Capturing CO2 from ambient air through chemical processes with
subsequent storage of the CO2 in geological formations is independent
of source and timing of emissions and can avoid competition for land.
Yet, this is also the main challenge: while the theoretical potential
for DACCS is mainly limited by the availability of safe and accessible
geological storage, the CO2 concentration in ambient air is 100-300
times lower than at gas- or coal-fired power plants (Sanz-Perez et al.,
2016) thus requiring more energy than flue gas CO2 capture (Pritchard
et al., 2015). This appears to be the main challenge to DACCS (SanzPerez et al., 2016; Barkakaty et al., 2017).
Studies explore alternative techniques to reduce the energy penalty
of DACCS (van der Giesen et al., 2017). Energy consumption could be
up to 12.9 GJ tCO2-eq-1; translating into an average of 156 EJ yr-1 by
2100 (current annual global primary energy supply is 600 EJ); water
requirements are estimated to average 0.8-24.8 km3 GtCO2-eq-1 yr-1
(Smith et al., 2016b, based on Socolow et al., 2011).

4

However, the literature shows low agreement and is fragmented
(Broehm et al., 2015). This fragmentation is reflected in a large range
of cost estimates: from 20-1,000 USD tCO2-1 (Keith et al., 2006; Pielke,
2009; House et al., 2011; Ranjan and Herzog, 2011; Simon et al., 2011;
Goeppert et al., 2012; Holmes and Keith, 2012; Zeman, 2014; SanzPerez et al., 2016; Sinha et al., 2017). There is lower agreement and a
smaller evidence base at the lower end of the cost range. Fuss et al.
(2018) narrow this range to 100-300 USD tCO2-1.
Research and efforts by small-scale commercialization projects focus
on utilization of captured CO2 (Wilcox et al., 2017). Given that only
a few IAM scenarios incorporate DACCS (e.g., Chen and Tavoni,
2013; Strefler et al., 2018b) its possible role in cost-optimized 1.5C
scenarios is not yet fully explored. Given the technology's early stage
of development (McLaren, 2012; NRC, 2015a; Nemet et al., 2018)
and few demonstrations (Holmes et al., 2013; Rau et al., 2013; Agee

7

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

et al., 2016), deploying the technology at scale is still a considerable
challenge, though both optimistic (Lackner et al., 2012) and pessimistic
outlooks exist (Pritchard et al., 2015).

4.3.7.6

Ocean fertilization

Nutrients can be added to the ocean resulting in increased biologic
production, leading to carbon fixation in the sunlit ocean and
subsequent sequestration in the deep ocean or sea floor sediments.
The added nutrients can be either micronutrients (such as iron) or
macronutrients (such as nitrogen and/or phosphorous) (Harrison,
2017). There is limited evidence and low agreement on the readiness of
this technology to contribute to rapid decarbonization (Williamson et
al., 2012). Only small-scale field experiments and theoretical modelling
have been conducted (e.g., McLaren, 2012). The full range of CDR
potential estimates is from 15.2 ktCO2 yr-1 (Bakker et al., 2001) for a
spatially constrained field experiment up to 44 GtCO2 yr-1 (Sarmiento
and Orr, 1991) following a modelling approach, but Fuss et al. (2018)
consider the potential to be extremely limited given the evidence and
existing barriers. Due to scavenging of iron, the iron addition only leads
to inefficient use of the nitrogen in exporting carbon (Zeebe, 2005;
Aumont and Bopp, 2006; Zahariev et al., 2008).
Cost estimates range from 2 USD tCO2-1 (for iron fertilization) (Boyd
and Denman, 2008) to 457 USD tCO2-1 (Harrison, 2013). Jones (2014)
proposed values greater than 20 USD tCO2-1 for nitrogen fertilization.
Fertilization is expected to impact food webs by stimulating its base
organisms (Matear, 2004), and extensive algal blooms may cause
anoxia (Sarmiento and Orr, 1991; Matear, 2004; Russell et al., 2012)
and deep water oxygen decline (Matear, 2004), with negative impacts
on biodiversity. Nutrient inputs can shift ecosystem production from
an iron-limited system to a P, N-, or Si-limited system depending on
the location (Matear, 2004; Bertram, 2010) and non-CO2 GHGs may
increase (Sarmiento and Orr, 1991; Matear, 2004; Bertram, 2010). The
greatest theoretical potential for this practice is the Southern Ocean,
posing challenges for monitoring and governance (Robinson et al.,
2014). The London Protocol of the International Maritime Organization
has asserted authority for regulation of ocean fertilization (Strong et al.,
2009), which is widely viewed as a de facto moratorium on commercial
ocean fertilization activities.
There is low agreement in the technical literature on the permanence
of CO2 in the ocean, with estimated residence times of 1,600 years
to millennia, especially if injected or buried in or below the sea floor
(Williams and Druffel, 1987; Jones, 2014). Storage at the surface would
mean that the carbon would be rapidly released after cessation (Zeebe,
2005; Aumont and Bopp, 2006).

This analysis relies on the assessment in Fuss et al. (2018), which provides more detail on saturation and permanence.

346

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.6 | Cross-cutting issues and uncertainties across carbon dioxide removal (CDR) options, aspects and uncertainties
Area of Uncertainty

Cross-Cutting Issues and Uncertainties

Technology upscaling

* CDR options are at different stages of technological readiness (McLaren, 2012) and differ with respect to scalability.
* Nemet et al. (2018) find >50% of the CDR innovation literature concerned with the earliest stages of the innovation process (R&D), identifying a
dissonance between the large CO2 removals needed in 1.5C pathways and the long -time periods involved in scaling up novel technologies.
* Lack of post-R&D literature, including incentives for early deployment, niche markets, scale up, demand, and public acceptance.

Emerging and niche
technologies

* For BECCS, there are niche opportunities with high efficiencies and fewer trade-offs, for example, sugar and paper processing facilities (Mollersten et al., 2003),
district heating (Karki et al., 2013; Ericsson and Werner, 2016), and industrial and municipal waste (Sanna et al., 2012). Turner et al. (2018) constrain potential using
sustainability considerations and overlap with storage basins to avoid the CO2 transportation challenge, providing a possible, though limited entry point for BECCS.
* The impacts on land use, water, nutrients and albedo of BECCS could be alleviated using marine sources of biomass that could include aquacultured micro
and macro flora (Hughes et al., 2012; Lenton, 2014).
* Regarding captured CO2 as a resource is discussed as an entry point for CDR. However, this does not necessarily lead to carbon removals, particularly if
the CO2 is sourced from fossil fuels and/or if the products do not store the CO2 for climate-relevant horizons (von der Assen et al., 2013) (see also Section 4.3.4.5).
* Methane8 is a much more potent GHG than CO2 (Montzka et al., 2011), associated with difficult-to-abate emissions in industry and agriculture and with
outgassing from lakes, wetlands, and oceans (Lockley, 2012; Stolaroff et al., 2012). Enhancing processes that naturally remove methane, either by chemical
or biological decomposition (Sundqvist et al., 2012), has been proposed to remove CH4. There is low confidence that existing technologies for CH4
removal are economically or energetically suitable for large-scale air capture (Boucher and Folberth, 2010). Methane removal potentials are limited due to
its low atmospheric concentration and its low chemical reactivity at ambient conditions.

Ethical aspects

* Preston (2013) identifies distributive and procedural justice, permissibility, moral hazard (Shue, 2018), and hubris as ethical aspects that could apply to
large-scale CDR deployment.
* There is a lack of reflection on the climate futures produced by recent modelling and implying very different ethical costs/risks and benefits (Minx et al., 2018).

Governance

* Existing governance mechanisms are scarce and either targeted at particular CDR options (e.g., ocean-based) or aspects (e.g., concerning indirect land-use
change (iLUC)) associated with bioenergy upscaling, and often the mechanisms are at national or regional scale (e.g., EU). Regulation accounting for iLUC
by formulating sustainability criteria (e.g., the EU Renewable Energy Directive) has been assessed as insufficient in avoiding leakage (e.g., Frank et al., 2013).
* An international governance mechanism is only in place for R&D of ocean fertilization within the Convention on Biological Diversity (IMO, 1972, 1996; CBD, 2008, 2010).
* Burns and Nicholson (2017) propose a human rights-based approach to protect those potentially adversely impacted by CDR options.

Policy

* The CDR potentials that can be realized are constrained by the lack of policy portfolios incentivising large-scale CDR (Peters and Geden, 2017).
* Near-term opportunities could be supported through modifying existing policy mechanisms (Lomax et al., 2015).
* Scott and Geden (2018) sketch three possible routes for limited progress, (i) at EU-level, (ii) at EU Member State level, and (iii) at private sector level, noting
the implied paradigm shift this would entail.
* EU may struggle to adopt policies for CDR deployment on the scale or time-frame envisioned by IAMs (Geden et al., 2018).
* Social impacts of large-scale CDR deployment (Buck, 2016) require policies taking these into account.

Carbon cycle

* On long time scales, natural sinks could reverse (C.D. Jones et al., 2016)
* No robust assessments yet of the effectiveness of CDR in reverting climate change (Tokarska and Zickfeld, 2015; Wu et al., 2015; Keller et al., 2018),
see also Chapter 2, Section 2.2.2.2.

4.3.8

Solar Radiation Modification (SRM)

This report refrains from using the term `geoengineering' and separates
SRM from CDR and other mitigation options (see Chapter 1, Section
1.4.1 and Glossary).
Table 4.7 gives an overview of SRM methods and characteristics. For a
more comprehensive discussion of currently proposed SRM methods,
and their implications for geophysical quantities and sustainable
development, see also Cross-Chapter Box 10 in this Chapter. This
section assesses the feasibility, from an institutional, technological,
economic and social-cultural viewpoint, focusing on stratospheric
aerosol injection (SAI) unless otherwise indicated, as most available
literature is about SAI.
Some of the literature on SRM appears in the forms of commentaries,
policy briefs, viewpoints and opinions (e.g., (Horton et al., 2016; Keith et
al., 2017; Parson, 2017). This assessment covers original research rather
than viewpoints, even if the latter appear in peer-reviewed journals.

8

4

SRM could reduce some of the global risks of climate change related
to temperature rise (Izrael et al., 2014; MacMartin et al., 2014), rate of
sea level rise (Moore et al., 2010), sea-ice loss (Berdahl et al., 2014) and
frequency of extreme storms in the North Atlantic and heatwaves in
Europe (Jones et al., 2018). SRM also holds risks of changing precipitation
and ozone concentrations and potentially reductions in biodiversity
(Pitari et al., 2014; Visioni et al., 2017a; Trisos et al., 2018). Literature
only supports SRM as a supplement to deep mitigation, for example in
overshoot scenarios (Smith and Rasch, 2013; MacMartin et al., 2018).

4.3.8.1

Governance and institutional feasibility

There is robust evidence but medium agreement for unilateral action
potentially becoming a serious SRM governance issue (Weitzman,
2015; Rabitz, 2016), as some argue that enhanced collaboration
might emerge around SRM (Horton, 2011). An equitable institutional
or governance arrangement around SRM would have to reflect
views of different countries (Heyen et al., 2015) and be multilateral
because of the risk of termination, and risks that implementation or
unilateral action by one country or organization will produce negative
precipitation or extreme weather effects across borders (Lempert and

Current work (e.g., de Richter et al., 2017) examines other technologies considering non-CO2 GHGs like N2O.

347

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.7 | Overview of the main characteristics of the most-studied SRM methods.
SRM indicator

Stratospheric Aerosol
injection (SAI)

Marine Cloud
Brightening (MCB)

Cirrus Cloud
Thinning (CCT)

Ground-Based Albedo
Modification (GBAM)

Description of
SRM method

Injection of a gas in the
stratosphere, which then converts
to aerosols. Injection of other
particles also considered.

Spraying sea salt or other
particles into marine clouds,
making them more reflective.

Seeding to promote nucleation, reducing
optical thickness and cloud lifetime,
to allow more outgoing longwave
radiation to escape into space.

Whitening roofs, changes in land use
management (e.g., no-till farming),
change of albedo at a larger scale
(covering glaciers or deserts with reflective
sheeting and changes in ocean albedo).

Radiative forcing
efficiencies

1-4 TgS W-1 m2 yr-1

100-295 Tg dry sea
salt W-1 m2 yr-1

Not known

Small on global scale, up to 1C-3C
on regional scale

Amount needed
for 1C overshoot

2-8 TgS yr-1

70 Tg dry sea salt yr-1

Not known

0.04-0.1 albedo change in agricultural
and urban areas

SRM specific
impacts on climate
variables

Changes in precipitation patterns
and circulation regimes; in case
of SO2 injection, disruption to
stratospheric chemistry (for
instance NOx depletion and
changes in methane lifetime);
increase in stratospheric water
vapour and troposphericstratospheric ice formation
affecting cloud microphysics

Regional rainfall responses;
reduction in hurricane intensity

Low-level cloud changes;
tropospheric drying; intensification
of the hydrological cycle

Impacts on precipitation in monsoon areas;
could target hot extremes

SRM specific
impacts on human/
natural systems

In case of SO2 injection,
stratospheric ozone loss (which
could also have a positive
effect - a net reduction in global
mortality due to competing
health impact pathways) and
significant increase of surface UV

Reduction in the number
of mild crop failures

Not known

Not known

Maturity of science

Volcanic analogues; high
agreement amongst simulations;
robust evidence on ethical,
governance and sustainable
development limitations

Observed in ships tracks;
several simulations confirm
mechanism;
regionally limited

No clear physical mechanism;
limited evidence and low agreement;
several simulations

Natural and land-use analogues;
several simulations confirm mechanism;
high agreement to influence on regional
temperature; land use costly

Key references

Robock et al., 2008;
Heckendorn et al., 2009;
Tilmes et al., 2012, 2016;
Pitari et al., 2014;
Crook et al., 2015;
C.J. Smith et al., 2017;
Visioni et al., 2017a, b;
Eastham et al., 2018;
Plazzotta et al., 2018

Salter et al., 2008;
Alterskjaer et al., 2012;
Jones and Haywood, 2012;
Latham et al., 2012, 2013;
Kravitz et al., 2013;
Crook et al., 2015;
Parkes et al., 2015;
Ahlm et al., 2017

Storelvmo et al., 2014;
Kristjansson et al., 2015;
Jackson et al., 2016;
Karcher, 2017;
Lohmann and Gasparini, 2017

Irvine et al., 2011;
Akbari et al., 2012;
Jacobson and Ten Hoeve, 2012;
Davin et al., 2014;
Crook et al., 2015, 2016;
Seneviratne et al., 2018

4

Prosnitz, 2011; Dilling and Hauser, 2013; NRC, 2015b). Some have
suggested that the governance of research and field experimentation
can help clarify uncertainties surrounding deployment of SRM (Long
and Shepherd, 2014; Parker, 2014; NRC, 2015c; Caldeira and Bala,
2017; Lawrence and Crutzen, 2017), and that SRM is compatible with
democratic processes (Horton et al., 2018) or not (Szerszynski et al.,
2013; Owen, 2014).

Alongside SBSTA, the WMO, UNESCO and UN Environment could play
a role in governance of SRM (Nicholson et al., 2018). Each of these
organizations has relevance with respect to the regulatory framework
(Bodle et al., 2012; Williamson and Bodle, 2016). The UNCBD gives
guidance that `that no climate-related geo-engineering activities that
may affect biodiversity take place' (CBD, 2010).

4.3.8.2
Several possible institutional arrangements have been considered
for SRM governance: under the UNFCCC (in particular under the
Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)) or the
United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD) (Honegger
et al., 2013; Nicholson et al., 2018), or through a consortium of
states (Bodansky, 2013; Sandler, 2017). Reasons for states to join an
international governance framework for SRM include having a voice in
SRM diplomacy, prevention of unilateral action by others and benefits
from research collaboration (Lloyd and Oppenheimer, 2014).
348

Economic and technological feasibility

The literature on the engineering costs of SRM is limited and may
be unreliable in the absence of testing or deployment. There is high
agreement that costs of SAI (not taking into account indirect and social
costs, research and development costs and monitoring expenses) may
be in the range of 1-10 billion USD yr-1 for injection of 1-5 MtS to
achieve cooling of 1-2 W m-2 (Robock et al., 2009; McClellan et al.,
2012; Ryaboshapko and Revokatova, 2015; Moriyama et al., 2016),
suggesting that cost-effectiveness may be high if side-effects are low

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

or neglected (McClellan et al., 2012). The overall economic feasibility
of SRM also depends on externalities and social costs (Moreno-Cruz
and Keith, 2013; Mackerron, 2014), climate sensitivity (Kosugi, 2013),
option value (Arino et al., 2016), presence of climate tipping points
(Eric Bickel, 2013) and damage costs as a function of the level of SRM
(Bahn et al., 2015; Heutel et al., 2018). Modelling of game-theoretic,
strategic interactions of states under heterogeneous climatic impacts
shows low agreement on the outcome and viability of a cost-benefit
analysis for SRM (Ricke et al., 2015; Weitzman, 2015).

shows low agreement on whether SRM research and deployment may
lead policy-makers to reduce mitigation efforts and thus imply a moral
hazard (Linner and Wibeck, 2015). SRM might motivate individuals
(as opposed to policymakers) to reduce their GHG emissions, but even
a subtle difference in the articulation of information about SRM can
influence subsequent judgements of favourability (Merk et al., 2016).
The argument that SRM research increases the likelihood of deployment
(the `slippery slope' argument), is also made (Quaas et al., 2017), but
some also found an opposite effect (Bellamy and Healey, 2018).

For SAI, there is high agreement that aircrafts could, after some
modifications, inject millions of tons of SO2 in the lower stratosphere
(at approximately 20 km; (Davidson et al., 2012; McClellan et al., 2012;
Irvine et al., 2016).

Unequal representation and deliberate exclusion are plausible in
decision-making on SRM, given diverging regional interests and the
anticipated low resource requirements to deploy SRM (Ricke et al.,
2013). Whyte (2012) argues that the concerns, sovereignties, and
experiences of indigenous peoples may particularly be at risk.

4.3.8.3

Social acceptability and ethics

Ethical questions around SRM include those of international
responsibilities for implementation, financing, compensation for
negative effects, the procedural justice questions of who is involved
in decisions, privatization and patenting, welfare, informed consent
by affected publics, intergenerational ethics (because SRM requires
sustained action in order to avoid termination hazards), and the
so-called `moral hazard' (Burns, 2011; Whyte, 2012; Gardiner, 2013;
Lin, 2013; Buck et al., 2014; Klepper and Rickels, 2014; Morrow, 2014;
Wong, 2014; Reynolds, 2015; Lockley and Coffman, 2016; McLaren,
2016; Suarez and van Aalst, 2017; Reynolds et al., 2018). The literature

The general public can be characterized as oblivious to and worried
about SRM (Carr et al., 2013; Parkhill et al., 2013; Wibeck et al., 2017).
An emerging literature discusses public perception of SRM, showing a
lack of knowledge and unstable opinions (Scheer and Renn, 2014). The
perception of controllability affects legitimacy and public acceptability
of SRM experiments (Bellamy et al., 2017). In Germany, laboratory
work on SRM is generally approved of, field research much less so,
and immediate deployment is largely rejected (Merk et al., 2015; Braun
et al., 2017). Various factors could explain variations in the degree of
rejection of SRM between Canada, China, Germany, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, and the United States (Visschers et al., 2017).

Cross-Chapter Box 10 | Solar Radiation Modification in the Context of 1.5C Mitigation Pathways

4
Contributing Authors:
Anastasia Revokatova (Russian Federation), Heleen de Coninck (Netherlands/EU), Piers Forster (UK), Veronika Ginzburg (Russian
Federation), Jatin Kala (Australia), Diana Liverman (USA), Maxime Plazzotta (France), Roland Seferian (France), Sonia I. Seneviratne
(Switzerland), Jana Sillmann (Norway).
Solar radiation modification (SRM) refers to a range of radiation modification measures not related to greenhouse gas (GHG)
mitigation that seek to limit global warming (see Chapter 1, Section 1.4.1). Most methods involve reducing the amount of incoming
solar radiation reaching the surface, but others also act on the longwave radiation budget by reducing optical thickness and cloud
lifetime (see Table 4.7). In the context of this report, SRM is assessed in terms of its potential to limit warming below 1.5C in
temporary overshoot scenarios as a way to reduce elevated temperatures and associated impacts (Irvine et al., 2016; Keith and
Irvine, 2016; Chen and Xin, 2017; Sugiyama et al., 2017a; Visioni et al., 2017a; MacMartin et al., 2018). The inherent variability of the
climate system would make it difficult to detect the efficacy or side-effects of SRM intervention when deployed in such a temporary
scenario (Jackson et al., 2015).

A. Potential SRM timing and magnitude
Published SRM approaches are summarized in Table 4.7. The timing and magnitude of potential SRM deployment depends on
the temperature overshoot associated with mitigation pathways. All overshooting pathways make use of carbon dioxide removal.
Therefore, if considered, SRM would only be deployed as a supplemental measure to large-scale carbon dioxide removal (Chapter
2, Section 2.3).
Cross-Chapter Box 10, Figure 1 below illustrates an example of how a hypothetical SRM deployment based on stratospheric aerosols
injection (SAI) could be used to limit warming below 1.5C using an `adaptive SRM' approach (e.g., Kravitz et al., 2011; Tilmes et al.,
2016), where global mean temperature rise exceeds 1.5C compared to pre-industrial level by mid-century and returns below 1.5C
before 2100 with a 66% likelihood (see Chapter 2). In all such limited adaptive deployment scenarios, deployment of SRM only

349

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Cross Chapter Box 10 (continued)

commences under conditions in which CO2 emissions have already fallen substantially below their peak level and are continuing to
fall. In order to hold warming to 1.5C, a hypothetical SRM deployment could span from one to several decades, with the earliest
possible threshold exceedance occurring before mid-century. Over this duration, SRM has to compensate for warming that exceeds
1.5C (displayed with hatching on panel a) with a decrease in radiative forcing (panel b) which could be achieved with a rate of SAI
varying between 0-5.9 MtSO2 yr-1 (panel c) (Robock et al., 2008; Heckendorn et al., 2009).

4

Cross-Chapter Box 10, Figure 1 | Evolution of hypothetical SRM deployment (based on stratospheric aerosols injection, or SAI) in the context of
1.5C-consistent pathways. (a) Range of median temperature outcomes as simulated by MAGICC (see in Chapter 2, Section 2.2) given the range of CO2 emissions
and (b) other climate forcers for mitigation pathways exceeding 1.5C at mid-century and returning below by 2100 with a 66% likelihood. Geophysical characteristics are
represented by (c) the magnitude of radiative forcing and (d) the amount of stratospheric SO2 injection that are required to keep the global median temperature below
1.5C during the temperature overshoot (given by the blue hatching on panel a). SRM surface radiative forcing has been diagnosed using a mean cooling efficiency of
0.3C (W- m2) of Plazzotta et al. (2018). Magnitude and timing of SO2 injection have been derived from published estimates of Heckendorn et al. (2009) and Robock
et al. (2008).

SAI is the most-researched SRM method, with high agreement that it could limit warming to below 1.5C (Tilmes et al., 2016;
Jones et al., 2018). The response of global temperature to SO2 injection, however, is uncertain and varies depending on the model
parametrization and emission scenarios (Jones et al., 2011; Kravitz et al., 2011; Izrael et al., 2014; Crook et al., 2015; Niemeier and
Timmreck, 2015; Tilmes et al., 2016; Kashimura et al., 2017). Uncertainty also arises due to the nature and the optical properties of
injected aerosols.

350

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Cross Chapter Box 10 (continued)

Other approaches are less well researched, but the literature suggests that ground-based albedo modification (GBAM), marine cloud
brightening (MCB) or cirrus cloud thinning (CCT) are not assessed to be able to substantially reduce overall global temperature
(Irvine et al., 2011; Seneviratne et al., 2018). However, these SRM approaches are known to create spatially heterogeneous forcing
and potentially more spatially heterogeneous climate effects, which may be used to mitigate regional climate impacts. This may
be of most relevance in the case of GBAM when applied to crop and urban areas (Seneviratne et al., 2018). Most of the literature
on regional mitigation has focused on GBAM in relationship with land-use and land-cover change scenarios. Both models and
observations suggest that there is a high agreement that GBAM would result in cooling over the region of changed albedo, and in
particular would reduce hot extremes (Irvine et al., 2011; Akbari et al., 2012; Jacobson and Ten Hoeve, 2012; Davin et al., 2014; Crook
et al., 2015, 2016; Alkama and Cescatti, 2016; Seneviratne et al., 2018). In comparison, there is a limited evidence on the ability of
MCB or CCT to mitigate regional climate impacts of 1.5C warming because the magnitude of the climate response to MCB or CCT
remains uncertain and the processes are not fully understood (Lohmann and Gasparini, 2017).

B.

General consequences and impacts of solar radiation modification

It has been proposed that deploying SRM as a supplement to mitigation may reduce increases in global temperature-related
extremes and rainfall intensity, and lessen the loss of coral reefs from increasing sea-surface temperatures (Keith and Irvine, 2016),
but it would not address, or could even worsen (Tjiputra et al., 2016), negative effects from continued ocean acidification.
Another concern with SRM is the risk of a `termination shock' or `termination effect' when suddenly stopping SRM, which might
cause rapid temperature rise and associated impacts (Jones et al., 2013; Izrael et al., 2014; McCusker et al., 2014), most noticeably
biodiversity loss (Trisos et al., 2018). The severity of the termination effect has recently been debated (Parker and Irvine, 2018) and
depends on the degree of SRM cooling. This report only considers limited SRM in the context of mitigation pathways to 1.5C. Other
risks of SRM deployment could be associated with the lack of testing of the proposed deployment schemes (e.g., Schafer et al.,
2013). Ethical aspects and issues related to the governance and economics are discussed in Section 4.3.8.

C.

Consequences and impacts of SRM on the carbon budget

Because of its effects on surface temperature, precipitation and surface shortwave radiation, SRM would also alter the carbon
budget pathways to 1.5C or 2C (Eliseev, 2012; Keller et al., 2014; Keith et al., 2017; Lauvset et al., 2017).
Despite the large uncertainties in the simulated climate response to SRM, current model simulations suggest that SRM would
lead to altered carbon budgets compatible with 1.5C or 2C. The 6 CMIP5 models investigated simulated an increase of natural
carbon uptake by land biosphere and, to a smaller extent, by the oceans (high agreement). The multimodel mean of this response
suggests an increase of the RCP4.5 carbon budget of about 150 GtCO2 after 50 years of SO2 injection with a rate of 4 TgS yr-1, which
represents about 4 years of CO2 emissions at the current rate (36 GtCO2 yr-1). However, there is uncertainty around quantitative
determination of the effects that SRM or its cessation has on the carbon budget due to a lack of understanding of the radiative
processes driving the global carbon cycle response to SRM (Ramachandran et al., 2000; Mercado et al., 2009; Eliseev, 2012; Xia et
al., 2016), uncertainties about how the carbon cycle will respond to termination effects of SRM, and uncertainties in climate-carbon
cycle feedbacks (Friedlingstein et al., 2014).

4

D. Sustainable development and SRM
There are few studies investigating potential implications of SRM for sustainable development. These are based on a limited
number of scenarios and hypothetical considerations, mainly referring to benefits from lower temperatures (Irvine et al., 2011;
Nicholson, 2013; Anshelm and Hansson, 2014; Harding and Moreno-Cruz, 2016). Other studies suggest negative impacts from SRM
implementation concerning issues related to regional disparities (Heyen et al., 2015), equity (Buck, 2012), fisheries, ecosystems,
agriculture, and termination effects (Robock, 2012; Morrow, 2014; Wong, 2014). If SRM is initiated by the richer nations, there might
be issues with local agency, and possibly worsening conditions for those suffering most under climate change (Buck et al., 2014).
In addition, ethical issues related to testing SRM have been raised (e.g., Lenferna et al., 2017). Overall, there is high agreement that
SRM would affect many development issues but limited evidence on the degree of influence, and how it manifests itself across
regions and different levels of society.

E.

Overall feasibility of SRM

If mitigation efforts do not keep global mean temperature below 1.5C, SRM can potentially reduce the climate impacts of a
temporary temperature overshoot, in particular extreme temperatures, rate of sea level rise and intensity of tropical cyclones,
alongside intense mitigation and adaptation efforts. While theoretical developments show that SRM is technically feasible (see
Section 4.3.8.2), global field experiments have not been conducted and most of the knowledge about SRM is based on imperfect

351

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Cross Chapter Box 10 (continued)

model simulations and some natural analogues. There are also considerable challenges to the implementation of SRM associated
with disagreements over the governance, ethics, public perception, and distributional development impacts (see Section 4.3.8) (Boyd,
2016; Preston, 2016; Asayama et al., 2017; Sugiyama et al., 2017b; Svoboda, 2017; McKinnon, 2018; Talberg et al., 2018). Overall,
the combined uncertainties surrounding the various SRM approaches, including technological maturity, physical understanding,
potential impacts, and challenges of governance, constrain the ability to implement SRM in the near future.

4.4

Implementing Far-Reaching
and Rapid Change

The feasibility of 1.5C-compatible pathways is contingent upon
enabling conditions for systemic change (see Cross Chapter Box 3 in
Chapter 1). Section 4.3 identifies the major systems, and options within
those systems, that offer the potential for change to align with 1.5C
pathways.
AR5 identifies enabling conditions as influencing the feasibility
of climate responses (Kolstad et al., 2014). This section draws on
1.5C-specific and related literature on rapid and scaled up change
to identify the enabling conditions that influence the feasibility of
adaptation and mitigation options assessed in Section 4.5. Examples
from diverse regions and sectors are provided in Boxes 4.1 to 4.10
to illustrate how these conditions could enable or constrain the
implementation of incremental, rapid, disruptive and transformative
mitigation and adaptation consistent with 1.5C pathways.

4

Coherence between the enabling conditions holds potential to enhance
the feasibility of 1.5C-consistent pathways and adapting to the
consequences. This includes better alignment across governance scales
(OECD, 2015a; Geels et al., 2017), enabling multilevel governance
(Cheshmehzangi, 2016; Revi, 2017; Tait and Euston-Brown, 2017) and
nested institutions (Abbott, 2012). It also includes interdisciplinary
actions, combined adaptation and mitigation action (Gopfert et al.,
2018), and science-policy partnerships (Vogel et al., 2007; Hering et al.,
2014; Roberts, 2016; Figueres et al., 2017; Leal Filho et al., 2018). These
partnerships are difficult to establish and sustain, but can generate
trust (Cole, 2015; Jordan et al., 2015) and inclusivity that ultimately can
provide durability and the realization of co-benefits for sustained rapid
change (Blanchet, 2015; Ziervogel et al., 2016a).

4.4.1

Enhancing Multilevel Governance

Addressing climate change and implementing responses to
1.5C-consistent pathways would require engagement between
various levels and types of governance (Betsill and Bulkeley, 2006;
Kern and Alber, 2009; Christoforidis et al., 2013; Romero-Lankao et al.,
2018). AR5 highlighted the significance of governance as a means of
strengthening adaptation and mitigation and advancing sustainable
development (Fleurbaey et al., 2014). Governance is defined in the
broadest sense as the `processes of interaction and decision-making
among actors involved in a common problem' (Kooiman, 2003; Hufty,
2011; Fleurbaey et al., 2014). This definition goes beyond notions of
formal government or political authority and integrates other actors,
networks, informal institutions and communities.
352

4.4.1.1

Institutions and their capacity to invoke far-reaching
and rapid change

Institutions - the rules and norms that guide human interactions
(Section 4.4.2) - enable or impede the structures, mechanisms
and measures that guide mitigation and adaptation. Institutions,
understood as the `rules of the game' (North, 1990), exert direct and
indirect influence over the viability of 1.5C-consistent pathways
(Munck et al., 2014; Willis, 2017). Governance would be needed to
support wide-scale and effective adoption of mitigation and adaptation
options. Institutions and governance structures are strengthened
when the principle of the `commons' is explored as a way of sharing
management and responsibilities (Ostrom et al., 1999; Chaffin et
al., 2014; Young, 2016). Institutions would need to be strengthened
to interact amongst themselves, and to share responsibilities for the
development and implementation of rules, regulations and policies
(Ostrom et al., 1999; Wejs et al., 2014; Craig et al., 2017), with the goal
of ensuring that these embrace equity, justice, poverty alleviation and
sustainable development, enabling a 1.5C world (Reckien et al., 2017;
Wood et al., 2017).
Several authors have identified different modes of cross-stakeholder
interaction in climate policy, including the role played by large
multinational corporations, small enterprises, civil society and nonstate actors. Ciplet et al. (2015) argue that civil society is to a great
extent the only reliable motor for driving institutions to change at
the pace required. Kern and Alber (2009) recognize different forms of
collaboration relevant to successful climate policies beyond the local
level. Horizontal collaboration (e.g., transnational city networks) and
vertical collaboration within nation-states can play an enabling role
(Ringel, 2017). Vertical and horizontal collaboration requires synergistic
relationships between stakeholders (Ingold and Fischer, 2014; Hsu et
al., 2017). The importance of community participation is emphasized
in literature, and in particular the need to take into account equity
and gender considerations (Chapter 5) (Graham et al., 2015; Bryan
et al., 2017; Wangui and Smucker, 2017). Participation often faces
implementation challenges and may not always result in better policy
outcomes. Stakeholders, for example, may not view climate change as
a priority and may not share the same preferences, potentially creating
a policy deadlock (Preston et al., 2013, 2015; Ford et al., 2016).

4.4.1.2

International governance

International treaties help strengthen policy implementation, providing
a medium- and long-term vision (Obergassel et al., 2016). International
climate governance is organized via many mechanisms, including
international organizations, treaties and conventions, for example,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

UNFCCC, the Paris Agreement and the Montreal Protocol. Other
multilateral and bilateral agreements, such as trade agreements, also
have a bearing on climate change.
There are significant differences between global mitigation and
adaptation governance frames. Mitigation tends to be global by its
nature and based on the principle of the climate system as a global
commons (Ostrom et al., 1999). Adaptation has traditionally been
viewed as a local process, involving local authorities, communities,
and stakeholders (Khan, 2013; Preston et al., 2015), although it is now
recognized to be a multi-scaled, multi-actor process that transcends
scales from local and sub-national to national and international
(Mimura et al., 2014; UNEP, 2017a). National governments provide a
central pivot for coordination, planning, determining policy priorities
and distributing resources. National governments are accountable
to the international community through international agreements.
Yet, many of the impacts of climate change are transboundary, so
that bilateral and multilateral cooperation are needed (Nalau et al.,
2015; Donner et al., 2016; Magnan and Ribera, 2016; Tilleard and Ford,
2016; Lesnikowski et al., 2017). The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal
Protocol demonstrates that a global environmental agreement
facilitating common but differentiated responsibilities is possible
(Sharadin, 2018). This was operationalized by developed countries
acting first, with developing countries following and benefiting from
leap-frogging the trial-and-error stages of innovative technology
development.
Work on international climate governance has focused on the nature
of `climate regimes' and coordinating the action of nation-states
(Aykut, 2016) organized around a diverse set of instruments: (i) binding
limits allocated by principles of historical responsibility and equity, (ii)
carbon prices, emissions quotas, (iii) pledges and review of policies and
measures or (iv) a combination of these options (Stavins, 1988; Grubb,
1990; Pizer, 2002; Newell and Pizer, 2003).
Literature on the Kyoto Protocol provides two important insights for
the 1.5C transition: the challenge of agreeing on rules to allocate
emissions quotas (Shukla, 2005; Caney, 2012; Winkler et al., 2013;
Gupta, 2014; Mejean et al., 2015) and a climate-centric vision (Shukla,
2005; BASIC experts, 2011), separated from development issues which
drove resistance from many developing nations (Roberts and Parks,
2006). For the former, a burden-sharing approach led to an adversarial
process among nations to decide who should be allocated `how much'
of the remainder of the emissions budget (Caney, 2014; Ohndorf et al.,
2015; Roser et al., 2015; Gimenez-Gomez et al., 2016). Industry group
lobbying further contributed to reducing space for manoeuvre of some
major emitting nations (Newell and Paterson, 1998; Levy and Egan,
2003; Dunlap and McCright, 2011; Michaelowa, 2013; Geels, 2014).
Given the political unwillingness to continue with the Kyoto Protocol
approach a new approach was introduced in the Copenhagen Accord,
the Cancun Agreements, and finally in the Paris Agreement. The
transition to 1.5C requires carbon neutrality and thus going beyond
the traditional framing of climate as a `tragedy of the commons' to be
addressed via cost-optimal allocation rules, which demonstrated a low
probability of enabling a transition to 1.5C-consistent pathways (Patt,
2017). The Paris Agreement, built on a `pledge and review' system,

Chapter 4

is thought be more effective in securing trust (Dagnet et al., 2016)
and enables effective monitoring and timely reporting on national
actions (including adaptation), allowing for international scrutiny and
persistent efforts of civil society and non-state actors to encourage
action in both national and international contexts (Allan and Hadden,
2017; Backstrand and Kuyper, 2017; Hohne et al., 2017; Lesnikowski et
al., 2017; Maor et al., 2017; UNEP, 2017a), with some limitations (Nieto
et al., 2018).
The paradigm shift enabled at Cancun succeeded by focusing on the
objective of `equitable access to sustainable development' (Hourcade
et al., 2015). The use of `pledge and review' now underpins the Paris
Agreement. This consolidates multiple attempts to define a governance
approach that relies on Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
and on means for a `facilitative model' (Bodansky and Diringer, 2014)
to reinforce them. This enables a regular, iterative, review of NDCs
allowing countries to set their own ambitions after a global stocktake
and more flexible, experimental forms of climate governance, which may
provide room for higher ambition and be consistent with the needs of
governing for a rapid transition to close the emission gap (Clemencon,
2016; Falkner, 2016) (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter). Beyond
a general consensus on the necessity of measurement, reporting and
verification (MRV) mechanisms as a key element of a climate regime
(Ford et al., 2015b; van Asselt et al., 2015), some authors emphasize
different governance approaches to implement the Paris Agreement.
Through the new proposed sustainable development mechanism in
Article 6, the Paris Agreement allows the space to harness the lowest
cost mitigation options worldwide. This may incentivize policymakers
to enhance mitigation ambition by speeding up climate action as part
of a `climate regime complex' (Keohane and Victor, 2011) of loosely
interrelated global governance institutions. In the Paris Agreement, the
`common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities'
(CBDR-RC) principle could be expanded and revisited under a `sharing
the pie' paradigm (Ji and Sha, 2015) as a tool to open innovation
processes towards alternative development pathways (Chapter 5).
COP 16 in Cancun was also the first time in the UNFCCC that
adaptation was recognized to have similar priority as mitigation. The
Paris Agreement recognizes the importance of adaptation action and
cooperation to enhance such action. Chung Tiam Fook (2017) and
Lesnikowski et al. (2017) suggest that the Paris Agreement is explicit
about multilevel adaptation governance, outlines stronger transparency
mechanisms, links adaptation to development and climate justice, and
is therefore suggestive of greater inclusiveness of non-state voices and
the broader contexts of social change.
1.5C-consistent pathways require further exploration of conditions of
trust and reciprocity amongst nation states (Schelling, 1991; Ostrom
and Walker, 2005). Some authors (Colman et al., 2011; Courtois et al.,
2015) suggest a departure from the vision of actors acting individually
in the pursuit of self-interest to that of iterated games with actors
interacting over time showing that reciprocity, with occasional
forgiveness and initial good faith, can lead to win-win outcomes and
to cooperation as a stable strategy (Axelrod and Hamilton, 1981).
Regional cooperation plays an important role in the context of
global governance. Literature on climate regimes has only started
353

4

Chapter 4

exploring innovative governance arrangements, including coalitions
of transnational actors including state, market and non-state actors
(Bulkeley et al., 2012; Hovi et al., 2016; Hagen et al., 2017; Hermwille
et al., 2017; Roelfsema et al., 2018) and groupings of countries, as
a complement to the UNFCCC (Abbott and Snidal, 2009; Biermann,
2010; Zelli, 2011; Nordhaus, 2015). Climate action requires multilevel
governance from the local and community level to national, regional
and international levels. Box 4.1 shows the role of sub-national
authorities (e.g., regions and provinces) in facilitating urban climate
action, while Box 4.2 shows that climate governance can be organized
across hydrological as well as political units.

4.4.1.3

4

Sub-national governance

Local governments can play a key role (Melica et al., 2018; RomeroLankao et al., 2018) in influencing mitigation and adaptation
strategies. It is important to understand how rural and urban
areas, small islands, informal settlements and communities might
intervene to reduce climate impacts (Bulkeley et al., 2011), either by
implementing climate objectives defined at higher government levels
or by taking initiative autonomously or collectively (Aall et al., 2007;
Reckien et al., 2014; Araos et al., 2016a; Heidrich et al., 2016). Local
governance faces the challenge of reconciling local concerns with
global objectives. Local governments could coordinate and develop
effective local responses, and could pursue procedural justice in
ensuring community engagement and more effective policies around
energy and vulnerability reduction (Moss et al., 2013; Fudge et al.,
2016). They can enable more participative decision-making (Barrett,
2015; Hesse, 2016). Fudge et al. (2016) argue that local authorities
are well-positioned to involve the wider community in: designing
and implementing climate policies, engaging with sustainable energy
generation (e.g., by supporting energy communities) (Slee, 2015), and
the delivery of demand-side measures and adaptation implementation.
By 2050, it is estimated three billion people will be living in slums and
informal settlements: neighbourhoods without formal governance, on
un-zoned land developments and in places that are exposed to climaterelated hazards (Bai et al., 2018). Emerging research is examining how
citizens can contribute informally to governance with rapid urbanization
and weaker government regulation (Sarmiento and Tilly, 2018). It
remains to be seen how the possibilities and consequences of alternative
urban governance models will be managed for large, complex problems
and for addressing inequality and urban adaptation (Amin and Cirolia,
2018; Bai et al., 2018; Sarmiento and Tilly, 2018).
Expanding networks of cities are sharing experiences on coping with
climate change and drawing economic and development benefits from
climate change responses - a recent institutional innovation. This could
be complemented by efforts of national governments to enhance local
climate action through national urban policies (Broekhoff et al., 2018).
Over the years, non-state actors have set up several transnational
climate governance initiatives to accelerate the climate response, for
example, ICLEI (1990), C-40 (2005), the Global Island Partnership
(2006) and the Covenant of Mayors (2008) (Gordon and Johnson,
2017; Hsu et al., 2017; Ringel, 2017; Kona et al., 2018; Melica et al.,
2018) and to exert influence on national governments and the UNFCCC

354

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

(Bulkeley, 2005). However, Michaelowa and Michaelowa (2017) find
low effectiveness for over 100 of such mitigation initiatives.

4.4.1.4

Interactions and processes for multilevel governance

Literature has proposed multilevel governance in climate change as
an enabler for systemic transformation and effective governance,
as the concept is thought to allow for combining decisions across
levels and sectors and across institutional types at the same level
(Romero-Lankao et al., 2018), with multilevel reinforcement and the
mobilization of economic interests at different levels of governance
(Janicke and Quitzow, 2017). These governance mechanisms are
based on accountability and transparency rules and participation and
coordination across and within these levels.
A study of 29 European countries showed that the rapid adoption
and diffusion of adaptation policymaking is largely driven by internal
factors, at the national and sub-national levels (Massey et al., 2014).
An assessment of national-level adaptation in 117 countries (BerrangFord et al., 2014) found good governance to be the one of the strongest
predictors of national adaptation policy. An analysis of the climate
responses of 200 large and medium-sized cities across eleven European
countries found that factors such as membership of climate networks,
population size, gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and adaptive
capacity act as drivers of mitigation and adaptation plans (Reckien et
al., 2015).
Adaptation policy has seen growth in some areas (Massey et al.,
2014; Lesnikowski et al., 2016), although efforts to track adaptation
progress are constrained by an absence of data sources on adaptation
(Berrang-Ford et al., 2011; Ford and Berrang-Ford, 2016; Magnan,
2016; Magnan and Ribera, 2016). Many developing countries have
made progress in formulating national policies, plans and strategies on
responding to climate change. The NDCs have been identified as one
such institutional mechanism (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this Chapter)
(Magnan et al., 2015; Kato and Ellis, 2016; Peters et al., 2017).
To overcome barriers to policy implementation, local conflicts of
interest or vested interests, strong leadership and agency is needed by
political leaders. As shown by the Covenant of Mayors initiative (Box
4.1), political leaders with a vision for the future of the local community
can succeed in reducing GHG emissions, when they are supported by
civil society (Rivas et al., 2015; Croci et al., 2017; Kona et al., 2018).
Any political vision would need to be translated into an action plan,
which could include elements describing policies and measures needed
to achieve transition, the human and financial resources needed,
milestones, and appropriate measurement and verification processes
(Azevedo and Leal, 2017). Discussing the plan with stakeholders
and civil society, including citizens and allowing for participation for
minorities, and having them provide input and endorse it, has been
found to increase the likelihood of success (Rivas et al., 2015; Wamsler,
2017). However, as described by Nightingale (2017) and Green (2016),
struggles over natural resources and adaptation governance both at
the national and community levels would also need to be addressed
`in politically unstable contexts, where power and politics shape
adaptation outcomes'.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Multilevel governance includes adaptation across local, regional, and
national scales (Adger et al., 2005). The whole-of-government approach
to understanding and influencing climate change policy design and
implementation puts analytical emphasis on how different levels of
government and different types of actors (e.g., public and private)
can constrain or support local adaptive capacity (Corfee-Morlot et al.,
2011), including the role of the civil society. National governments,
for example, have been associated with enhancing adaptive capacity
through building awareness of climate impacts, encouraging economic
growth, providing incentives, establishing legislative frameworks
conducive to adaptation, and communicating climate change
information (Berrang-Ford et al., 2014; Massey et al., 2014; Austin et al.,
2015; Henstra, 2016; Massey and Huitema, 2016). Local governments,
on the other hand, are responsible for delivering basic services and
utilities to the urban population, and protecting their integrity from
the impacts of extreme weather (Austin et al., 2015; Cloutier et al.,
2015; Nalau et al., 2015; Araos et al., 2016b). National policies and
transnational governance could be seen as complementary, rather
than competitors, and strong national policies favour transnational
engagement of sub- and non-state actors (Andonova et al., 2017).
Local initiatives are complementary with higher level policies and can
be integrated in the multilevel governance system (Fuhr et al., 2018).

Chapter 4

A multilevel approach considers that adaptation planning is affected
by scale mismatches between the local manifestation of climate
impacts and the diverse scales at which the problem is driven (Shi
et al., 2016). Multilevel approaches may be relevant in low-income
countries where limited financial resources and human capabilities
within local governments often lead to greater dependency on
national governments and other (donor) organizations, to strengthen
adaptation responses (Donner et al., 2016; Adenle et al., 2017).
National governments or international organizations may motivate
urban adaptation externally through broad policy directives or projects
by international donors. Municipal governments on the other hand
work within the city to spur progress on adaptation. Individual political
leadership in municipal government, for example, has been cited as
a factor driving the adaptation policies of early adapters in Quito,
Ecuador, and Durban, and South Africa (Anguelovski et al., 2014),
and for adaptation more generally (Smith et al., 2009). Adaptation
pathways can help identify maladaptive actions (Juhola et al., 2016;
Magnan et al., 2016; Gajjar et al., 2018) and encourage social learning
approaches across multiple levels of stakeholders in sectors such as
marine biodiversity and water supply (Bosomworth et al., 2015; Butler
et al., 2015; van der Brugge and Roosjen, 2015).

Box 4.1 | Multilevel Governance in the EU Covenant of Mayors: Example of the Provincia di Foggia
Since 2005, cities have emerged as a locus of institutional and governance climate innovation (Melica et al., 2018) and are driving
responses to climate change (Roberts, 2016). Many cities have adopted more ambitious greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction
targets than countries (Kona et al., 2018), with an overall commitment of GHG emission reduction targets by 2020 of 27%, almost
7 percentage points higher than the minimum target for 2020 (Kona et al., 2018). The Covenant of Mayors (CoM) is an initiative
in which municipalities voluntarily commit to CO2 emission reduction. The participation of small municipalities has been facilitated
by the development and testing of a new multilevel governance model involving Covenant Territorial Coordinators (CTCs), i.e.,
provinces and regions, which commit to providing strategic guidance and financial and technical support to municipalities in their
territories. Results from the 315 monitoring inventories submitted show an achievement of 23% reduction in emissions (compared
to an average year 2005) for more than half of the cities under a CTC schema (Kona et al., 2018).

4

The Province of Foggia, acting as a CTC, gave support to 36 municipalities to participate in the CoM and to prepare Sustainable
Energy Action Plans (SEAPs). The Province developed a common approach to prepare SEAPs, provided data to compile municipal
emission inventories (Bertoldi et al., 2018) and guided the signatory to identify an appropriate combination of measures to curb
GHG emissions. The local Chamber of Commerce also had a key role in the implementation of these projects by the municipalities
(Lombardi et al., 2016). The joint action by the province and the municipalities in collaboration with the local business community
could be seen as an example of multilevel governance (Lombardi et al., 2016).
Researchers have investigated local forms of collaboration within local government, with the active involvement of citizens and
stakeholders, and acknowledge that public acceptance is key to the successful implementation of policies (Larsen and GunnarssonOstling, 2009; Musall and Kuik, 2011; Pollak et al., 2011; Christoforidis et al., 2013; Pasimeni et al., 2014; Lee and Painter, 2015).
Achieving ambitious targets would need leadership, enhanced multilevel governance, vision and widespread participation in
transformative change (Castan Broto and Bulkeley, 2013; Rosenzweig et al., 2015; Castan Broto, 2017; Fazey et al., 2017; Wamsler,
2017; Romero-Lankao et al., 2018). The Chapter 5, Section 5.6.4 case studies of climate-resilient development pathways, at state
and community scales, show that participation, social learning and iterative decision-making are governance features of strategies
that deliver mitigation, adaptation, and sustainable development in a fair and equitable manner. Another insight is the finding
that incremental voluntary changes are amplified through community networking, polycentric governance (Dorsch and Flachsland,
2017), partnerships, and long-term change to governance systems at multiple levels (Stevenson and Dryzek, 2014; Lovbrand et al.,
2017; Pichler et al., 2017; Termeer et al., 2017).

355

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Box 4.2 | Watershed Management in a 1.5C World
Water management is necessary in order for the global community to adapt to 1.5C-consistent pathways. Cohesive planning
that includes numerous stakeholders would be required to improve access, utilization and efficiency of water use and to ensure
hydrologic viability.
Response to drought and El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) in southern Guatemala
Hydro-meteorological events, including ENSO, have impacted Central America (Steinhoff et al., 2014; Chang et al., 2015; Maggioni et
al., 2016) and are projected to increase in frequency during a 1.5C transition (Wang et al., 2017). The 2014-2016 ENSO damaged
agriculture, seriously impacting rural communities.
In 2016, the Climate Change Institute, in conjunction with local governments, the private sector, communities and human rights
organizations, established dialogue tables for different watersheds to discuss water usage amongst stakeholders and plans to
mitigate the effects of drought, alleviate social tension, and map water use of watersheds at risk. The goal was to encourage better
water resource management and to enhance ecological flow through improved communication, transparency, and coordination
amongst users. These goals were achieved in 2017 when each previously affected river reached the Pacific Ocean with at least its
minimum ecological flow (Guerra, 2017).
Drought management through the Limpopo Watercourse Commission
The governments sharing the Limpopo river basin (Botswana, Mozambique, South Africa and Zimbabwe) formed the Limpopo
Watercourse Commission in 2003 (Nyagwambo et al., 2008; Mitchell, 2013). It has an advisory body composed of working groups
that assess water use and sustainability, decide national level distribution of water access, and support disaster and emergency
planning. The Limpopo basin delta is highly vulnerable (Tessler et al., 2015), and is associated with a lack of infrastructure and
investment capacity, requiring increased economic development together with plans for vulnerability reduction (Tessler et al.,
2015) and water rights (Swatuk, 2015). The high vulnerability is influenced by gender inequality, limited stakeholder participation
and limited institutional capacity to address unequal water access (Mehta et al., 2014). The implementation of integrated water
resources management (IWRM) would need to consider pre-existing social, economic, historical and cultural contexts (Merrey,
2009; Mehta et al., 2014). The Commission therefore could play a role in improving participation and in providing an adaptable and
equitable strategy for cross-border water sharing (Ekblom et al., 2017).

4

Flood management in the Danube
The Danube River Protection Convention is the official instrument for cooperation on transboundary water governance between
the countries that share the Danube Basin. The International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR) provides
a strong science-policy link through expert working groups dealing with issues including governance, monitoring and assessment,
and flood protection (Schmeier, 2014). The Trans-National Monitoring Network (TNMN) was developed to undertake comprehensive
monitoring of water quality (Schmeier, 2014). Monitoring of water quality constitutes almost 50% of ICPDR's scientific publications,
although ICPDR also works on governance, basin planning, monitoring, and IWRM, indicating its importance. The ICPDR is an
example of IWRM `coordinating groundwater, surface water abstractions, flood management, energy production, navigation, and
water quality' (Hering et al., 2014).

Box 4.2 exemplifies how multilevel governance has been used for
watershed management in different basins, given the impacts on water
sources (Chapter 3, Section 3.4.2).

356

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Cross-Chapter Box 11 | Consistency Between Nationally Determined Contributions and 1.5C Scenarios
Contributing Authors:
Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Michel den Elzen (Netherlands), James Ford (Canada/UK), Richard Klein (Netherlands/Germany), Debora Ley
(Guatemala/Mexico), Timmons Roberts (USA), Joeri Rogelj (Austria/Belgium).

Mitigation
1. Introduction
There is high agreement that Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) are important for the global response to climate change
and represent an innovative bottom-up instrument in climate change governance (Section 4.4.1), with contributions from all
signatory countries (den Elzen et al., 2016; Rogelj et al., 2016; Vandyck et al., 2016; Luderer et al., 2018; Vrontisi et al., 2018). The
global emission projections resulting from full implementation of the NDCs represent an improvement compared to business as
usual (Rogelj et al., 2016) and current policies scenarios to 2030 (den Elzen et al., 2016; Vrontisi et al., 2018). Most G20 economies
would require new policies and actions to achieve their NDC targets (den Elzen et al., 2016; Vandyck et al., 2016; UNEP, 2017b;
Kuramochi et al., 2018).
2. The effect of NDCs on global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
Several studies estimate global emission levels that would be achieved under the NDCs (e.g., den Elzen et al., 2016; Luderer et al.,
2016; Rogelj et al., 2016, 2017; Vandyck et al., 2016; Rose et al., 2017; Vrontisi et al., 2018). Rogelj et al. (2016) and UNEP (2017b)
concluded that the full implementation of the unconditional and conditional NDCs are expected to result in global GHG emissions
of about 55 (52-58) and 53 (50-54) GtCO2-eq yr-1, respectively (Cross-Chapter Box 11, Figure 1 below).

Global greenhouse gas emissions, including LULUCFemissions (GtCO2-eq yr-1)

65

60

- 25th percentile

- Median
- 75th percentile

55

54
53
52

50

48
47

45

61
60
56

56

57

52
51

52

53
52

49

56
53
50
48

50

58

52

30

44
38

50

4

48
42
39

37

30

35
30
27
25

25
20

54
53

Conditional NDCs

47

Range of emissions (25th
percentile, median, 75th
percentile) in scenarios that
hold global mean
temperature increase below
1.5oC and 2C

35

Unconditional NDCs

55

44

40

NDC emission projections:

22
2010

2020
Current
policies

2020
Higher-2C

2020
Lower-2C

2020
2020
1.5C-high-OS 1.5C-low-OS

2020
Below-1.5C

2030
Current
policies

2030
Higher-2C

2030
Lower-2C

2030
2030
1.5C-high-OS 1.5C-low-OS

21

2030
Below-1.5C

Cross-Chapter Box 11, Figure 1 | GHG emissions are all expressed in units of CO2-equivalence computed with 100-year global warming potentials (GWPs) reported
in IPCC SAR, while the emissions for the 1.5C and 2C scenarios in Table 2.4 are reported using the 100-year GWPs reported in IPCC AR4, and are hence about 3%
higher. Using IPCC AR4 instead of SAR GWP values is estimated to result in a 2-3% increase in estimated 1.5C and 2C emissions levels in 2030. Source: based on
Rogelj et al. (2016) and UNEP (2017b).

3. The effect of NDCs on temperature increase and carbon budget
Estimates of global average temperature increase are 2.9C-3.4C above preindustrial levels with a greater than 66% probability
by 2100 (Rogelj et al., 2016; UNEP, 2017b), under a full implementation of unconditional NDCs and a continuation of climate action
similar to that of the NDCs. Full implementation of the conditional NDCs would lower the estimates by about 0.2C by 2100. As
an indication of the carbon budget implications of NDC scenarios, Rogelj et al. (2016) estimated cumulative emissions in the range

357

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Cross Chapter Box 11 (continued)

of 690 to 850 GtCO2 for the period 2011-2030 if the NDCs are successfully implemented. The carbon budget for post-2010 till 2100
compatible with staying below 1.5C with a 50-66% probability was estimated at 550-600 GtCO2 (Clarke et al., 2014; Rogelj et al.,
2016), which will be well exceeded by 2030 at full implementation of the NDCs (Chapter 2, Section 2.2 and Section 2.3.1).
4. The 2030 emissions gap with 1.5C and urgency of action
As the 1.5C pathways require reaching carbon neutrality by mid-century, the NDCs alone are not sufficient, as they have a time
horizon until 2030. Rogelj et al. (2016) and Hof et al. (2017) have used results or compared NDC pathways with emissions pathways
produced by integrated assessment models (IAMs) assessing the contribution of NDCs to achieve the 1.5C targets. There is high
agreement that current NDC emissions levels are not in line with pathways that limit warming to 1.5C by the end of the century
(Rogelj et al., 2016, 2017; Hof et al., 2017; UNEP, 2017b; Vrontisi et al., 2018). The median 1.5C emissions gap (>66% chance) for
the full implementation of both the conditional and unconditional NDCs for 2030 is 26 (19-29) to 28 (22-33) GtCO2-eq (CrossChapter Box 11, Figure 1 above).
Studies indicate important trade-offs of delaying global emissions reductions (Chapter 2, Sections 2.3.5 and 2.5.1). AR5 identified
flexibility in 2030 emission levels when pursuing a 2C objective (Clarke et al., 2014) indicating that strongest trade-offs for 2C
pathways could be avoided if emissions are limited to below 50 GtCO2-eq yr-1 in 2030 (here computed with the GWP-100 metric
of the IPCC SAR). New scenario studies show that full implementation of the NDCs by 2030 would imply the need for deeper and
faster emission reductions beyond 2030 in order to meet 2C, and also higher costs and efforts of negative emissions (Fujimori et
al., 2016; Sanderson et al., 2016; Rose et al., 2017; van Soest et al., 2017; Luderer et al., 2018). However, no flexibility has been found
for 1.5C-consistent pathways (Luderer et al., 2016; Rogelj et al., 2017), indicating that if emissions through 2030 are at NDC levels,
the resulting post-2030 reductions required to remain within a 1.5C-consistent carbon budget during the 21st century (Chapter 2,
Section 2.2) are not within the feasible operating space of IAMs. This indicates that the chances of failing to reach a 1.5C pathway
are significantly increased (Riahi et al., 2015), if near-term ambition is not strengthened beyond the level implied by current NDCs.
Accelerated and stronger short-term action and enhanced longer-term national ambition going beyond the NDCs would be needed
for 1.5C-consistent pathways. Implementing deeper emissions reductions than current NDCs would imply action towards levels
identified in Chapter 2, Section 2.3.3, either as part of or over-delivering on NDCs.
5. The impact of uncertainties on NDC emission levels
The measures proposed in NDCs are not legally binding (Nemet et al., 2017), further impacting estimates of anticipated 2030
emission levels. The aggregation of targets results in high uncertainty (Rogelj et al., 2017), which could be reduced with clearer
guidelines for compiling future NDCs focused more on energy accounting (Rogelj et al., 2017) and increased transparency and
comparability (Pauw et al., 2018).

4

Many factors would influence NDCs global aggregated effects, including: (1) variations in socio-economic conditions (GDP and
population growth), (2) uncertainties in historical emission inventories, (3) conditionality of certain NDCs, (4) definition of NDC
targets as ranges instead of single values, (5) the way in which renewable energy targets are expressed, and (6) the way in which
traditional biomass use is accounted for. Additionally, there are land-use mitigation uncertainties (Forsell et al., 2016; Grassi et al.,
2017). Land-use options play a key role in many country NDCs; however, many analyses on NDCs do not use country estimates on
land-use emissions, but use model estimates, mainly because of the large difference in estimating the `anthropogenic' forest sink
between countries and models (Grassi et al., 2017).
6. Comparing countries' NDC ambition (equity, cost optimal allocation and other indicators)
Various assessment frameworks have been proposed to analyse, benchmark and compare NDCs, and indicate possible strengthening,
based on equity and other indicators (Aldy et al., 2016; den Elzen et al., 2016; Hohne et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2017; Holz et al.,
2018).There is large variation in conformity/fulfilment with equity principles across NDCs and countries. Studies use assessment
frameworks based on six effort sharing categories in the AR5 (Clarke et al., 2014) with the principles of `responsibility', `capability'
and `equity' (Hohne et al., 2017; Pan et al., 2017; Robiou du Pont et al., 2017). There is an important methodological gap in
the assessment of the NDCs' fairness and equity implications, partly due to lack of information on countries' own assessments
(Winkler et al., 2017). Implementation of Article 2.2 of the Paris Agreement could reflect equity and the principle of `common but
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities', due to different national circumstances and different interpretations of
equity principles (Lahn and Sundqvist, 2017; Lahn, 2018).

358

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Cross Chapter Box 11 (continued)

Adaptation
The Paris Agreement recognizes adaptation by establishing a global goal for adaptation (Kato and Ellis, 2016; Rajamani, 2016;
Kinley, 2017; Lesnikowski et al., 2017; UNEP, 2017a). This is assessed qualitatively, as achieving a temperature goal would determine
the level of adaptation ambition required to deal with the consequent risks and impacts (Rajamani, 2016). Countries can include
domestic adaptation goals in their NDCs, which together with national adaptation plans (NAPs) give countries flexibility to design
and adjust their adaptation trajectories as their needs evolve and as progress is evaluated over time. A challenge for assessing
progress on adaptation globally is the aggregation of many national adaptation actions and approaches. Knowledge gaps still
remain about how to design measurement frameworks that generate and integrate national adaptation data without placing undue
burdens on countries (UNEP, 2017a).
The Paris Agreement stipulates that adaptation communications shall be submitted as a component of or in conjunction with
other communications, such as an NDC, a NAP, or a national communication. Of the 197 Parties to the UNFCCC, 140 NDCs have
an adaptation component, almost exclusively from developing countries. NDC adaptation components could be an opportunity
for enhancing adaptation planning and implementation by highlighting priorities and goals (Kato and Ellis, 2016). At the national
level they provide momentum for the development of NAPs and raise the profile of adaptation (Pauw et al., 2016b, 2018). The Paris
Agreement's transparency framework includes adaptation, through which `adaptation communication' and accelerated adaptation
actions are submitted and reviewed every five years (Hermwille, 2016; Kato and Ellis, 2016). This framework, unlike others used in
the past, is applicable to all countries taking into account differing capacities amongst Parties (Rajamani, 2016).
Adaptation measures presented in qualitative terms include sectors, risks and vulnerabilities that are seen as priorities by the Parties.
Sectoral coverage of adaptation actions identified in NDCs is uneven, with adaptation primarily reported to focus on the water
sector (71% of NDCs with adaptation component), agriculture (63%), health (54%), and biodiversity/ecosystems (50%) (Pauw et
al., 2016b, 2018).

4.4.2

Enhancing Institutional Capacities

The implementation of sound responses and strategies to enable a
transition to 1.5C world would require strengthening governance
and scaling up institutional capacities, particularly in developing
countries (Adenle et al., 2017; Rosenbloom, 2017). Building on the
characterization of governance in Section 4.4.1, this section examines
the necessary institutional capacity to implement actions to limit
warming to 1.5C and adapt to the consequences. This takes into
account a plurality of regional and local responses, as institutional
capacity is highly context-dependent (North, 1990; Lustick et al.,
2011).
Institutions would need to interact with one another and align across
scales to ensure that rules and regulations are followed (Chaffin
and Gunderson, 2016; Young, 2016). The institutional architecture
required for a 1.5C world would include the growing proportion of
the world's population that live in peri-urban and informal settlements
and engage in informal economic activity (Simone and Pieterse, 2017).
This population, amongst the most exposed to perturbed climates in
the world (Hallegatte et al., 2017), is also beyond the direct reach
of some policy instruments (Jaglin, 2014; Thieme, 2018). Strategies
that accommodate the informal rules of the game adopted by these
populations have large chances of success (McGranahan et al., 2016;
Kaika, 2017).
The goal for strengthening implementation is to ensure that these rules
and regulations embrace equity, equality and poverty alleviation along

1.5C-consistent pathways (mitigation) and enables the building of
adaptive capacity that together, will enable sustainable development
and poverty reduction.
Rising to the challenge of a transition to a 1.5C world would require
enhancing institutional climate change capacities along multiple
dimensions presented below.

4.4.2.1

Capacity for policy design and implementation

The enhancement of institutional capacity for integrated policy design
and implementation has long been among the top items on the UN
agenda of addressing global environmental problems and sustainable
development (see Chapter 5, Section 5.5) (UNEP, 2005).
Political stability, an effective regulatory and enforcement framework
(e.g., institutions to impose sanctions, collect taxes and to verify
building codes), access to a knowledge base and the availability of
resources, would be needed at various governance levels to address
a wide range of stakeholders and their concerns. The strengthening
of the global response would need to support these with different
interventions, in the context of sustainable development (Chapter 5,
Section 5.5.1) (Pasquini et al., 2015).
Given the scale of change needed to limit warming to 1.5C,
strengthening the response capacity of relevant institutions is best
addressed in ways that take advantage of existing decision-making
processes in local and regional governments and within cities and
359

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

communities (Romero-Lankao et al., 2013), and draws upon diverse
knowledge sources including indigenous and local knowledge
(Nakashima et al., 2012; Smith and Sharp, 2012; Mistry and Berardi,
2016; Tschakert et al., 2017). Examples of successful local institutional
processes and the integration of local knowledge in climate-related
decision-making are provided in Box 4.3 and Box 4.4.

settlements which are vulnerable to climate impacts. It is common
for 30-50% of urban populations in low-income nations to live in
informal settlements with no regulatory infrastructure (Revi et al.,
2014b). For example, in Huambo (Angola), a classified `urban' area
extends 20 km west of the city and is predominantly made up of
`unplanned' urban settlements (Smith and Jenkins, 2015).

Implementing 1.5C-consistent strategies would require wellfunctioning legal frameworks to be in place, in conjunction with
clearly defined mandates, rights and responsibilities to enable the
institutional capacity to deliver (Romero-Lankao et al., 2013). As
an example, current rates of urbanization occurring in cities with a
lack of institutional capacity for effective land-use planning, zoning
and infrastructure development result in unplanned, informal urban

Internationally, the Paris Agreement process has aimed at enhancing
the capacity of decision-making institutions in developing countries
to support effective implementation. These efforts are particularly
reflected in Article 11 of the Paris Agreement on capacity building
(the creation of the Paris Committee on Capacity Building), Article 13
(the creation of the Capacity Building Initiative on Transparency), and
Article 15 on compliance (UNFCCC, 2016).

Box 4.3 | Indigenous Knowledge and Community Adaptation
Indigenous knowledge refers to the understandings, skills and philosophies developed by societies with long histories of interaction
with their natural surroundings (UNESCO, 2017). This knowledge can underpin the development of adaptation and mitigation
strategies (Ford et al., 2014b; Green and Minchin, 2014; Pearce et al., 2015; Savo et al., 2016).
Climate change is an important concern for the Maya, who depend on climate knowledge for their livelihood. In Guatemala, the
collaboration between the Mayan K'iche population of the Nahualate river basin and the Climate Change Institute has resulted in
a catalogue of indigenous knowledge, used to identify indicators for watershed meteorological forecasts (Lopez and Alvarez, 2016).
These indicators are relevant but would need continuous assessment if their continued reliability is to be confirmed (Nyong et al.,
2007; Alexander et al., 2011; Mistry and Berardi, 2016). For more than ten years, Guatemala has maintained an `Indigenous Table
for Climate Change', to enable the consideration of indigenous knowledge in disaster management and adaptation development.

4

In Tanzania, increased variability of rainfall is challenging indigenous and local communities (Mahoo et al., 2015; Sewando et
al., 2016). The majority of agro-pastoralists use indigenous knowledge to forecast seasonal rainfall, relying on observations of
plant phenology, bird, animal, and insect behaviour, the sun and moon, and wind (Chang'a et al., 2010; Elia et al., 2014; Shaffer,
2014). Increased climate variability has raised concerns about the reliability of these indicators (Shaffer, 2014); therefore, initiatives
have focused on the co-production of knowledge by involving local communities in monitoring and discussing the implications of
indigenous knowledge and meteorological forecasts (Shaffer, 2014), and creating local forecasts by utilizing the two sources of
knowledge (Mahoo et al., 2013). This has resulted in increased documentation of indigenous knowledge, understanding of relevant
climate information amongst stakeholders, and adaptive capacity at the community level (Mahoo et al., 2013, 2015; Shaffer, 2014).
The Pacific Islands and small island developing states (SIDS) are vulnerable to the effects of climate change, but the cultural resilience
of Pacific Island inhabitants is also recognized (Nunn et al., 2017). In Fiji and Vanuatu, strategies used to prepare for cyclones include
building reserve emergency supplies and utilizing farming techniques to ensure adequate crop yield to combat potential losses
from a cyclone or drought (McNamara and Prasad, 2014; Granderson, 2017; Pearce et al., 2017). Social cohesion and kinship are
important in responding and preparing for climate-related hazards, including the role of resource sharing, communal labour, and
remittances (McMillen et al., 2014; Gawith et al., 2016; Granderson, 2017). There is a concern that indigenous knowledge will
weaken, a process driven by westernization and disruptions in established bioclimatic indicators and traditional planning calendars
(Granderson, 2017). In some urban settlements, it has been noted that cultural practices (e.g., prioritizing the quantity of food over
the quality of food) can lower food security through dispersing limited resources and by encouraging the consumption of cheap
but nutrient-poor foods (Mccubbin et al., 2017) (See Cross-Chapter Box 6 on Food Security in Chapter 3). Indigenous practices also
encounter limitations, particularly in relation to sea level rise (Nunn et al., 2017).

360

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Box 4.4 | Manizales, Colombia: Supportive National Government and Localized Planning and Integration
as an Enabling Condition for Managing Climate and Development Risks
Institutional reform in the city of Manizales, Colombia, helps identify three important features of an enabling environment:
integrating climate change adaptation, mitigation and disaster risk management at the city-scale; the importance of decentralized
planning and policy formulation within a supportive national policy environment; and the role of a multi-sectoral framework in
mainstreaming climate action in development activities.
Manizales is exposed to risks caused by rapid development and expansion in a mountainous terrain exposed to seismic activity and
periodic wet and dry spells. Local assessments expect climate change to amplify the risk of disasters (Carreno et al., 2017). The city
is widely recognized for its longstanding urban environmental policy (Biomanizales) and local environmental action plan (Bioplan),
and has been integrating environmental planning in its development agenda for nearly two decades (Velasquez Barrero, 1998;
Hardoy and Velasquez Barrero, 2014). When the city's environmental agenda was updated in 2014 to reflect climate change risks,
assessments were conducted in a participatory manner at the street and neighbourhood level (Hardoy and Velasquez Barrero, 2016).
The creation of a new Environmental Secretariat assisted in coordination and integration of environmental policies, disaster risk
management, development and climate change (Leck and Roberts, 2015). Planning in Manizales remains mindful of steep gradients
through its longstanding Slope Guardian programme that trains women and keeps records of vulnerable households. Planning also
looks to include mitigation opportunities and enhance local capacity through participatory engagement (Hardoy and Velasquez
Barrero, 2016).
Manizales' mayors were identified as important champions for much of these early integration and innovation efforts. Their
role may have been enabled by Colombia's history of decentralized approaches to planning and policy formulation, including
establishing environmental observatories (for continuous environmental assessment) and participatory tracking of environmental
indicators. Multi-stakeholder involvement has both enabled and driven progress, and has enabled the integration of climate risks in
development planning (Hardoy and Velasquez Barrero, 2016).

4.4.2.2

Monitoring, reporting, and review institutions

One of the novel features of the new climate governance architecture
emerging from the 2015 Paris Agreement is the transparency
framework in Article 13 committing countries, based on capacity,
to provide regular progress reports on national pledges to address
climate change (UNFCCC, 2016). Many countries will rely on public
policies and existing national reporting channels to deliver on their
NDCs under the Paris Agreement. Scaling up the mitigation and
adaptation efforts in these countries to be consistent with 1.5C
would put significant pressure on the need to develop, enhance and
streamline local, national and international climate change reporting
and monitoring methodologies and institutional capacity in relation
to mitigation, adaptation, finance, and GHG inventories (Ford et al.,
2015b; Lesnikowski et al., 2015; Schoenefeld et al., 2016). Consistent
with this direction, the provision of the information to the stocktake
under Article 14 of the Paris Agreement would contribute to enhancing
reporting and transparency (UNFCCC, 2016). Nonetheless, approaches,
reporting procedures, reference points, and data sources to assess
progress on implementation across and within nations are still largely
underdeveloped (Ford et al., 2015b; Araos et al., 2016b; Magnan and
Ribera, 2016; Lesnikowski et al., 2017). The availability of independent
private and public reporting and statistical institutions are integral to
oversight, effective monitoring, reporting and review. The creation and
enhancement of these institutions would be an important contribution
to an effective transition to a low-emission world.

4.4.2.3

Financial institutions

4

IPCC AR5 assessed that in order to enable a transition to a 2C pathway,
the volume of climate investments would need to be transformed along
with changes in the pattern of general investment behaviour towards
low emissions. The report argued that, compared to 2012, annually up
to a trillion dollars in additional investment in low-emission energy and
energy efficiency measures may be required until 2050 (Blanco et al.,
2014; IEA, 2014a). Financing of 1.5C would present an even greater
challenge, addressing financing of both existing and new assets, which
would require significant transitions to the type and structure of financial
institutions as well as to the method of financing (Cochrani et al., 2014;
Ma, 2014). Both public and private financial institutions would be needed
to contribute to the large resource mobilization needed for 1.5C, yet, in
the ordinary course of business, these transitions may not be expected.
On the one hand, private financial institutions could face scale-up risk,
for example, the risks associated with commercialization and scaling
up of renewable technologies to accelerate mitigation (Wilson, 2012;
Hartley and Medlock, 2013) and/or price risk, such as carbon price
volatility that carbon markets could face. In contrast, traditional public
financial institutions are limited by both structure and instruments, while
concessional financing would require taxpayer support for subsidization.
Special efforts and innovative approaches would be needed to address
these challenges, for example the creation of special institutions that
underwrite the value of emission reductions using auctioned price floors
(Bodnar et al., 2018) to deal with price volatility.

361

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Financial institutions are equally important for adaptation.
Linnerooth-Bayer and Hochrainer-Stigler (2015) discussed the
benefits of financial instruments in adaptation, including the
provision of post-disaster finances for recovery and pre-disaster
security necessary for climate adaptation and poverty reduction.
Pre-disaster financial instruments and options include insurance,
such as index-based weather insurance schemes, catastrophe bonds,
and laws to encourage insurance purchasing. The development and
enhancement of microfinance institutions to ensure social resilience
and smooth transitions in the adaptation to climate change impacts
could be an important local institutional innovation (Hammill et al.,
2008).

4.4.2.4

Co-operative institutions and social safety nets

Effective cooperative institutions and social safety nets may help
address energy access and adaptation, as well as distributional impacts
during the transition to 1.5C-consistent pathways and enabling
sustainable development. Not all countries have the institutional
capabilities to design and manage these. Social capital for adaptation
in the form of bonding, bridging, and linking social institutions has
proved to be effective in dealing with climate crises at the local,
regional and national levels (Aldrich et al., 2016).

4

The shift towards sustainable energy systems in transitioning
economies could impact the livelihoods of large populations in
traditional and legacy employment sectors. The transition of selected
EU Member States to biofuels, for example, caused anxiety among
farmers, who lacked confidence in the biofuel crop market. Enabling
contracts between farmers and energy companies, involving local
governments, helped create an atmosphere of confidence during the
transition (McCormick and Kaberger, 2007).
How do broader socio-economic processes influence urban
vulnerabilities and thereby underpin climate change adaptation?
This is a systemic challenge originating from a lack of collective
societal ownership of the responsibility for climate risk management.
Explanations for this situation include competing time-horizons due

to self-interest of stakeholders to a more `rational' conception of risk
assessment, measured across a risk-tolerance spectrum (Moffatt, 2014).
Self-governing and self-organised institutional settings, where
equipment and resource systems are commonly owned and managed,
can potentially generate a much higher diversity of administration
solutions, than other institutional arrangements, where energy
technology and resource systems are either owned and administered
individually in market settings or via a central authority (e.g., the
state). They can also increase the adaptability of technological systems
while reducing their burden on the environment (Labanca, 2017).
Educational, learning and awareness-building institutions can help
strengthen the societal response to climate change (Butler et al., 2016;
Thi Hong Phuong et al., 2017).

4.4.3

Enabling Lifestyle and Behavioural Change

Humans are at the centre of global climate change: their actions cause
anthropogenic climate change, and social change is key to effectively
responding to climate change (Vlek and Steg, 2007; Dietz et al., 2013;
ISSC and UNESCO, 2013; Hackmann et al., 2014). Chapter 2 shows
that 1.5C-consistent pathways assume substantial changes in
behaviour. This section assesses the potential of behaviour change, as
the integrated assessment models (IAMs) applied in Chapter 2 do not
comprehensively asses this potential.
Table 4.8 shows examples of mitigation and adaption actions relevant
for 1.5C-consistent pathways. Reductions in population growth can
reduce overall carbon demand and mitigate climate change (Bridgeman,
2017), particularly when population growth is accompanied by increases
in affluence and carbon-intensive consumption (Rosa and Dietz, 2012;
Clayton et al., 2017). Mitigation actions with a substantial carbon
emission reduction potential (see Figure 4.3) that individuals may
readily adopt would have the most climate impact (Dietz et al., 2009).
Various policy approaches and strategies can encourage and enable
climate actions by individuals and organizations. Policy approaches
would be more effective when they address key contextual and psycho-

Table 4.8 | Examples of mitigation and adaptation behaviours relevant for 1.5C (Dietz et al., 2009; Jabeen, 2014; Taylor et al., 2014; Araos et al., 2016b; Steg, 2016; Stern et
al., 2016b; Creutzig et al., 2018)
Climate action

Mitigation

362

Type of action

Examples

Implementing resource efficiency in buildings

Insulation
Low-carbon building materials

Adopting low-emission innovations

Electric vehicles
Heat pumps, district heating and cooling

Adopting energy efficient appliances

Energy-efficient heating or cooling
Energy-efficient appliances

Energy-saving behaviour

Walking or cycling rather than drive short distances
Using mass transit rather than flying
Lower temperature for space heating
Line drying of laundry
Reducing food waste

Buying products and materials with low GHG
emissions during production and transport

Reducing meat and dairy consumption
Buying local, seasonal food
Replacing aluminium products by low-GHG alternatives

Organisational behaviour

Designing low-emission products and procedures
Replacing business travel by videoconferencing

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.8 (continued)
Climate action

Type of action

Using crops with higher tolerance for higher temperatures or CO2 elevation

Flood protective behaviour

Elevating barriers between rooms
Building elevated storage spaces
Building drainage channels outside the home

Heat protective behaviour

Staying hydrated
Moving to cooler places
Installing green roofs

Efficient water use during water shortage crisis

Rationing water
Constructing wells or rainwater tanks

Adoption of renewable energy sources

Solar PV
Solar water heaters

Citizenship behaviour

Engage through civic channels to encourage or support planning for low-carbon
climate-resilient development

Adaptation

Mitigation &
adaptation

Examples

Growing different crops and raising different animal varieties

4

Figure 4.3 | Examples of mitigation behaviour and their GHG emission reduction potential. Mitigation potential assessments are printed in different
units. Based on [1] Carlsson-Kanyama and Gonzalez (2009); [2] Tuomisto and Teixeira de Mattos (2011); [3] Springmann et al. (2016); [4] Nijland and Meerkerk (2017); [5]
Woodcock et al. (2009); [6] Salon et al. (2012); [7] Dietz et al. (2009); [8] Mulville et al. (2017); [9] Huebner and Shipworth (2017); [10] Jaboyedoff et al. (2004); [11] Pellegrino
et al. (2016); [12] Nagele et al. (2017).

social factors influencing climate actions, which differ across contexts
and individuals (Steg and Vlek, 2009; Stern, 2011). This suggests
that diverse policy approaches would be needed in 1.5C-consistent
pathways in different contexts and regions. Combinations of policies
that target multiple barriers and enabling factors simultaneously can
be more effective (Nissinen et al., 2015).

In the United States and Europe, GHG emissions are lower when
legislators have strong environmental records (Jensen and Spoon, 2011;
Dietz et al., 2015). Political elites affect public concern about climate
change: pro-climate action statements increased concern, while anticlimate action statements and anti-environment voting reduced public
concern about climate change (Brulle et al., 2012). In the European
363

Chapter 4

Union (EU), individuals worry more about climate change and engage
more in climate actions in countries where political party elites are
united rather than divided in their support for environmental issues
(Sohlberg, 2017).
This section discusses how to enable and encourage behaviour and
lifestyle changes that strengthen implementation of 1.5C-consistent
pathways by assessing psycho-social factors related to climate action,
as well as the effects and acceptability of policy approaches targeting
climate actions that are consistent with 1.5C. Box 4.5 and Box 4.6
illustrate how these have worked in practice.

4.4.3.1

Factors related to climate actions

Mitigation and adaptation behaviour is affected by many factors that
shape which options are feasible and considered by individuals. Besides
contextual factors (see other sub-sections in Section 4.4), these include
abilities and different types of motivation to engage in behaviour.

4

Ability to engage in climate action. Individuals more often engage
in adaptation (Gebrehiwot and van der Veen, 2015; Koerth et al.,
2017) and mitigation behaviour (Pisano and Lubell, 2017) when they
are or feel more capable to do so. Hence, it is important to enhance
ability to act on climate change, which depends on income and
knowledge, among other things. A higher income is related to higher
CO2 emissions; higher income groups can afford more carbon-intensive
lifestyles (Lamb et al., 2014; Dietz et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015). Yet
low-income groups may lack resources to invest in energy-efficient
technology and refurbishments (Andrews-Speed and Ma, 2016) and
adaptation options (Wamsler, 2007; Fleming et al., 2015b; Takahashi et
al., 2016). Adaptive capacity further depends on gender roles (Jabeen,
2014; Bunce and Ford, 2015), technical capacities and knowledge
(Feola et al., 2015; Eakin et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2016b).
Knowledge of the causes and consequences of climate change and
of ways to reduce GHG emissions is not always accurate (Bord et al.,
2000; Whitmarsh et al., 2011; Tobler et al., 2012), which can inhibit
climate actions, even when people would be motivated to act. For
example, people overestimate savings from low-energy activities,
and underestimate savings from high-energy activities (Attari et al.,
2010). They know little about `embodied' energy (i.e., energy needed
to produce products; Tobler et al., 2011), including meat (de Boer et
al., 2016b). Some people mistake weather for climate (Reynolds et al.,
2010), or conflate climate risks with other hazards, which can inhibit
adequate adaptation (Taylor et al., 2014).
More knowledge on adaptation is related to higher engagement in
adaptation actions in some circumstances (Bates et al., 2009; van
Kasteren, 2014; Hagen et al., 2016). How adaptation is framed in
the media can influence the types of options viewed as important in
different contexts (Boykoff et al., 2013; Moser, 2014; Ford and King,
2015).
Knowledge is important, but is often not sufficient to motivate action
(Trenberth et al., 2016). Climate change knowledge and perceptions
are not strongly related to mitigation actions (Hornsey et al., 2016).
Direct experience of events related to climate change influences
364

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

climate concerns and actions (Blennow et al., 2012; Taylor et al., 2014),
more so than second-hand information (Spence et al., 2011; Myers et
al., 2012; Demski et al., 2017); high impact events with low frequency
are remembered more than low impact regular events (Meze-Hausken,
2004; Singh et al., 2016b; Sullivan-Wiley and Short Gianotti, 2017).
Personal experience with climate hazards strengthens motivation to
protect oneself (Jabeen, 2014) and enhances adaptation actions (Bryan
et al., 2009; Berrang-Ford et al., 2011; Demski et al., 2017), although
this does not always translate into proactive adaptation (Taylor et
al., 2014). Collectively constructed notions of risk and expectations
of future climate variability shape risk perception and adaptation
behaviour (Singh et al., 2016b). People with particular political views
and those who emphasize individual autonomy may reject climate
science knowledge and believe that there is widespread scientific
disagreement about climate change (Kahan, 2010; O'Neill et al., 2013),
inhibiting support for climate policy (Ding et al., 2011; McCright et al.,
2013). This may explain why extreme weather experiences enhances
preparedness to reduce energy use among left- but not right-leaning
voters (Ogunbode et al., 2017).
Motivation to engage in climate action. Climate actions are
more strongly related to motivational factors than to knowledge,
reflecting individuals' reasons for actions, such as values, ideology
and worldviews (Hornsey et al., 2016). People consider various types
of costs and benefits of actions (Golz and Hahnel, 2016) and focus
on consequences that have implications for the values they find most
important (Dietz et al., 2013; Hahnel et al., 2015; Steg, 2016). This
implies that different individuals consider different consequences when
making choices. People who strongly value protecting the environment
and other people generally more strongly consider climate impacts and
act more on climate change than those who strongly endorse hedonic
and egoistic values (Taylor et al., 2014; Steg, 2016). People are more
prone to adopt sustainable innovations when they are more open to
new ideas (Jansson, 2011; Wolske et al., 2017). Further, a free-market
ideology is associated with weaker climate change beliefs (McCright
and Dunlap, 2011; Hornsey et al., 2016), and a capital-oriented culture
tends to promote activity associated with GHG emissions (Kasser et
al., 2007).
Some indigenous populations believe it is arrogant to predict the
future, and some cultures have belief systems that interpret natural
phenomena as sentient, where thoughts and words are believed to
influence the future, with people reluctant to talk about negative future
possibilities (Natcher et al., 2007; Flynn et al., 2018). Integrating these
considerations into the design of adaptation and mitigation policy is
important (Cochran et al., 2013; Chapin et al., 2016; Brugnach et al.,
2017; Flynn et al., 2018).
People are more prone to act on climate change when individual benefits
of actions exceed costs (Steg and Vlek, 2009; Kardooni et al., 2016;
Wolske et al., 2017). For this reason, people generally prefer adoption of
energy-efficient appliances above energy-consumption reductions; the
latter is perceived as more costly (Poortinga et al., 2003; Steg et al.,
2006), although transaction costs can inhibit the uptake of mitigation
technology (Mundaca, 2007). Decentralized renewable energy systems
are evaluated most favourably when they guarantee independence,
autonomy, control and supply security (Ecker et al., 2017).

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Besides, social costs and benefits affect climate action (Farrow et al.,
2017). People engage more in climate actions when they think others
expect them to do so and when others act as well (Nolan et al., 2008;
Le Dang et al., 2014; Truelove et al., 2015; Rai et al., 2016), and when
they experience social support (Singh et al., 2016a; Burnham and Ma,
2017; Wolske et al., 2017). Discussing effective actions with peers also
encourages climate action (Esham and Garforth, 2013), particularly
when individuals strongly identify with their peers (Biddau et al.,
2012; Fielding and Hornsey, 2016). Further, individuals may engage
in mitigation actions when they think doing so would enhance their
reputation (Milinski et al., 2006; Noppers et al., 2014; Kastner and
Stern, 2015). Such social costs and benefits can be addressed in climate
policy (see Section 4.4.3.2).
Feelings affect climate action (Brosch et al., 2014). Negative feelings
related to climate change can encourage adaptation action (Kerstholt
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017), while positive feelings associated with
climate risks may inhibit protective behaviour (Lefevre et al., 2015).
Individuals are more prone to engage in mitigation actions when they
worry about climate change (Verplanken and Roy, 2013) and when
they expect to derive positive feelings from such actions (Pelletier et
al., 1998; Taufik et al., 2016).
Furthermore, collective consequences affect climate actions
(Balcombe et al., 2013; Doci and Vasileiadou, 2015; Kastner and
Stern, 2015). People are motivated to see themselves as morally
right, which encourages mitigation actions (Steg et al., 2015),
particularly when long-term goals are salient (Zaval et al., 2015) and
behavioural costs are not too high (Diekmann and Preisendorfer,
2003). Individuals are more prone to engage in climate actions when
they believe climate change is occurring, when they are aware of
threats caused by climate change and by their inaction, and when
they think they can engage in actions that will reduce these threats
(Esham and Garforth, 2013; Arunrat et al., 2017; Chatrchyan et al.,
2017). The more individuals are concerned about climate change and
aware of the negative climate impact of their behaviour, the more
they feel responsible for their actions and think that their actions can
help reduce such negative impacts, which can strengthen their moral
norms to act accordingly (Steg and de Groot, 2010; Jakovcevic and
Steg, 2013; Chen, 2015; Ray et al., 2017; Wolske et al., 2017; Woods
et al., 2017). Individuals may engage in mitigation actions when
they see themselves as supportive of the environment (i.e., strong
environmental self-identity) (Fielding et al., 2008; van der Werff et
al., 2013b; Kashima et al., 2014; Barbarossa et al., 2017); a strong
environmental identity strengthens intrinsic motivation to engage
in mitigation actions both at home (van der Werff et al., 2013a)
and at work (Ruepert et al., 2016). Environmental self-identity is
strengthened when people realize they have engaged in mitigation
actions, which can in turn promote further mitigation actions (van der
Werff et al., 2014b).
Individuals are less prone to engage in adaptation behaviour
themselves when they rely on external measures such as government
interventions (Grothmann and Reusswig, 2006; Wamsler and Brink,
2014a; Armah et al., 2015; Burnham and Ma, 2017) or perceive
themselves as protected by god (Gandure et al., 2013; Dang et al.,
2014; Cannon, 2015).

Chapter 4

Habits, heuristics and biases. Decisions are often not based on
weighing costs and benefits, but on habit or automaticity, both of
individuals (Aarts and Dijksterhuis, 2000; Kloeckner et al., 2003)
and within organizations (Dooley, 2017) and institutions (Munck
et al., 2014). When habits are strong, individuals are less perceptive
of information (Verplanken et al., 1997; Aarts et al., 1998) and may
not consider alternatives as long as outcomes are good enough
(Marechal, 2010). Habits are mostly only reconsidered when the
situation changed significantly (Fujii and Kitamura, 2003; Marechal,
2010; Verplanken and Roy, 2016). Hence, strategies that create the
opportunity for reflection and encourage active decisions can break
habits (Steg et al., 2018).
Individuals can follow heuristics, or `rules of thumb', in making
inferences, which demand less cognitive resources, knowledge
and time than thinking through all implications of actions (Preston
et al., 2013; Frederiks et al., 2015; Gillingham and Palmer, 2017).
For example, people tend to think that larger and more visible
appliances use more energy, which is not always accurate (Cowen
and Gatersleben, 2017). They underestimate energy used for water
heating and overestimate energy used for lighting (Stern, 2014).
When facing choice overload, people may choose the easiest or first
available option, which can inhibit energy-saving behaviour (Stern
and Gardner, 1981; Frederiks et al., 2015). As a result, individuals
and firms often strive for satisficing (`good enough') outcomes with
regard to energy decisions (Wilson and Dowlatabadi, 2007; Klotz,
2011), which can inhibit investments in energy efficiency (Decanio,
1993; Frederiks et al., 2015).
Biases also play a role. In Mozambique, farmers displayed omission
biases (unwillingness to take adaptation actions with potentially
negative consequences to avoid personal responsibility for losses),
while policymakers displayed action biases (wanting to demonstrate
positive action despite potential negative consequences; Patt and
Schroter, 2008). People tend to place greater value on relative losses
than gains (Kahneman, 2003). Perceived gains and losses depend on
the reference point or status-quo (Kahneman, 2003). Loss aversion
and the status-quo bias prevent consumers from switching electricity
suppliers (Ek and Soderholm, 2008), to time-of-use electricity tariffs
(Nicolson et al., 2017), and to accept new energy systems (Leijten et
al., 2014).
Owned inefficient appliances and fossil fuel-based electricity can act as
endowments, increasing their value compared to alternatives (Pichert
and Katsikopoulos, 2008; Dinner et al., 2011). Uncertainty and loss
aversion lead consumers to undervalue future energy savings (Greene,
2011) and savings from energy efficient technologies (Kolstad et al.,
2014). Uncertainties about the performance of products and illiquidity
of investments can drive consumers to postpone (profitable) energyefficient investments (Sutherland, 1991; van Soest and Bulte, 2001).
People with a higher tendency to delay decisions may engage less
in energy saving actions (Lillemo, 2014). Training energy auditors in
loss-aversion increased their clients' investments in energy efficiency
improvements (Gonzales et al., 1988). Engagement in energy saving
and renewable energy programmes can be enhanced if participation is
set as a default option (Pichert and Katsikopoulos, 2008; Olander and
Thogersen, 2014; Ebeling and Lotz, 2015).
365

4

Chapter 4

4.4.3.2

Strategies and policies to promote actions
on climate change

Policy can enable and strengthen motivation to act on climate change
via top-down or bottom-up approaches, through informational
campaigns, regulatory measures, financial (dis)incentives, and
infrastructural and technological changes (Adger et al., 2003; Steg and
Vlek, 2009; Henstra, 2016).
Adaptation efforts tend to focus on infrastructural and technological
solutions (Ford and King, 2015) with lower emphasis on socio-cognitive
and finance aspects of adaptation. For example, flooding policies in
cities focus on infrastructure projects and regulation such as building
codes, and hardly target individual or household behaviour (Araos et
al., 2016b; Georgeson et al., 2016).
Current mitigation policies emphasize infrastructural and technology
development, regulation, financial incentives and information
provision (Mundaca and Markandya, 2016) that can create conditions
enabling climate action, but target only some of the many factors
influencing climate actions (see Section 4.4.5.1). They fall short of
their true potential if their social and psychological implications are

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

overlooked (Stern et al., 2016a). For example, promising energysaving or low-carbon technology may not be adopted or not be used
as intended (Pritoni et al., 2015) when people lack resources and
trustworthy information (Stern, 2011; Balcombe et al., 2013).
Financial incentives or feedback on financial savings can encourage
climate action (Santos, 2008; Bolderdijk et al., 2011; Maki et al.,
2016) (see Box 4.5), but are not always effective (Delmas et al.,
2013) and can be less effective than social rewards (Handgraaf et
al., 2013) or emphasising benefits for people and the environment
(Bolderdijk et al., 2013b; Asensio and Delmas, 2015; Schwartz et
al., 2015). The latter can happen when financial incentives reduce
a focus on environmental considerations and weaken intrinsic
motivation to engage in climate action (Evans et al., 2012; Agrawal
et al., 2015; Schwartz et al., 2015). In addition, pursuing small
financial gains is perceived to be less worth the effort than pursuing
equivalent CO2 emission reductions (Bolderdijk et al., 2013b; Dogan
et al., 2014). Also, people may not respond to financial incentives
(e.g., to improve energy efficiency) because they do not trust the
organization sponsoring incentive programmes (Mundaca, 2007) or
when it takes too much effort to receive the incentive (Stern et al.,
2016a).

Box 4.5 | How Pricing Policy has Reduced Car Use in Singapore, Stockholm and London
In Singapore, Stockholm and London, car ownership, car use, and GHG emissions have reduced because of pricing and regulatory
policies and policies facilitating behaviour change. Notably, acceptability of these policies has increased as people experienced their
positive effects.

4

Singapore implemented electronic road pricing in the central business district and at major expressways, a vehicle quota and
registration fee system, and investments in mass transit. In the vehicle quota system introduced in 1990, registration of new vehicles
is conditional upon a successful bid (via auctioning) (Chu, 2015), costing about 50,000 USD in 2014 (LTA, 2015). The registration
tax incentivizes purchases of low-emission vehicles via a feebate system. As a result, per capita transport emissions (approximately
1.25 tCO2yr-1) and car ownership (107 vehicles per 1000 capita) (LTA, 2017) are substantially lower than in cities with comparable
income levels. Modal share of public transport was 63% during peak hours in 2013 (LTA, 2013).
The Stockholm congestion charge implemented in 2007 (after a trial in 2006) reduced kilometres driven in the inner city by 16%, and
outside the city by 5%; traffic volumes reduced by 20% and remained constant over time despite economic and population growth
(Eliasson, 2014). CO2 emissions from traffic reduced by 2-3% in Stockholm county. Vehicles entering or leaving the city centre
were charged during weekdays (except for holidays). Charges were 1-2 (maximum 6 per day), being higher during peak hours;
taxis, emergency vehicles and buses were exempted. Before introducing the charge, public transport and parking places near mass
transit stations were extended. The aim and effects of the charge were extensively communicated to the public. Acceptability of the
congestion charge was initially low, but the scheme gained support of about two-thirds of the population and all political parties
after it was implemented (Eliasson, 2014), which may be related to the fact that the revenues were earmarked for constructing
a motorway tunnel. After the trial, people believed that the charge had more positive effects on environmental, congestion and
parking problems while costs increased less than they anticipated beforehand (Schuitema et al., 2010a). The initially hostile media
eventually declared the scheme to be a success.
In 2003, a congestion charge was implemented in the Greater London area, with an enforcement and compliance scheme and an
information campaign on the functioning of the scheme. Vehicles entering, leaving, driving or parking on a public road in the zone
at weekdays at daytime pay a congestion charge of 8 (until 2005, 5), with some exemptions. Revenues were invested in London's
bus network (80%), cycling facilities, and road safety measures (Leape, 2006). The number of cars entering the zone decreased by
18% in 2003 and 2004. In the charging zone, vehicle kilometres driven decreased by 15% in the first year and a further 6% a year
later, while CO2 emissions from road traffic reduced by 20% (Santos, 2008).

366

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

While providing information on the causes and consequences of climate
change or on effective climate actions generally increases knowledge,
it often does not encourage engagement in climate actions by
individuals (Abrahamse et al., 2005; Unal et al., 2017) or organizations
(Anderson and Newell, 2004). Similarly, media coverage on the UN
Climate Summit slightly increased knowledge about the conference
but did not enhance motivation to engage personally in climate
protection (Bruggemann et al., 2017). Fear-inducing representations of
climate change may inhibit action when they make people feel helpless
and overwhelmed (O'Neill and Nicholson-Cole, 2009). Energy-related
recommendations and feedback (e.g., via performance contracts,
energy audits, smart metering) are more effective for promoting energy
conservation, load shifting in electricity use and sustainable travel
choices when framed in terms of losses rather than gains (Gonzales et
al., 1988; Wolak, 2011; Bradley et al., 2016; Bager and Mundaca, 2017).
Credible and targeted information at the point of decision can promote
climate action (Stern et al., 2016a). For example, communicating the
impacts of climate change is more effective when provided right
before adaptation decisions are taken (e.g., before the agricultural
season) and when bundled with information on potential actions to
ameliorate impacts, rather than just providing information on climate
projections with little meaning to end users (e.g., weather forecasts,
seasonal forecasts, decadal climate trends) (Dorward et al., 2015;
Singh et al., 2017). Similarly, heat action plans that provide early alerts
and advisories combined with emergency public health measures can
reduce heat-related morbidity and mortality (Benmarhnia et al., 2016).
Information provision is more effective when tailored to the personal
situation of individuals, demonstrating clear impacts, and resonating
with individuals' core values (Daamen et al., 2001; Abrahamse et al.,
2007; Bolderdijk et al., 2013a; Dorward et al., 2015; Singh et al., 2017).
Tailored information prevents information overload, and people are
more motivated to consider and act upon information that aligns with
their core values and beliefs (Campbell and Kay, 2014; Hornsey et al.,
2016). Also, tailored information can remove barriers to receive and
interpret information faced by vulnerable groups, such as the elderly
during heatwaves (Vandentorren et al., 2006; Keim, 2008). Further,
prompts can be effective when they serve as reminders to perform a
planned action (Osbaldiston and Schott, 2012).
Feedback provision is generally effective in promoting mitigation
behaviour within households (Abrahamse et al., 2005; Delmas et al.,
2013; Karlin et al., 2015) and at work (Young et al., 2015), particularly
when provided in real-time or immediately after the action (Abrahamse
et al., 2005), which makes the implications of one's behaviour more
salient (Tiefenbeck et al., 2016). Simple information is more effective
than detailed and technical data (Wilson and Dowlatabadi, 2007; Ek
and Soderholm, 2010; Frederiks et al., 2015). Energy labels (Banerjee
and Solomon, 2003; Stadelmann, 2017), visualization techniques (Pahl
et al., 2016), and ambient persuasive technology (Midden and Ham,
2012) can encourage mitigation actions by providing information
and feedback in a format that immediately makes sense and hardly
requires users' conscious attention.
Social influence approaches that emphasize what other people do or
think can encourage climate action (Clayton et al., 2015), particularly

Chapter 4

when they involve face-to-face interaction (Abrahamse and Steg, 2013).
For example, community approaches, where change is initiated from
the bottom-up, can promote adaptation (see Box 4.6) and mitigation
actions (Middlemiss, 2011; Seyfang and Haxeltine, 2012; Abrahamse
and Steg, 2013), especially when community ties are strong (Weenig
and Midden, 1991). Furthermore, providing social models of desired
actions can encourage mitigation action (Osbaldiston and Schott,
2012; Abrahamse and Steg, 2013). Social influence approaches that do
not involve social interaction, such as social norm, social comparison
and group feedback, are less effective, but can be easily administered
on a large scale at low costs (Allcott, 2011; Abrahamse and Steg, 2013).
Goal setting can promote mitigation action when goals are not set
too low or too high (Loock et al., 2013). Commitment strategies where
people make a pledge to engage in climate actions can encourage
mitigation behaviour (Abrahamse and Steg, 2013; Lokhorst et al., 2013),
particularly when individuals also indicate how and when they will
perform the relevant action and anticipate how to cope with possible
barriers (i.e., implementation intentions) (Bamberg, 2000, 2002). Such
strategies take advantage of individuals' desire to be consistent (Steg,
2016). Similarly, hypocrisy-related strategies that make people aware of
inconsistencies between their attitudes and behaviour can encourage
mitigation actions (Osbaldiston and Schott, 2012).
Actions that reduce climate risks can be rewarded and facilitated, while
actions that increase climate risks can be punished and inhibited, and
behaviour change can be voluntary (e.g., information provision) or
imposed (e.g., by law); voluntary changes that involve rewards are
more acceptable than imposed changes that restrict choices (Eriksson
et al., 2006, 2008; Steg et al., 2006; Dietz et al., 2007). Policies punishing
maladaptive behaviour can increase vulnerability when they reinforce
socio-economic inequalities that typically produce the maladaptive
behaviour in the first place (Adger et al., 2003). Change can be initiated
by governments at various levels, but also by individuals, communities,
profit-making organizations, trade organizations, and other nongovernmental actors (Lindenberg and Steg, 2013; Robertson and
Barling, 2015; Stern et al., 2016b).
Strategies can target intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation. It may be
particularly important to enhance intrinsic motivation so that people
voluntarily engage in climate action over and again (Steg, 2016).
Endorsement of mitigation and adaptation actions are positively
related (Brugger et al., 2015; Carrico et al., 2015); both are positively
related to concern about climate change (Brugger et al., 2015).
Strategies that target general antecedents that affect a wide range
of actions, such as values, identities, worldviews, climate change
beliefs, awareness of the climate impacts of one's actions, and feelings
of responsibility to act on climate change, can encourage consistent
actions on climate change (van Der Werff and Steg, 2015; Hornsey
et al., 2016; Steg, 2016). Initial climate actions can lead to further
commitment to climate action (Juhl et al., 2017), when people learn
that such actions are easy and effective (Lauren et al., 2016), when they
engaged in the initial behaviour for environmental reasons (Peters et
al., 2018), hold strong pro-environmental values and norms (Thogersen
and Olander, 2003), and when initial actions make them realise they
are an environmentally sensitive person, motivating them to act on
climate change in subsequent situations so as to be consistent (van der
367

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Box 4.6 | Bottom-up Initiatives: Adaptation Responses Initiated by Individuals and Communities
To effectively adapt to climate change, bottom-up initiatives by individuals and communities are essential, in addition to efforts
of governments, organizations, and institutions (Wamsler and Brink, 2014a). This box presents examples of bottom-up adaptation
responses and behavioural change.
Fiji increasingly faces a lack of freshwater due to decreasing rainfall and rising temperatures (Deo, 2011; IPCC, 2014a). While
some villages have access to boreholes, these are not sufficient to supply the population with freshwater. Villagers are adapting
by rationing water, changing diets, and setting up inter-village sharing networks (Pearce et al., 2017). Some villagers take up wage
employment to buy food instead of growing it themselves (Pearce et al., 2017). In Kiribati, residents adapt to drought by purchasing
rainwater tanks and constructing additional wells (Kuruppu and Liverman, 2011). An important factor that motivated residents of
Kiribati to adapt to drought was the perception that they could effectively adapt to the negative consequences of climate change
(Kuruppu and Liverman, 2011).
In the Philippines, seismic activity has caused some islands to flood during high tide. While the municipal government offered affected
island communities the possibility to relocate to the mainland, residents preferred to stay and implement measures themselves in
their local community to reduce flood damage (Laurice Jamero et al., 2017). Migration is perceived as undesirable because island
communities have strong place-based identities (Mortreux and Barnett, 2009). Instead, these island communities have adapted to
flooding by constructing stilted houses and raising floors, furniture, and roads to prevent water damage (Laurice Jamero et al., 2017).
While inundation was in this case caused by seismic activity, this example indicates how island-based communities may respond to
rising sea levels caused by climate change.
Adaptation initiatives by individuals may temporarily reduce the impacts of climate change and enable residents to cope with
changing environmental circumstances. However, they may not be sufficient to sustain communities' way of life in the long term. For
instance, in Fiji and Kiribati, freshwater and food are projected to become even scarcer in the future, rendering individual adaptations
ineffective. Moreover, individuals can sometimes engage in behaviour that may be maladaptive over larger spatio-temporal scales.
For example, in the Philippines, many islanders adapt to flooding by elevating their floors using coral stone (Laurice Jamero et
al., 2017). Over time, this can harm the survivability of their community, as coral reefs are critical for reducing flood vulnerability
(Ferrario et al., 2014). In Maharashtra, India, on-farm ponds are promoted as rainwater harvesting structures to adapt to dry spells
during the monsoon season. However, some individuals fill these ponds with groundwater, leading to depletion of water tables and
potentially maladaptive outcomes in the long run (Kale, 2015).

4

Integration of individuals' adaptation initiatives with top-down adaptation policy is critical (Butler et al., 2015), as failing to do so
may lead individual actors to mistrust authority and can discourage them from undertaking adequate adaptive actions (Wamsler
and Brink, 2014a).

Werff et al., 2014a; Lacasse, 2015, 2016). Yet some studies suggest that
people may feel licensed not to engage in further mitigation actions
when they believe they have already done their part (Truelove et al.,
2014).

4.4.3.3

Acceptability of policy and system changes

Public acceptability can shape, enable or prevent policy and system
changes. Acceptability reflects the extent to which policy or system
changes are evaluated (un)favourably. Acceptability is higher when
people expect more positive and less negative effects of policy
and system changes (Perlaviciute and Steg, 2014; Demski et al.,
2015; Drews and Van den Bergh, 2016), including climate impacts
(Schuitema et al., 2010b). Because of this, policy `rewarding'
climate actions is more acceptable than policy `punishing' actions
that increase climate risks (Steg et al., 2006; Eriksson et al., 2008).
Pricing policy is more acceptable when revenues are earmarked for
environmental purposes (Steg et al., 2006; Saelen and Kallbekken,
368

2011) or redistributed towards those affected (Schuitema and Steg,
2008). Acceptability can increase when people experience positive
effects after a policy has been implemented (Schuitema et al., 2010a;
Eliasson, 2014; Weber, 2015); effective policy trials can thus build
public support for climate policy (see Box 4.8).
Climate policy and renewable energy systems are more acceptable
when people strongly value other people and the environment, or
support egalitarian worldviews, left-wing or green political ideologies
(Drews and Van den Bergh, 2016), and less acceptable when people
strongly endorse self-enhancement values, or support individualistic
and hierarchical worldviews (Dietz et al., 2007; Perlaviciute and Steg,
2014; Drews and Van den Bergh, 2016). Solar radiation modification
is more acceptable when people strongly endorse self-enhancement
values, and less acceptable when they strongly value other people
and the environment (Visschers et al., 2017). Climate policy is more
acceptable when people believe climate change is real, when they
are concerned about climate change (Hornsey et al., 2016), when

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

they think their actions may reduce climate risks, and when they feel
responsible to act on climate change (Steg et al., 2005; Eriksson et
al., 2006; Jakovcevic and Steg, 2013; Drews and Van den Bergh, 2016;
Kim and Shin, 2017). Stronger environmental awareness is associated
with a preference for governmental regulation and behaviour change
rather than free-market and technological solutions (Poortinga et al.,
2002).
Climate policy is more acceptable when costs and benefits are
distributed equally, when nature and future generations are
protected (Sjoberg and Drottz-Sjoberg, 2001; Schuitema et al., 2011;
Drews and Van den Bergh, 2016), and when fair procedures have
been followed, including participation by the public (Dietz, 2013;
Bernauer et al., 2016a; Bidwell, 2016) or public society organizations
(Bernauer and Gampfer, 2013). Providing benefits to compensate
affected communities for losses due to policy or systems changes
enhanced public acceptability in some cases (Perlaviciute and Steg,
2014), although people may disagree on what would be a worthwhile
compensation (Aitken, 2010; Cass et al., 2010), or feel they are being
bribed (Cass et al., 2010; Perlaviciute and Steg, 2014).
Public support is higher when individuals trust responsible parties
(Perlaviciute and Steg, 2014; Drews and Van den Bergh, 2016). Yet,
public support for multilateral climate policy is not higher than for
unilateral policy (Bernauer and Gampfer, 2015); public support for
unilateral, non-reciprocal climate policy is rather strong and robust
(Bernauer et al., 2016b). Public opposition may result from a culturally
valued landscape being affected by adaptation or mitigation options,
such as renewable energy development (Warren et al., 2005; Devinewright and Howes, 2010) or coastal protection measures (Kimura,
2016), particularly when people have formed strong emotional bonds
with the place (Devine-Wright, 2009, 2013).
Climate actions may reduce human well-being when such actions
involve more costs, effort or discomfort. Yet some climate actions
enhance well-being, such as technology that improves daily comfort
and nature-based solutions for climate adaptation (Wamsler and Brink,
2014b). Further, climate action may enhance well-being (Kasser and
Sheldon, 2002; Xiao et al., 2011; Schmitt et al., 2018) because pursuing
meaning by acting on climate change can make people feel good
(Venhoeven et al., 2013, 2016; Taufik et al., 2015), more so than merely
pursuing pleasure.

4.4.4

Enabling Technological Innovation

This section focuses on the role of technological innovation in limiting
warming to 1.5C, and how innovation can contribute to strengthening
implementation to move towards or to adapt to 1.5C worlds. This
assessment builds on information of technological innovation and
related policy debates in and after AR5 (Somanathan et al., 2014).

4.4.4.1

The nature of technological innovations

Technological systems have their own dynamics. New technologies
have been described as emerging as part of a `socio-technical system'
that is integrated with social structures and that itself evolves over time
(Geels and Schot, 2007). This progress is cumulative and accelerating

Chapter 4

(Kauffman, 2002; Arthur, 2009). To illustrate such a process of
co-evolution: the progress of computer simulation enables us to better
understand climate, agriculture, and material sciences, contributing
to upgrading food production and quality, microscale manufacturing
techniques, and leading to much faster computing technologies,
resulting, for instance, in better performing photovoltaic (PV) cells.
A variety of technological developments have and will contribute to
1.5C-consistent climate action or the lack of it. They can do this, for
example, in the form of applications such as smart lighting systems,
more efficient drilling techniques that make fossil fuels cheaper, or
precision agriculture. As discussed in Section 4.3.1, costs of PV (IEA,
2017f) and batteries (Nykvist and Nilsson, 2015) have sharply dropped.
In addition, costs of fuel cells (Iguma and Kidoshi, 2015; Wei et al., 2017)
and shale gas and oil (Wang et al., 2014; Mills, 2015) have come down
as a consequence of innovation.

4.4.4.2

Technologies as enablers of climate action

Since AR5, literature has emerged as to how much future GHG emission
reductions can be enabled by the rapid progress of general purpose
technologies (GPTs), consisting of information and communication
technologies (ICT), including artificial intelligence (AI) and the internet
of things (IoT), nanotechnologies, biotechnologies, robotics, and so forth
(WEF, 2015; OECD, 2017c). Although these may contribute to limiting
warming to 1.5C, the potential environmental, social and economic
impacts of new technologies are uncertain.
Rapid improvement of performance and cost reduction is observed
for many GPTs. They include AI, sensors, internet, memory storage
and microelectromechanical systems. The latter GPTs are not usually
categorized as climate technologies, but they can impact GHG emissions.
Progress of GPT could help reduce GHG emissions more costeffectively. Examples are shown in Table 4.9. It may however, result in
more emissions by increasing the volume of economic activities, with
unintended negative consequence on sustainable development. While
ICT increases electricity consumption (Aebischer and Hilty, 2015), the
energy consumption of ICT is usually dwarfed by the energy saving by
ICT (Koomey et al., 2013; Malmodin et al., 2014), but rebound effects
and other sustainable development impacts may be significant. An
appropriate policy framework that accommodates such impacts and
their uncertainties could address the potential negative impacts by GPT
(Jasanoff, 2007).
GHG emission reduction potentials in relation to GPTs were estimated
for passenger cars using a combination of three emerging technologies:
electric vehicles, car sharing, and self-driving. GHG emission reduction
potential is reported, assuming generation of electricity with low GHG
emissions (Greenblatt and Saxena, 2015; ITF, 2015; Viegas et al., 2016;
Fulton et al., 2017). It is also possible that GHG emissions increase due
to an incentive to car use. Appropriate policies such as urban planning
and efficiency regulations could contain such rebound effects (Wadud
et al., 2016).
Estimating emission reductions by GPT is difficult due to substantial
uncertainties, including projections of future technological performance,
369

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.9 | Examples of technological innovations relevant to 1.5C enabled by general purpose technologies (GPT). Note: lists of enabling GPT or adaptation/mitigation
options are not exhaustive, and the GPTs by themselves do not reduce emissions or increase climate change resilience.
Sector
Buildings

Examples of Mitigation/Adaptation Technological Innovation

Enabling GPT

Energy and CO2 efficiency of logistics, warehouse and shops (GeSI, 2015; IEA, 2017a)

IoT, AI

Smart lighting and air conditioning (IEA, 2016b, 2017a)

IoT, AI

Energy efficiency improvement by industrial process optimization (IEA, 2017a)
Industry

Robots, IoT

Bio-based plastic production by biorefinery (OECD, 2017c)

Biotechnology

New materials from biorefineries (Fornell et al., 2013; McKay et al., 2016)

ICT, biotechnology

Electric vehicles, car sharing, automation (Greenblatt and Saxena, 2015; Fulton et al., 2017)
Bio-based diesel fuel by biorefinery (OECD, 2017c)
Second generation bioethanol potentially coupled to carbon capture systems (De Souza et al., 2014; Rochedo et al., 2016)
Transport

Logistical optimization, and electrification of trucks by overhead line (IEA, 2017e)

Biotechnology
ICT, biotechnology

Reduction of transport needs by remote education, health and other services (GeSI, 2015; IEA, 2017a)

Biotechnology

Energy saving by lightweight aircraft components (Beyer, 2014; Faludi et al., 2015; Verhoef et al., 2018)

Additive manufacturing
(3D printing)

Solar PV manufacturing (Nemet, 2014)
Electricity

Biotechnology
ICT, biotechnology

Nanotechnology

Smart grids and grid flexibility to accommodate intermittent renewables (Heard et al., 2017)

IoT, AI

Plasma confinement for nuclear fusion (Baltz et al., 2017)

AI

Precision agriculture (improvement of energy and resource efficiency including reduction of fertilizer use and N2O emissions)
(Pierpaoli et al., 2013; Brown et al., 2016; Schimmelpfennig and Ebel, 2016)
Agriculture

Disaster Reduction
and Adaptation

4

Methane inhibitors (and methane-suppressing vaccines) that reduce livestock emissions from enteric fermentation (Wedlock et al.
2013; Hristov et al. 2015; Wollenberg et al. 2016)

Biotechnology

Engineering C3 into C4 photosynthesis to improve agricultural production and productivity (Schuler et al., 2016)

Biotechnology

Genome editing using CRISPR to improve/adapt crops to a changing climate (Gao, 2018)

Biotechnology

Weather forecasting and early warning systems, in combination with user knowledge (Hewitt et al., 2012; Lourenco et al., 2016)

ICT

Climate risk reduction (Upadhyay and Bijalwan, 2015)

ICT

Rapid assessment of disaster damage (Kryvasheyeu et al., 2016)

ICT

costs, penetration rates, and induced human activity. Even if a
technology is available, the establishment of business models might
not be feasible (Linder and Williander, 2017). Indeed, studies show a
wide range of estimates, ranging from deep emission reductions to
possible increases in emissions due to the rebound effect (Larson and
Zhao, 2017).
GPT could also enable climate adaptation, in particular through more
effective climate disaster risk management and improved weather
forecasting.
Government policy usually plays a role in promoting or limiting
GPTs, or science and technology in general. It has impacts on climate
action, because the performance of further climate technologies
will partly depend on the progress of GPTs. Governments have
established institutions for achieving many social, and sometimes
conflicting goals, including economic growth and addressing climate
change (OECD, 2017c), which include investment in basic research
and development (R&D) that can help develop game-changing
technologies (Shayegh et al., 2017). Governments are also needed
to create an enabling environment for the growth of scientific and
technological ecosystems necessary for GPT development (Tassey,
2014).

370

Biotechnology ICT, AI

4.4.4.3

The role of government in 1.5C-consistent
climate technology policy

While literature on 1.5C-specific innovation policy is absent, a growing
body of literature indicates that governments aim to achieve social,
economic and environmental goals by promoting science and a broad
range of technologies through `mission-driven' innovation policies,
based on differentiated national priorities (Edler and Fagerberg,
2017). Governments can play a role in advancing climate technology
via a `technology push' policy on the technology supply side (e.g.,
R&D subsidies), and by `demand pull' policy on the demand side (e.g.,
energy-efficiency regulation), and these policies can be complemented
by enabling environments (Somanathan et al., 2014). Governments may
also play a role in removing existent support for incumbents (Kivimaa
and Kern, 2016). A growing literature indicates that policy mixes, rather
than single policy instruments, are more effective in addressing climate
innovation challenges ranging from technologies in the R&D phase to
those ready for diffusion (Veugelers, 2012; Quitzow, 2015; Rogge et al.,
2017; Rosenow et al., 2017). Such innovation policies can help address
two kinds of externalities: environmental externalities and proprietary
problems (GEA, 2012; IPCC, 2014b; Mazzucato and Semieniuk, 2017). To
avoid `picking winners', governments often maintain a broad portfolio
of technological options (Kverndokk and Rosendahl, 2007) and work in

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

close collaboration with the industrial sector and society in general. Some
governments have achieved relative success in supporting innovation
policies (Grubler et al., 2012; Mazzucato, 2013) that addressed climaterelated R&D (see Box 4.7 on bioethanol in Brazil).
Funding for R&D could come from various sources, including the general
budget, energy or resource taxation, or emission trading schemes (see
Section 4.4.5). Investing in climate-related R&D has as an additional
benefit of building capabilities to implement climate mitigation and
adaptation technologies (Ockwell et al., 2015). Countries regard
innovation in general and climate technology specifically as a national
interests issue and addressing climate change primarily as being in
the global interest. Reframing part of climate policy as technology or
industrial policy might therefore contribute to resolving the difficulties
that continue to plague emission target negotiations (Faehn and
Isaksen, 2016; Fischer et al., 2017; Lachapelle et al., 2017).
Climate technology transfer to emerging economies has happened
regardless of international treaties, as these countries have been keen
to acquire them, and companies have an incentive to access emerging
markets to remain competitive (Glachant and Dechezlepretre, 2016).

Chapter 4

However, the complexity of these transfer processes is high, and
they have to be conducted carefully by governments and institutions
(Favretto et al., 2017). It is noticeable that the impact of the EU emission
trading scheme (EU ETS) on innovation is contested; recent work
(based on lower carbon prices than anticipated for 1.5C-consistent
pathways) indicates that it is limited (Calel and Dechezlepretre, 2016),
but earlier assessments (Blanco et al., 2014) indicate otherwise.

4.4.4.4

Technology transfer in the Paris Agreement

Technology development and transfer is recognized as an enabler of both
mitigation and adaptation in Article 10 in the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC,
2016) as well as in Article 4.5 of the original text of the UNFCCC (UNFCCC,
1992). As previous sections have focused on technology development
and diffusion, this section focuses on technology transfer. Technology
transfer can adapt technologies to local circumstances, reduce financing
costs, develop indigenous technology, and build capabilities to operate,
maintain, adapt and innovate on technology globally (Ockwell et al.,
2015; de Coninck and Sagar, 2017). Technology cooperation could
decrease global mitigation cost, and enhance developing countries'
mitigation contributions (Huang et al., 2017a).

Box 4.7 | Bioethanol in Brazil: Innovation and Lessons for Technology Transfer
The use of sugarcane as a bioenergy source started in Brazil in the 1970s. Government and multinational car factories modified
car engines nationwide so that vehicles running only on ethanol could be produced. As demand grew, production and distribution
systems matured and costs came down (Soccol et al., 2010). After a transition period in which both ethanol-only and gasoline-only
cars were used, the flex-fuel era started in 2003, when all gasoline was blended with 25% ethanol (de Freitas and Kaneko, 2011). By
2010, around 80% of the car fleet in Brazil had been converted to use flex-fuel (Goldemberg, 2011; Su et al., 2015).

4

More than forty years of combining technology push and market pull measures led to the deployment of ethanol production,
transportation and distribution systems across Brazil, leading to a significant decrease in CO2 emissions (Macedo et al., 2008).
Examples of innovations include: (i) the development of environmentally well-adapted varieties of sugarcane; (ii) the development
and scaling up of sugar fermentation in a non-sterile environment, and (iii) the development of adaptations of car engines to use
ethanol as a fuel in isolation or in combination with gasoline (Amorim et al., 2011; de Freitas and Kaneko, 2011; De Souza et al.,
2014). Public procurement, public investment in R&D and mandated fuel blends accompanying these innovations were also crucial
(Hogarth, 2017). In the future, innovation could lead to viable partial CO2 removal through deployment of BECCS associated with
the bioethanol refineries (Fuss et al., 2014; Rochedo et al., 2016) (see Section 4.3.7).
Ethanol appears to reduce urban car emission of health-affecting ultrafine particles by 30% compared to gasoline-based cars,
but increases ozone (Salvo et al., 2017). During the 1990s, when sugarcane burning was still prevalent, particulate pollution had
negative consequences for human health and the environment (Ribeiro, 2008; Paraiso and Gouveia, 2015). While Jaiswal et al.
(2017) report bioethanol's limited impact on food production and forests in Brazil, despite the large scale, and attribute this to
specific agro-ecological zoning legislation, various studies report adverse effects of bioenergy production through forest substitution
by croplands (Searchinger et al., 2008), as well as impacts on biodiversity, water resources and food security (Rathore et al., 2016).
For new generation biofuels, feasibility and life cycle assessment studies can provide information on their impacts on environmental,
economic and social factors (Rathore et al., 2016).
Brazil and the European Union have tried to replicate Brazil's bioethanol experience in climatically suitable African countries.
Although such technology transfer achieved relative success in Angola and Sudan, the attempts to set up bioethanol value chains
did not pass the phase of political deliberations and feasibility studies elsewhere in Africa. Lessons learned include the need for
political and economic stability of the donor country (Brazil) and the necessity for market creation to attract investments in firstgeneration biofuels alongside a safe legal and policy environment for improved technologies (Afionis et al., 2014; Favretto et al.,
2017).

371

Chapter 4

The international institutional landscape around technology
development and transfer includes the UNFCCC (via its technology
framework and Technology Mechanism including the Climate
Technology Centre and Network (CTCN)), the United Nations (a
technology facilitation mechanism for the SDGs) and a variety of
non-UN multilateral and bilateral cooperation initiatives such as the
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR,
founded in the 1970s), and numerous initiatives of companies,
foundations, governments and non-governmental and academic
organizations. Moreover, in 2015, twenty countries launched an
initiative called `Mission Innovation', seeking to double their energy
R&D funding. At this point it is difficult to evaluate whether Mission
Innovation achieved its objective (Sanchez and Sivaram, 2017). At
the same time, the private sector started an innovation initiative
called the `Breakthrough Energy Coalition'.

4

Most technology transfer is driven by through markets by the
interests of technology seekers and technology holders, particularly
in regions with well-developed institutional and technological
capabilities such as developed and emerging nations (Glachant and
Dechezlepretre, 2016). However, the current international technology
transfer landscape has gaps, in particular in reaching out to leastdeveloped countries, where institutional and technology capabilities
are limited (de Coninck and Puig, 2015; Ockwell and Byrne, 2016).
On the one hand, literature suggests that the management or even
monitoring of all these UN, bilateral, private and public initiatives
may fail to lead to better results. On the other hand, it is probably
more cost-effective to adopt a strategy of `letting a thousand flowers
bloom', by challenging and enticing researchers in the public and
the private sector to direct innovation towards low-emission and
adaptation options (Haselip et al., 2015). This can be done at the
same time as mission-oriented research is adopted in parallel by the
scientific community (Mazzucato, 2018).
At COP 21, the UNFCCC requested the Subsidiary Body for Scientific
and Technological Advice (SBSTA) to initiate the elaboration of
the technology framework established under the Paris Agreement
(UNFCCC, 2016). Among other things, the technology framework
would `provide overarching guidance for the work of the Technology
Mechanism in promoting and facilitating enhanced action on
technology development and transfer in order to support the
implementation of this Agreement' (this Agreement being the
Paris Agreement). An enhanced guidance issued by the Technology
Executive Committee (TEC) for preparing a technology action plan
(TAP) supports the new technology framework as well as the Parties'
long-term vision on technology development and transfer, reflected
in the Paris Agreement (TEC, 2016).

9

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

4.4.5

Strengthening Policy Instruments and Enabling
Climate Finance

Triggering rapid and far-reaching change in technical choices and
institutional arrangements, consumption and lifestyles, infrastructure,
land use, and spatial patterns implies the ability to scale up policy signals
to enable the decoupling of GHGs emission, and economic growth and
development (Section 4.2.2.3). Such a scale-up would also imply that
potential short-term negative responses by populations and interest
groups, which could block these changes from the outset, would need
to be prevented or overcome. This section describes the size and nature
of investment needs and the financial challenge over the coming two
decades in the context of 1.5C warmer worlds, assesses the potential
and constraints of three categories of policy instruments that respond to
the challenge, and explains the conditions for using them synergistically.
The policy and finance instruments discussed in this section relate to
Section 4.4.1 (on governance) and other Sections in 4.4.

4.4.5.1

The core challenge: cost-efficiency, coordination
of expectations and distributive effects

Box 4.8 shows that the average estimate by seven models of annual
investment needs in the energy system is around 2.38 trillion USD2010
(1.38 to 3.25) between 2016 and 2035. This represents between 2.53%
(1.6-4%) of the world GDP in market exchange rates (MER) and 1.7%
of the world GDP in purchasing power parity (PPP). OECD investment
assessments for a 2C-consistent transition suggest that including
investments in transportation and in other infrastructure would increase
the investment needs by a factor of three. Other studies not included in
Box 4.8, in particular by the World Economic Forum (WEF, 2013) and the
Global Commission on the Economy and Climate (GCEC, 2014) confirm
these orders of magnitude of investment.
The average increase of investment in the energy sector resulting from
Box 4.8 represents a mean value of 1.5% of the total world investment
compared with the baselines scenario in MER and a little over 1% in
PPP. Including infrastructure investments would raise this to 2.5% and
1.7% respectively.9
These incremental investments could be funded through a drain on
consumption (Bowen et al., 2017), which would necessitate between
0.68% and 0.45% lower global consumption than in the baseline. But,
consumption at a constant savings/consumption ratio can alternatively
be funded by shifting savings towards productive adaptation and
mitigation investments, instead of real-estate sector and liquid financial
products. This response depends upon whether it is possible to close the
global investment funding gap for infrastructure that potentially inhibits
growth, through structural changes in the global economy. In this case,
investing more in infrastructure would not be an incremental cost in
terms of development and welfare (IMF, 2014; Gurara et al., 2017)

A calculation in MER tends indeed to underestimate the world GDP and its growth by giving a lower weight to fast-growing developing countries, whereas a calculation
in PPP tends to overestimate it. The difference between the value of two currencies in PPP and MER should vanish as the gap of the income levels of the two concerned
countries decreases. Accounting for this trend in modelling is challenging.

372

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Box 4.8 | Investment Needs and the Financial Challenge of Limiting Warming to 1.5C
Peer-reviewed literature that estimates the investment needs over the next two decades to scale up the response to limit warming
to 1.5C is very limited (see Section 4.6). This box attempts to bring together available estimates of the order of magnitude of
these investments, after consultation with the makers of those estimates, to provide the context for global and national financial
mobilization policy and related institutional arrangements.
Table 1 in this box presents mean annual investments up to 2035, based on three studies (after clarifying their scope and harmonizing
their metrics): an ensemble of four integrated assessment models (here denoted IAM, see Chapter 2), an Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) scenario for a 2C limit (OECD, 2017a) and scenarios from the International Energy Agency
(IEA, 2016c). All three sources provide estimates for the energy sector for various mitigation scenarios. They give a mean value
of 2.38 trillion USD of yearly investments in the energy sector over the period, with minimum and maximum values of 1.38 and
3.25 respectively. We also report the OECD estimate for 2C because it also covers transportation and other infrastructure (water,
sanitation, and telecommunication), which are essential to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG 7 on
clean energy access, and enhance the adaptive capacity to climate change.
Box 4.8, Table 1 | Estimated annualized world mitigation investment needed to limit global warming to 2C or 1.5C (2015-2035 in trillions of USD at market
exchange rates) from different sources. The top four lines indicate the results of Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) as reported in Chapter 2
for their Baseline, Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), 2C- and 1.5C-consistent pathways. These numbers only cover the energy
sector and the second row includes energy efficiency in all sectors. The final two rows indicate the mitigation investment needs for the energy,
transport and other infrastructure according to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) for a Baseline pathway
and a 2C-consistent pathway. Sources: IEA, 2016c; OECD, 2017a.

Energy
Investments

Of which
Demand Side

Transport

Other Infrastructures

Total

Ratio to
MER GDP

IAM Baseline (mean)

1.96

0.24

1.96

1.8%

IAM NDC (mean)

2.04

0.28

2.04

1.9%

IAM 2C (mean)

2.19

0.38

2.19

2.1%

IAM 1.5C (mean)

2.32

0.45

2.32

2.2%

IEA NDC

2.40

0.72

2.40

2.3%

1.13

2.76

2.7%

0.54

2.38

2.53%

IEA 1.5C

2.76

Mean IAM-IEA, 1.5C

2.38

Min IAM-IEA, 1.5C

1.38

0.38

1.38

1.6%

Max IAM-IEA, 1.5C

3.25

1.13

3.25

4.0%

5.74

5.4%

2.13

0.40

6.38

6.0%

OECD Baseline

OECD 2C

2.73

1.52

4

The mean incremental share of annual energy investments to stay well below 2C is 0.36% (between 0.2-1%) of global GDP
between 2016 and 2035. Since total world investment (also called gross fixed capital formation (GFCF)) is about 24% of global
GDP, the estimated incremental energy investments between a baseline and a 1.5C transition would be approximately 1.5%
(between 0.8-4.2%) of projected total world investments. As the higher ends of these ranges reflect pessimistic assumptions
in 1.5C-consistent pathways on technological change, the implementation of policies to accelerate technical change (see the
remainder of Section 4.4.5) could lower the probability of higher incremental investment.
If we assume the amounts of investments given by the OECD for transportation and other infrastructure for warming of 2C to be
a lower limit for an 1.5C pathway, then total incremental investments for all sectors for a 1.5C-consistent pathway would be
estimated at 2.4% of total world investments. This total incremental investment reaches 2.53% if the investments in transportation
are scaled up proportionally with the investments in the energy sector and if all other investments are kept constant. Comparing this
2.4% or 2.53% number for all sectors to the 1.5% number for energy only (see previous paragraph) suggests that the investments in
sectors other than energy contribute significantly to incremental world investments, even though a comprehensive study or estimate
of these investments for a 1.5C limit is not available.
The issue, from a macroeconomic perspective, is whether these investments would be funded by higher savings at the costs of lower
consumption. This would mean a 0.5% reduction in consumption for the energy sector for 1.5C. Note that for a 2C scenario, this

373

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Box 4.8 (continued)

reduction would be 0.8% if we account for the investment needs of all infrastructure sectors. Assuming conversely a constant
savings ratio, this would necessitate reallocating existing capital flows towards infrastructure. In addition to these incremental
investments, the amount of redirected investments is relevant from a financial perspective. In the reported IAM energy sector
scenarios, about three times the incremental investments is redirected. There is no such assessment for the other sectors. The OECD
report suggests that these ratios might be higher.
These orders of magnitude of investment can be compared to the available statistics of the global stock of 386 trillion USD of
financial capital, which consists of 100 trillion USD in bonds (SIFMA, 2017), around 60 trillion USD in equity (World Bank, 2018b),
and 226 trillion USD of loans managed by the banking system (IIF, 2017; World Bank, 2018a). The long-term rate of return (interest
plus increase of shareholder value) is about 3% on bonds, 5% on bank lending and 7% on equity, leading to a weighted mean return
on capital of 3.4% in real terms (5.4% in nominal terms). Using 3.4% as a lower bound and 5% as a higher bound (following Piketty,
2014) and taking a conservative assumption that global financial capital grows at the same rate as global GDP, the estimated yearly
financial capital revenues would be between 16.8 and 25.4 trillion USD.
Assuming that a quarter of these investments comes from public funds (as estimated by the World Bank; World Bank, 2018a), the
amount of private resources needed to enable an energy sector transition is between 3.3% and 5.3% of annual capital income and
between 5.6% and 8.3% of these revenues for all infrastructure to meet the 2C limit and the SDGs.
Since the financial system has limited fungibility across budget lines, changing the partitioning of investments is not a zero-sum
game. An effective policy regime could encourage investment managers to change their asset allocation. Part of the challenge may
lie in increasing the pace of financing of low-emission assets to compensate for a possible 38% decrease, by 2035, in the value of
fossil fuel assets (energy sector and indirect holdings in downstream uses like automobiles) (Mercure et al., 2018).

4

Investments in other (non-energy system) infrastructure to meet
development and poverty-reduction goals can strengthen the adaptive
capacity to address climate change, and are difficult to separate from
overall sustainable development and poverty-alleviation investments
(Hallegatte and Rozenberg, 2017). The magnitude of potential climate
change damages is related to pre-existing fragility of impacted
societies (Hallegatte et al., 2007). Enhancing infrastructure and service
provision would lower this fragility, for example, through the provision
of universal (water, sanitation, telecommunication) service access
(Arezki et al., 2016).
The main challenge is thus not just a lack of mobilization of aggregate
resources but of redirection of savings towards infrastructure, and
the further redirection of these infrastructure investments towards
low-emission options. If emission-free assets emerge fast enough to
compensate for the devaluation of high-emission assets, the sum of
the required incremental and redirected investments in the energy
sector would (up to 2035) be equivalent to between 3.3% and 5.3%
of the average annual revenues of the private capital stock (see Box
4.8) and to between 5.6% and 8.3%, including all infrastructure
investments.
The interplay between mechanisms of financial intermediation
and the private risk-return calculus is a major barrier to realizing
these investments (Sirkis et al., 2015). This obstacle is not specific to
climate mitigation investments but also affects infrastructure and
has been characterised as the gap between the `propensity to save'
and the `propensity to invest' (Summers, 2016). The issue is whether
new financial instruments could close this gap and inject liquidity
into the low-emission transition, thereby unlocking new economic
374

opportunities (GCEC, 2014; NCE, 2016). By offsetting the crowding-out
of other private and public investments (Pollitt and Mercure, 2017), the
ensuing ripple effect could reinforce growth and the sustainability of
development (King, 2011; Teulings and Baldwin, 2014) and potentially
trigger a new growth cycle (Stern, 2013, 2015). In this case, a massive
mobilization of low-emission investments would require a significant
effort but may be complementary to sustainable development
investments.
This uncertain but potentially positive outcome might be constrained
by the higher energy costs of low-emission options in the energy and
transportation sectors. The envelope of worldwide marginal abatement
costs for 1.5C-consistent pathways reported in Chapter 2 is 135-5500
USD2010 tCO2-1 in 2030 and 245-13000 USD2010 tCO2-1 in 2050,
which is between three to four times higher than for a 2C limit.
These figures are consistent with the dramatic reduction in the unit
costs of some low-emission technical options (for example solar
PV, LED lighting) over the past decade (see Section 4.3.1) (OECD,
2017c). Yet there are multiple constraints to a system-wide energy
transition. Lower costs of some supply- and demand-side options do
not always result in a proportional decrease in energy system costs.
The adoption of alternative options can be slowed down by increasing
costs of decommissioning existing infrastructure, the inertia of market
structures, cultural habits and risk-adverse user behaviour (see Sections
4.4.1 to 4.4.3). Learning-by-doing processes and R&D can accelerate
the cost-efficiency of low-emission technology but often imply higher
early-phase costs. The German energy transition resulted in high
consumer prices for electricity in Germany (Kreuz and Musgens, 2017)
and needed strong accompanying measures to succeed.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

One key issue is that energy costs can propagate across sectors and
amplify overall production costs. During the early stage of a lowemission transition, an increase in the prices of non-energy goods could
reduce consumer purchasing power and final demand. A rise in energy
prices has a proportionally greater impact in developing countries
that are in a catch-up phase, as they have a stronger dependence on
energy-intensive sectors (Crassous et al., 2006; Luderer et al., 2012)
and a higher ratio of energy to labour cost (Waisman et al., 2012). This
explains why with lower carbon prices, similar emission reductions are
reached in South Africa (Altieri et al., 2016) and Brazil (La Rovere et al.,
2017a) compared to developed countries. However, three distributional
issues emerge.
First, in the absence of countervailing policies, higher energy costs
have an adverse effect on the distribution of welfare (see also
Chapter 5). The negative impact is inversely correlated with the
level of income (Harberger, 1984; Fleurbaey and Hammond, 2004)
and positively correlated with the share of energy in the households
budget, which is high for low- and middle-income households
(Proost and Van Regemorter, 1995; Barker and Kohler, 1998; West
and Williams, 2004; Chiroleu-Assouline and Fodha, 2011). Moreover,
climatic conditions and the geographical conditions of human
settlements matter for heating and mobility needs (see Chapter 5).
Medium-income populations in the suburbs, in remote areas, and in
low-density regions can be as vulnerable as residents of low-income
urban areas. Poor households with low levels of energy consumption
are also impacted by price increases of non-energy goods caused by
the propagation of energy costs (Combet et al., 2010; Dubois, 2012).
These impacts are generally not offset by non-market co-benefits of
climate policies for the poor (Baumgartner et al., 2017).
A second matter of concern is the distortion of international competition
and employment implications in the case of uneven carbon constraints,
especially for energy-intensive industries (Demailly and Quirion, 2008).
Some of these industries are not highly exposed to international
competition because of their very high transportation costs per unit
value added (Sartor, 2013; Branger et al., 2016), but other industries
could suffer severe shocks, generate `carbon leakage' through cheaper
imports from countries with lower carbon constraints (Branger and
Quirion, 2014), and weaken the surrounding regional industrial fabric
with economy-wide and employment implications.
A third challenge is the depreciation of assets whose value is based on
the valuation of fossil energy resources, of which future revenues may
decline precipitously with higher carbon prices (Waisman et al., 2013;
Jakob and Hilaire, 2015; McGlade and Ekins, 2015), and on emissionintensive capital stocks (Guivarch and Hallegatte, 2011; OECD, 2015a;
Pfeiffer et al., 2016). This raises issues of changes in industrial structure,
adaptation of worker skills, and of stability of financial, insurance and
social security systems. These systems are in part based on current
holdings of carbon-based assets whose value might decrease by about
38% by the mid-2030s (Mercure et al., 2018). This stranded asset
challenge may be exacerbated by a decline of export revenues of fossil
fuel producing countries and regions (Waisman et al., 2013; Jakob and
Hilaire, 2015; McGlade and Ekins, 2015).

Chapter 4

These distributional issues, if addressed carefully and expeditiously, could
affect popular sensitivity towards climate policies. Addressing them
could mitigate adverse macroeconomic effects on economic growth and
employment that could undermine the potential benefits of a redirection
of savings and investments towards 1.5C-consistent pathways.
Strengthening policy instruments for a low-emission transition would
thus need to reconcile three objectives: (i) handling the short-term
frictions inherent to this transition in an equitable way, (ii) minimizing
these frictions by lowering the cost of avoided GHGs emissions, and (iii)
coordinating expectations of multiple stakeholders at various decisionmaking levels to accelerate the decline in costs of emission reduction,
efficiency and decoupling options and maximizing their co-benefits
(see the practical example of lowering car use in cities in Box 4.9).
Three categories of policy tools would be available to meet the
distributional challenges: carbon pricing, regulatory instruments and
information and financial tools. Each of them has its own strengths
and weaknesses, from a 1.5C perspective, policy tools would have to
be both scaled up and better coordinated in packages in a synergistic
manner.

4.4.5.2

Carbon pricing: necessity and constraints

Economic literature has long argued that climate and energy policy
grounded only in regulation, standards and public funding of R&D is
at risk of being influenced by political and administrative arbitrariness,
which could raise the costs of implementation. This literature has argued
that it may be more efficient to make these costs explicit through carbon
taxes and carbon trading, securing the abatement of emissions in places
and sectors where it is cheapest (IPCC, 1995, 2001; Gupta et al., 2007;
Somanathan et al., 2014).
In a frictionless world, a uniform world carbon price could minimize the
social costs of the low-carbon transition by equating the marginal costs
of abatement across all sources of emissions. This implies that investors
will be able to make the right choices under perfect foresight and that
domestic and international compensatory transfers offset the adverse
distributional impacts of higher energy prices and their consequences on
economic activity. In the absence of such transfers, carbon prices would
have to be differentiated by jurisdiction (Chichilnisky and Heal, 2000;
Sheeran, 2006; Bohringer et al., 2009; Bohringer and Alexeeva-Talebi,
2013). This differentiation could in turn raise concerns of distortions in
international competition (Hourcade et al., 2001; Stavins et al., 2014).
Obstacles to enforcing a uniform world carbon price in the short run
would not necessarily crowd out explicit national carbon pricing, for
three reasons. First, a uniform carbon price would limit an emissions
rebound resulting from a higher consumption of energy services
enabled by efficiency gains, if energy prices do not change (Greening et
al., 2000; Fleurbaey and Hammond, 2004; Sorrell et al., 2009; Guivarch
and Hallegatte, 2011; Chitnis and Sorrell, 2015; Freire-Gonzalez, 2017).
Second, it could hedge against the arbitrariness of regulatory policies.
Third, `revenue neutral' recycling, at a constant share of taxes on GDP,
into lowering some existing taxes would compensate for at least part
of the propagation effect of higher energy costs (Stiglitz et al., 2017).
The substitution by carbon taxes of taxes that cause distortions on the
375

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Box 4.9 | Emerging Cities and `Peak Car Use': Evidence of Decoupling in Beijing
The phenomenon of `peak car use', or reductions in per capita car use, provides hope for continuing reductions in greenhouse
gases from oil consumption (Millard-Ball and Schipper, 2011; Newman and Kenworthy, 2011; Goodwin and Van Dender, 2013). The
phenomenon has been mostly associated with developed cities apart from some early signs in Eastern Europe, Latin America and
China (Newman and Kenworthy, 2015). New research indicates that peak car is now also underway in China (Gao and Newman,
2018).

Modal split of daily trips (%)

China's rapid urban motorization was a result of strong economic growth, fast urban development and the prosperity of the Chinese
automobile industry (Gao et al., 2015). However, recent data (Gao and Newman, 2018) (expressed as a percentage of daily trips)
suggest the first signs of a break in the growth of car use along with the growth in mass transit, primarily the expansion of Metro
systems (see Box 4.9, Figure 1).
70

Transit

Private Vehicles

Bicycle

1995

2000

2005

60

50
40
30
20
10

0
1985

1990

2010

2015

Year
Box 4.9, Figure 1 | The modal split data in Beijing between 1986 and 2014. Source: (Gao and Newman, 2018).

Chinese urban fabrics, featuring traditional dense linear forms and mixed land use, favour mass transit systems over automobiles
(Gao and Newman, 2018). The data show that the decline in car use did not impede economic development, but the growth in
vehicle kilometres of travel (VKT) has decoupled absolutely from GDP as shown in Box 4.9, Figure 2 below.
5000

per capita GDP (USD)

20000

4000

15000

3000

10000

2000

per capita GDP (USD)

5000

per capita VKT (km)
0
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

1000

per capita VKT (km)

4

0
2016

Year
Box 4.9, Figure 2 | Peak car in Beijing: relationships between economic performance and private automobile use in Beijing from 1986 to 2014.
VKT is vehicle kilometres of travel. Source: (Gao and Newman, 2018).

economy can counteract the regressive effect of higher energy prices. For
example, offsetting increased carbon prices with lower labour taxes can
potentially decrease labour costs (without affecting salaries), enhance
employment and reduce the attractiveness of informal economic activity
(Goulder, 2013).
The conditions under which an economic gain along with climate
benefit (a `double dividend') can be expected are well documented
376

(Goulder, 1995; Bovenberg, 1999; Mooij, 2000). In the context of OECD
countries, the literature examines how carbon taxation could substitute
for other taxes to fund the social security system (Combet, 2013). The
same general principles apply for countries that are building their social
welfare system, such as China (Li and Wang, 2012) or Brazil (La Rovere
et al., 2017a), but an optimal recycling scheme could differ based on the
structure of the economy (Lefevre et al., 2018).

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

In every country the design of carbon pricing policy implies a balance
between incentivizing low-carbon behaviour and mitigating the
adverse distributional consequences of higher energy prices (Combet
et al., 2010). Carbon taxes can offset these effects if their revenues
are redistributed through rebates to poor households. Other options
include the reduction of value-added taxes for basic products or direct
benefit transfers to enable poverty reduction (see Winkler et al. (2017)
for South Africa and Grottera et al. (2016) for Brazil). This is possible
because higher-income households pay more in absolute terms, even
though their carbon tax burden is a relatively smaller share of their
income (Arze del Granado et al., 2012).
Ultimately, the pace of increase of carbon prices would depend on the
pace at which they can be embedded in a consistent set of fiscal and
social policies. This is specifically critical in the context of the 1.5C
limit (Michaelowa et al., 2018). This is why, after a quarter century of
academic debate and experimentation (see IPCC WGIII reports since
the SAR), a gap persists with respect to `switching carbon prices'
needed to trigger rapid changes. In 2016, only 15% of global emissions
are covered by carbon pricing, three-quarters of which with prices
below 10 USD tCO2-1 (World Bank, 2016). This is too low to outweigh
the `noise' from the volatility of oil markets (in the range of 100 USD
tCO2-1 over the past decade), of other price dynamics (interest rates,
currency exchange rates and real estate prices) and of regulatory
policies in energy, transportation and industry. For example, the
dynamics of mobility depend upon a trade-off between housing prices
and transportation costs in which the price of real estate and the inert
endowments in public transport play as important a role as liquid fuel
prices (Lampin et al., 2013).
These considerations apply to attempts to secure a minimum price in
carbon trading systems (Wood and Jotzo, 2011; Fell et al., 2012; Fuss
et al., 2018) and to the reduction of fossil fuel subsidies. Estimated at
650 billion USD in 2015 (Coady et al., 2017), these subsidies represent
25-30% of government expenditures in forty (mostly developing)
countries (IEA, 2014b). Reducing these subsidies would contribute to
reaching 1.5C-consistent pathways, but raises similar issues as carbon
pricing around long-term benefits and short-term costs (Jakob et al.,
2015; Zeng and Chen, 2016), as well as social impacts.
Explicit carbon prices remain a necessary condition of ambitious
climate policies, and some authors highlight the potential benefit
brought by coordination among groups of countries (Weischer et al.,
2012; Hermwille et al., 2017; Keohane et al., 2017). They could take the
form of carbon pricing corridors (Bhattacharya et al., 2015). They are
a necessary `lubricant' through fiscal reforms or direct compensating
transfers to accommodate the general equilibrium effects of higher
energy prices but may not suffice to trigger the low-carbon transition
because of a persistent `implementation gap' between the aspirational
carbon prices and those that can practically be enforced. When systemic
changes, such as those needed for 1.5C-consistent pathways, are at
play on many dimensions of development, price levels `depend on the
path and the path depends on political decisions' (Dreze and Stern,
1990).

Chapter 4

4.4.5.3

Regulatory measures and information flows

Regulatory instruments are a common tool for improving energy
efficiency and enhancing renewable energy in OECD countries (e.g., the
USA, Japan, Korea, Australia, the EU) and, more recently, in developing
countries (M.J. Scott et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2017). Such instruments
include constraints on the import of products banned in other countries
(Knoop and Lechtenbohmer, 2017).
For energy efficiency, these instruments include end-use standards and
labelling for domestic appliances, lighting, electric motors, water heaters
and air-conditioners. They are often complemented by mandatory
efficiency labels to attract consumers' attention and stimulate the
manufacture of more efficient products (Girod et al., 2017). Experience
shows that these policy instruments are effective only if they are
regularly reviewed to follow technological developments, as in the `Top
Runner' programme for domestic appliances in Japan (Sunikka-Blank
and Iwafune, 2011).
In four countries, efficiency standards (e.g. miles per gallon or level of
CO2 emission per kilometre) have been used in the transport sector,
for light- and heavy-duty vehicles, which have spillovers for the global
car industry. In the EU (Ajanovic and Haas, 2017) and the USA (Sen
et al., 2017), vehicle manufacturers need to meet an annual CO2
emission target for their entire new vehicle fleet. This allows them to
compensate through the introduction of low-emission vehicles for the
high-emission ones in the fleet. This leads to increasingly efficient fleets
of vehicles over time but does not necessarily limit the driven distance.
Building codes that prescribe efficiency requirements for new and
existing buildings have been adopted in many OECD countries (Evans
et al., 2017) and are regularly revised to increase their efficiency per
unit of floor space. Building codes can avoid locking rapidly urbanizing
countries into poorly performing buildings that remain in use for the
next 50-100 years (Urge-Vorsatz et al., 2014). In OECD countries,
however, their main role is to incentivize the retrofit of existing
buildings. In addition of the convergence of these codes to net zero
energy buildings (D'Agostino, 2015), a new focus should be placed,
in the context of 1.5C-consistent pathways, on public and private
coordination to achieve better integration of building policies with the
promotion of low-emission transportation modes (Bertoldi, 2017).
The efficacy of regulatory instruments can be reinforced by economic
incentives, such as feed-in tariffs based on the quantity of renewable
energy produced, subsidies or tax exemptions for energy savings
(Bertoldi et al., 2013; Ritzenhofen and Spinler, 2016; Garcia-Alvarez et
al., 2017; Pablo-Romero et al., 2017), fee-bates, and `bonus-malus' that
foster the penetration of low-emission options (Butler and Neuhoff,
2008). Economic incentives can also be combined with direct-use
market-based instruments, for example combining, in the United
States and, in some EU countries, carbon trading schemes with energy
savings obligations for energy retailers (Haoqi et al., 2017), or with
green certificates for renewable energy portfolio standards (Upton and
Snyder, 2017). Scholars have investigated caps on utilities' energy sales
(Thomas et al., 2017) and emission caps implemented at a personal
level (Fawcett et al., 2010).

377

4

Chapter 4

In combination with the funding of public research institutes, grants
or subsidies also support R&D, where risk and the uncertainty about
long-term perspectives can reduce the private sector's willingness to
invest in low-emission innovation (see also Section 4.4.4). Subsidies can
take the form of rebates on value-added tax (VAT), of direct support to
investments (e.g., renewable energy or refurbishment of buildings) or
feed-in tariffs (Mir-Artigues and del Rio, 2014). They can be provided
by the public budget, via consumption levies, or via the revenues of
carbon taxes or pricing. Fee-bates, introduced in some countries (e.g.,
for cars), have had a neutral impact on public budgets by incentivizing
low-emission products and penalizing high-emission ones (de Haan et
al., 2009).
All policy instruments can benefit from information campaigns (e.g., TV
ads) tailored to specific end-users. A vast majority of public campaigns on
energy and climate have been delivered through mass-media channels
and advertising-based approaches (Corner and Randall, 2011; Doyle,
2011). Although some authors report large savings obtained by such
campaigns, most agree that the effects are short-lived and decrease
over time (Bertoldi et al., 2016). Recently, focus has been placed on the
use of social norms to motivate behavioural changes (Allcott, 2011; Allo
and Loureiro, 2014). More on strategies to change behaviour can be
found in Section 4.4.3.

4.4.5.4

4

Scaling up climate finance and de-risking
low-emission investments

The redirection of savings towards low-emission investments may be
constrained by enforceable carbon prices, implementation of technical
standards and the short-term bias of financial systems (Miles, 1993;
Bushee, 2001; Black and Fraser, 2002). The many causes of this bias are
extensively analysed in economic literature (Tehranian and Waegelein,
1985; Shleifer and Vishny, 1990; Bikhchandani and Sharma, 2000),
including their link with prevailing patterns of economic globalization
(Krugman, 2009; Rajan, 2011) and the chronic underinvestment in
long-term infrastructure (IMF, 2014). Emerging literature explores how
to overcome this through reforms targeted to bridge the gap between
short-term cash balances and long-term low-emission assets and to
reduce the risk-weighted capital costs of climate-resilient investments.
This gap, which was qualified by the Governor of the Bank of England as
a `tragedy of the horizon' (Carney, 2016) that constitutes a threat to the
stability of the financial system, is confirmed by the literature (Arezki et
al., 2016; Christophers, 2017). This potential threat would encompass the
impact of climate events on the value of assets (Battiston et al., 2017),
liability risks (Heede, 2014) and the transition risk due to devaluation of
certain classes of assets (Platinga and Scholtens, 2016).
The financial community's attention to climate change grew after COP
15 (ESRB ASC, 2016). This led to the introduction of climate-related risk
disclosure in financial portfolios (UNEP, 2015), placing it on the agenda
of G20 Green Finance Study Group and of the Financial Stability Board.
This led to the creation of low-carbon financial indices that investors
could consider as a `free option on carbon' to hedge against risks of
stranded carbon-intensive assets (Andersson et al., 2016). This could also
accelerate the emergence of climate-friendly financial products such as
10

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

green or climate bonds. The estimated value of the green bonds market
in 2017 is 155 billion USD (BNEF, 2018). The bulk of these investments
are in renewable energy, energy efficiency and low-emission transport
(Lazurko and Venema, 2017), with only 4% for adaptation (OECD,
2017b). One major question is whether individual strategies based on
improved climate-related information alone will enable the financial
system to allocate capital in an optimal way (Christophers, 2017) since
climate change is a systemic risk (CISL, 2015; Schoenmaker and van
Tilburg, 2016).
The readiness of financial actors to reduce investments in fossil fuels
is a real trend (Platinga and Scholtens, 2016; Ayling and Gunningham,
2017), but they may not resist the attractiveness of carbon-intensive
investments in many regions. Hence, decarbonizing an investment
portfolio is not synonymous with investing massively in low-emission
infrastructure. Scaling up climate-friendly financial products may
depend upon a business context conducive to the reduction of the riskweighted capital costs of low-emission projects. The typical leverage of
public funding mechanisms for low-emission investment is low (2 to 4)
compared with other sectors (10 to 15) (Maclean et al., 2008; Ward et
al., 2009; MDB, 2016). This is due to the interplay of the uncertainty of
emerging low-emission technologies in the midst of their learning-bydoing cycle with uncertain future revenues due to volatility of fossil fuel
prices (Roques et al., 2008; Gross et al., 2010) as well as uncertainty
around regulatory policies. This inhibits low-emission investments by
corporations functioning under a `shareholder value business regime'
(Berle and Means, 1932; Roe, 1996; Froud et al., 2000) and actors
with restricted access to capital (e.g. cities, local authorities, SMEs and
households).
De-risking policy instruments to enable low-emission investment
encompasses interest rate subsidies, fee-bates, tax breaks, concessional
loans from development banks, and public investment funds, including
revolving funds. Given the constraints on public budgets, public
guarantees can be used to increase the leverage effect of public
financing on private financing. Such de-risking instruments imply
indeed a full direct burden on public budgets only in case of default
of the project. They could back for example various forms of green
infrastructure funds (de Gouvello and Zelenko, 2010; Emin et al., 2014;
Studart and Gallagher, 2015).10
The risk of defaulting can be mitigated by strong measurement, reporting
and verifying (MRV) systems (Bellassen et al., 2015) and by the use of
notional prices recommended in public economics (and currently in use
in France and the UK) to calibrate public support to the provision of
public goods in case of persisting distortions in pricing (Stiglitz et al.,
2017). Some suggest linking these notional prices to `social, economic
and environmental value of voluntary mitigation actions' recognized by
the COP 21 Decision accompanying the Paris Agreement (paragraph
108) (Hourcade et al., 2015; La Rovere et al., 2017b; Shukla et al., 2017),
in order to incorporate the co-benefits of mitigation.
Such public guarantees ultimately amount to money issuance backed by
low-emission projects as collateral. This explains the potentially strong
link between global climate finance and the evolution of the financial

One prototype is the World Bank's Pilot Auction Facility on Methane and Climate Change

378

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

and monetary system. Amongst suggested mechanisms for this
evolution are the use of International Monetary Fund's (IMF's) Special
Drawing Rights to fund the paid-in capital of the Green Climate Fund
(Bredenkamp and Pattillo, 2010) and the creation of carbon remediation
assets at a predetermined face value per avoided tonne of emissions
(Aglietta et al., 2015a, b). Such a predetermined value could hedge
against the fragmentation of climate finance initiatives and support the
emergence of financial products backed by a new class of long-term
assets.
Combining public guarantees at a predetermined value of avoided
emissions, in addition to improving the consistency of non-price
measures, could support the emergence of financial products backed
by a new class of certified assets to attract savers in search of safe and
ethical investments (Aglietta et al., 2015b). It could hedge against the
fragmentation of climate finance initiatives and provide a mechanism to
compensate for the `stranded' assets caused by divestment in carbonbased activities and in lowering the systemic risk of stranded assets
(Safarzyska and van den Bergh, 2017). These new assets could also
facilitate a low-carbon transition for fossil fuel producers and help them
to overcome the `resource curse' (Ross, 2015; Venables, 2016).
Blended injection of liquidity has monetary implications. Some argue
that this questions the premise that money should remain neutral
(Annicchiarico and Di Dio, 2015, 2016; Nikiforos and Zezza, 2017).
Central banks or financial regulators could act as a facilitator of last
resort for low-emission financing instruments, which could in turn lower
the systemic risk of stranded assets (Safarzyska and van den Bergh,
2017). This may, in time, lead to the use of carbon-based monetary
instruments to diversify reserve currencies (Jaeger et al., 2013) and
differentiate reserve requirements (Rozenberg et al., 2013) in the
context of a climate-friendly Bretton Woods (Sirkis et al., 2015; Stua,
2017).

4.4.5.5

Financial challenge for basic needs and adaptation
finance

Adaptation finance is difficult to quantify for two reasons. The first is
that it is very difficult to isolate specific investment needs to enhance
climate resilience from the provision of basic infrastructure that are
currently underinvested (IMF, 2014; Gurara et al., 2017). The UNEP
(2016) estimate of investment needs on adaptation in developing
countries between 140-300 billion USD yr-1 in 2030, a major part
being investment expenditures that are complementary with SDGrelated investments focused on universal access to infrastructure and
services and meeting basic needs. Many climate-adaptation-centric
financial incentives are relevant to non-market services, offering fewer
opportunities for market revenues while they contribute to creating
resilience to climate impacts.
Hence, adaptation investments and the provision of basic needs would
typically have to be supported by national and sub-national government
budgets together with support from overseas development assistance
and multilateral development banks (Fankhauser and Schmidt-Traub,
2011; Adenle et al., 2017; Robinson and Dornan, 2017), and a slow
increase of dedicated NGO and private climate funds (Nakhooda
and Watson, 2016). Even though the UNEP estimates of the costs of

Chapter 4

adaptation might be lower in a 1.5C world (UNEP/Climate Analytics,
2015) they would be higher than the UNEP estimate of 22.5 billion
USD of bilateral and multilateral funding for climate change adaptation
in 2014. Currently, 18-25% of climate finance flows to adaptation in
developing countries (OECD, 2015b, 2016; Shine and Campillo, 2016). It
remains fragmented, with small proportions flowing through UNFCCC
channels (AdaptationWatch, 2015; Roberts and Weikmans, 2017).
Means of raising resources for adaptation, achieving the SDGs and
meeting basic needs (Durand et al., 2016; Roberts et al., 2017) include
the reduction of fossil fuel subsidies (Jakob et al., 2016), increasing
revenues from carbon taxes (Jakob et al., 2016), levies on international
aviation and maritime transport, and sharing of the proceeds of financial
arrangements supporting mitigation activities (Keen et al., 2013). Each
have different redistribution implications. Challenges, however, include
the efficient use of resources, the emergence of long-term assets using
infrastructure as collateral and the capacity to implement small-scale
adaptation and the mainstreaming of adaptation in overall development
policies. There is thus a need for greater policy coordination (Fankhauser
and McDermott, 2014; Morita and Matsumoto, 2015; Sovacool et al.,
2015, 2017; Lemos et al., 2016; Adenle et al., 2017; Peake and Ekins,
2017) that includes robust mechanisms for tracking, reporting and
ensuring transparency of adaptation finance (Donner et al., 2016; Pauw
et al., 2016a; Roberts and Weikmans, 2017; Trabacchi and Buchner,
2017) and its consistency with the provision of basic needs (Hallegatte
et al., 2016).

4.4.5.6

Towards integrated policy packages and innovative
forms of financial cooperation

Carbon prices, regulation and standards, improved information and
appropriate financial instruments can work synergistically to meet the
challenge of `making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards
low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development', as in
Article 2 in the Paris Agreement.
There is growing attention to the combination of policy instruments
that address three domains of action: behavioural changes, economic
optimization and long-term strategies (Grubb et al., 2014). For example,
de-risking low-emission investments would result in higher volumes of
low-emission investments, and would in turn lead to a lower switching
price for the same climate ambition (Hirth and Steckel, 2016). In the
reverse direction, higher explicit carbon prices may generate more
low-emission projects for a given quantum of de-risking. For example,
efficiency standards for housing can increase the efficacy of carbon prices
and overcome the barriers coming from the high discount rates used by
households (Parry et al., 2014), while explicit and notional carbon prices
can lower the risk of arbitrary standards. The calibration of innovative
financial instruments to notional carbon prices could encourage large
multinational companies to increase their level of internal carbon prices
(UNEP, 2016). These notional prices could be higher than explicit carbon
prices because they redirect new hardware investments without an
immediate impact on existing capital stocks and associated interests.
Literature, however, shows that conflicts between poorly articulated
policy instruments can undermine their efficiency (Lecuyer and
Quirion, 2013; Bhattacharya et al., 2017; Garcia-Alvarez et al., 2017).
379

4

Chapter 4

As has been illustrated in Europe, commitment uncertainty and lack of
credibility of regulation have consistently led to low carbon prices in
the case of the EU Emission Trading System (Koch et al., 2014, 2016). A
comparative study shows how these conflicts can be avoided by policy
packages that integrate many dimensions of public policies and are
designed to match institutional and social context of each country and
region (Bataille et al., 2015).
Even though policy packages depend upon domestic political
processes, they might not reinforce the NDCs at a level consistent with
the 1.5C transition without a conducive international setting where
international development finance plays a critical role. Section 4.4.1
explores the means of mainstreaming climate finance in the current
evolution of the lending practices of national and multilateral banks
(Badre, 2018). This could facilitate the access of developing countries
to loans via bond markets at low interest rates, encouragement
of the emergence of new business models for infrastructure,
and encouragement of financial markets to support small-scale
investments (Deau and Touati, 2017).
These financial innovations may involve non-state public actors
like cities and regional public authorities that govern infrastructure
investment, enable energy and food systems transitions and manage
urban dynamics (Cartwright, 2015). They would help, for example, in
raising the 4.5-5.4 trillion USD yr-1 from 2015 to 2030 announced
by the Cities Climate Finance Leadership Alliance (CCFLA, 2016) to
achieve the commitments by the Covenant of Mayors of many cities to
long-term climate targets (Kona et al., 2018).

4

The evolution of global climate financial cooperation may involve
central banks, financial regulatory authorities, and multilateral and
commercial banks. There are still knowledge gaps about the form,
structure and potential of these arrangements. They could be viewed
as a form of a burden-sharing between high-, medium- and lowincome countries to enhance the deployment of ambitious Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) and new forms of `common but
differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities' (Edenhofer et
al., 2015; Hourcade et al., 2015; Ji and Sha, 2015).

4.5

Integration and Enabling Transformation

4.5.1

Assessing Feasibility of Options for Accelerated
Transitions

Chapter 2 shows that 1.5C-consistent pathways involve rapid, global
climate responses to reach net zero emissions by mid-century or earlier.
Chapter 3 identifies climate change risks and impacts to which the
world would need to adapt during these transitions and additional risks
and impacts during potential 1.5C overshoot pathways. The feasibility
of these pathways is contingent upon systemic change (Section 4.3)
and enabling conditions (Section 4.4), including policy packages. This
section assesses the feasibility of options (technologies, actions and
measures) that form part of global systems under transition that make
up 1.5C-consistent pathways.

380

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Following the assessment framework developed in Chapter 1, economic
and technological, institutional and socio-cultural, and environmental and
geophysical feasibility are considered and applied to system transitions
(Sections 4.3.1-4.3.4), overarching adaptation options (Section 4.3.5)
and carbon dioxide removal (CDR) options (Section 4.3.7). This is done
to assess the multidimensional feasibility of mitigation and adaptation
options that have seen considerable development and change since
AR5. In the case of adaptation, the assessed AR5 options are typically
clustered. For example, all options related to energy infrastructure
resilience, independently of the generation source, are categorized as
`resilience of power infrastructure'.
Table 4.10 presents sets of indicators against which the multidimensional
feasibility of individual adaptation options relevant to warming of 1.5C,
and mitigation options along 1.5C-consistent pathways, is assessed.
The feasibility assessment takes the following steps. First, each of
the mitigation and adaptation options is assessed along the relevant
indicators grouped around six feasibility dimensions: economic,
technological, institutional, socio-cultural, environmental/ecological
and geophysical. Three types of feasibility groupings were assessed
from the underlying literature: first, if the indicator could block the
feasibility of this option; second, if the indicator has neither a positive
nor a negative effect on the feasibility of the option or the evidence
is mixed; and third, if the indicator does not pose any barrier to the
feasibility of this option. The full assessment of each option under each
indicator, including the literature references on which the assessment
is based, can be found in supplementary materials 4.SM.4.2 and
4.SM.4.3. When appropriate, it is indicated that there is no evidence
(NE), limited evidence (LE) or that the indicator is not applicable to the
option (NA).
Next, for each feasibility dimension and option, the overall feasibility
for a given dimension is assessed as the mean of combined scores
of the relevant underlying indicators and classified into `insignificant
barriers' (2.5 to 3), `mixed or moderate but still existent barriers' (1.5
to 2.5) or `significant barriers' (below 1.5) to feasibility. Indicators
assessed as NA, LE or NE are not included in this overall assessment
(see supplementary material 4.SM.4.1 for the averaging and weighing
guidance).
The results are summarized in Table 4.11 (for mitigation options)
and Table 4.12 (for adaptation options) for each of the six feasibility
dimensions: where dark shading indicates few feasibility barriers;
moderate shading indicates that there are mixed or moderate but still
existent barriers, and light shading indicates that multiple barriers, in
this dimension, may block implementation.
A three-step process of independent validation and discussion by
authors was undertaken to make this assessment as robust as possible
within the scope of this Special Report. It must, however, be recognized
that this is an indicative assessment at global scale, and both policy
and implementation at regional, national and local level would need to
adapt and build on this knowledge, within the particular local context
and constraints. Some contextual factors are indicated in the rightmost
column in Tables 4.11 and 4.12.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.10 | Sets of indicators against which the feasibility of adaptation and mitigation options are assessed for each feasibility dimension. The options are discussed in
Sections 4.3.1-4.3.5 and 4.3.7.
Feasibility Dimensions

Adaptation Indicators

Mitigation Indicators

Economic

Microeconomic viability
Macroeconomic viability
Socio-economic vulnerability reduction potential
Employment & productivity enhancement potential

Cost-effectiveness
Absence of distributional effects
Employment & productivity enhancement potential

Technological

Technical resource availability
Risks mitigation potential

Technical scalability
Maturity
Simplicity
Absence of risk

Institutional

Political acceptability
Legal & regulatory feasibility
Institutional capacity & administrative feasibility
Transparency & accountability potential

Political acceptability
Legal & administrative feasibility
Institutional capacity
Transparency & accountability potential

Socio-cultural

Social co-benefits (health, education)
Socio-cultural acceptability
Social & regional inclusiveness
Intergenerational equity

Social co-benefits (health, education)
Public acceptance
Social & regional inclusiveness
Intergenerational equity
Human capabilities

Environmental/Ecological

Ecological capacity
Adaptive capacity/ resilience building potential

Reduction of air pollution
Reduction of toxic waste
Reduction of water use
Improved biodiversity

Geophysical

Physical feasibility
Land use change enhancement potential
Hazard risk reduction potential

Physical feasibility (physical potentials)
Limited use of land
Limited use of scarce (geo)physical resources
Global spread

4.5.2

Implementing Mitigation

This section builds on the insights on mitigation options in Section 4.3,
applies the assessment methodology along feasibility dimensions and
indicators explained in Section 4.5.1, and synthesizes the assessment
of the enabling conditions in Section 4.4.

section (Section 4.6). Nevertheless, in Table 4.11, an indicative attempt
has been made to capture relevant contextual information. The `context'
column indicates which contextual factors may affect the feasibility of
an option, including regional differences. For instance, solar irradiation
in an area impacts the cost-effectiveness of solar photovoltaic energy,
so solar irradiation is mentioned in this column.

4.5.2.1

4.5.2.2

Assessing mitigation options for limiting warming
to 1.5C against feasibility dimensions

Enabling conditions for implementation
of mitigation options towards 1.5C

An assessment of the degree to which examples of 1.5C-relevant
mitigation options face barriers to implementation, and on which
contexts this depends, is summarized in Table 4.11. An explanation of
the approach is given in Section 4.5.1 and in supplementary material
4.SM.4.1. Selected options were mapped onto system transitions
and clustered through an iterative process of literature review,
expert feedback, and responses to reviewer comments. The detailed
assessment and the literature underpinning the assessment can be
found in supplementary material 4.SM.4.2.

The feasibility assessment highlights six dimensions that could help
inform an agenda that could be addressed by the areas discussed in
Section 4.4: governance, behaviour and lifestyles, innovation, enhancing
institutional capacities, policy and finance. For instance, Section 4.4.3 on
behaviour offers strategies for addressing public acceptance problems,
and how changes can be more effective when communication and
actions relate to people's values. This section synthesizes the findings in
Section 4.4 in an attempt to link them to the assessment in Table 4.11.
The literature on which the discussion is based is found in Section 4.4.

The feasibility framework in Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1 highlights
that the feasibility of mitigation and adaptation options depends on
many factors. Many of those are captured in the indicators in Table 4.10,
but many depend on the specific context in which an option features. This
Special Report did not have the mandate, space or the literature base
to undertake a regionally specific assessment. Hence the assessment is
caveated as providing a broad indication of the likely global barriers,
ignoring significant regional diversity. Regional and context-specific
literature is also just emerging as is noted in the knowledge gaps

From Section 4.4, including the case studies presented in the Boxes
4.1 to 4.10, several main messages can be constructed. For instance,
governance would have to be multilevel and engaging different actors,
while being efficient, and choosing the form of cooperation based on
the specific systemic challenge or option at hand. If institutional capacity
for financing and governing the various transitions is not urgently built,
many countries would lack the ability to change pathways from a
high-emission scenario to a low- or zero-emission scenario. In terms of
innovation, governments, both national and multilateral, can contribute
381

4

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.11 | Feasibility assessment of examples of 1.5C-relevant mitigation options, with dark shading signifying the absence of barriers in the feasibility dimension, moderate
shading indicating that, on average, the dimension does not have a positive or negative effect on the feasibility of the option, or the evidence is mixed, and faint
shading the presence of potentially blocking barriers. No shading means that the literature found was not sufficient to make an assessment. Evidence and agreement
assessment is undertaken at the option level. The context column on the far right indicates how the assessment might change if contextual factors were different. For
the methodology and literature basis, see supplementary material 4.SM.4.1 and 4.SM.4.2.
Abbreviations used: Ec: Economic - Tec: Technological - Inst: Institutional - Soc: Socio-cultural - Env: Environmental/Ecological - Geo: Geophysical
System

Mitigation Option
Wind energy (on-shore
& off-shore)

Solar PV

Energy
System
Transitions

4

Land &
Ecosystem
Transitions

Urban &
Infra
structure
System
Transitions

382

Evidence
Robust

Robust

Agreement

Ec

Tec

Inst

Soc

Env

Geo

Context

Medium

Wind regime, economic status, space for wind
farms, and the existence of a legal framework
for independent power producers affect uptake;
cost-effectiveness affected by incentive regime

High

Cost-effectiveness affected by solar irradiation
and incentive regime. Also enhanced by legal
framework for independent power producers,
which affects uptake
Depends on availability of biomass and land and the
capability to manage sustainable land use.
Distributional effects depend on the agrarian
(or other) system used to produce feedstock

Bioenergy

Robust

Medium

Electricity storage

Robust

High

Batteries universal, but grid-flexible resources
vary with area's level of development

Power sector carbon
dioxide capture
and storage

Robust

High

Varies with local CO2 storage capacity, presence of
legal framework, level of development and
quality of public engagement

Nuclear energy

Robust

High

Electricity market organization, legal framework,
standardization & know-how, country's `democratic
fabric', institutional and technical capacity, and
safety culture of public and private institutions

Reduced food
wastage & efficient
food production

Robust

High

Will depend on the combination of
individual and institutional behaviour

Dietary shifts

Medium

High

Depends on individual behaviour, education,
cultural factors and institutional support

Sustainable
intensification
of agriculture

Medium

High

Depends on development and deployment
of new technologies

Ecosystems restoration

Medium

High

Depends on location and institutional factors

Land-use & urban
planning

Robust

Medium

Electric cars and buses

Medium

High

Sharing schemes

Limited

Medium

Historic schemes universal, but new ones depend
on ICT status; undermined by high crime and low
levels of law enforcement
Depends on presence of existing `informal' taxi
systems, which may be more cost-effective and
affordable than capital-intensive new build schemes,
as well as (local) government capabilities

Varies with urban fabric, not geography or economy;
requires capacitated local government and legitimate
tenure system
Varies with degree of government intervention;
requires capacity to retrofit "fuelling" stations

Public transport

Robust

Medium

Non-motorized
transport

Robust

High

Aviation & shipping

Medium

Medium

Varies with technology, governance
and accountability

Smart grids

Medium

Medium

Varies with economic status and presence or quality
of existing grid

Efficient appliances

Medium

High

Adoption varies with economic status and policy
framework

Low/zero-energy
buildings

Medium

High

Depends on size of existing building stock and growth
of building stock

Viability rests on linkages with public transport,
cultural factors, climate and geography

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.11 (continued)
System

Industrial
System
Transitions

Carbon
Dioxide
Removal

Mitigation Option

Evidence

Agreement

Ec

Tec

Inst

Soc

Env

Geo

Context
Potential and adoption depend on existing efficiency,
energy prices and interest rates, as well as
government incentives

Energy efficiency

Robust

High

Bio-based & circularity

Medium

Medium

Faces barriers in terms of pressure on natural
resources and biodiversity. Product substitution
depends on market organization and government
incentivization

Electrification
& hydrogen

Medium

High

Depends on availability of large-scale, cheap,
emission-free electricity (electrification, hydrogen)
or CO2 storage nearby (hydrogen). Manufacturers'
appetite to embrace disruptive innovations

Industrial carbon
dioxide capture,
utilization and storage

Robust

High

High concentration of CO2 in exhaust gas improve
economic and technical feasibility of CCUS in
industry. CO2 storage or reuse possibilities

Bioenergy and carbon
dioxide capture
and storage

Robust

Medium

Depends on biomass availability, CO2 storage
capacity, legal framework, economic status and
social acceptance

Direct air carbon
dioxide capture
and storage

Medium

Medium

Depends on CO2-free energy, CO2 storage capacity,
legal framework, economic status and social
acceptance

Afforestation &
reforestation

Robust

High

Depends on location, mode of implementation,
and economic and institutional factors

Soil carbon
sequestration & biochar

Robust

High

Depends on location, soil properties, time span

Enhanced weathering

Medium

Low

Depends on CO2-free energy, economic
status and social acceptance

to applying general-purpose technologies to mitigation purposes.
If this is not managed, some reduction in emissions could happen
autonomously, but it may not lead to a 1.5C-consistent pathway.
International cooperation on technology, including technology transfer
where this does not happen autonomously, is needed and can help
create innovation capabilities in all countries that allow them to operate,
maintain, adapt and regulate a portfolio of mitigation technologies.
Case studies in the various subsections highlight the opportunities and
challenges of doing this in practice. They indicate that it can be done in
specific circumstances, which can be created.
A combination of behaviour-oriented pricing policies and financing
options can help change technologies and social behaviour as it would
challenge the existing, high-emission socio-technical regime on multiple
levels across feasibility characteristics. For instance, for dietary change,
combining supply-side measures with value-driven communication and
economic instruments may help make a lasting transition, while an
economic instrument, such as enhanced prices or taxation, on its own
may not be as robust.
Governments could benefit from enhanced carbon prices, as a price and
innovation incentive and also a source of additional revenue to correct
distributional effects and subsidize the development of new, costeffective negative-emission technology and infrastructure. However,
there is high evidence and medium agreement that pricing alone is
insufficient. Even if prices rise significantly, they typically incentivize
incremental change, but typically fail to provide the impetus for private
actors to take the risk of engaging in the transformational changes
that would be needed to limit warming to 1.5C. Apart from the

incentives to change behaviour and technology, financial systems are
an indispensable element of a systemic transition. If financial markets
do not acknowledge climate risk and the risk of transitions, regulatory
financial institutions, such as central banks, could intervene.
Strengthening implementation revolves around more than addressing
barriers to feasibility. A system transition, be it in energy, industry, land
or a city, requires changing the core parameters of a system. These relate,
as introduced in Section 4.2 and further elaborated in Section 4.4, to
how actors cooperate, how technologies are embedded, how resources
are linked, how cultures relate and what values people associate with
the transition and the current regime.

4.5.3

Implementing Adaptation

Article 7 of the Paris Agreement provides an aspirational global goal for
adaptation, of `enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience,
and reducing vulnerability' (UNFCCC, 2016). Adaptation implementation
is gathering momentum in many regions, guided by national NDC's and
national adaptation plans (see Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this Chapter).
Operationalizing adaptation in a set of regional environments on
pathways to a 1.5C world requires strengthened global and differentiated
regional and local capacities. It also needs rapid and decisive adaptation
actions to reduce the costs and magnitude of potential climate impacts
(Vergara et al., 2015).
This could be facilitated by: (i) enabling conditions, especially improved
governance, economic measures and financing (Section 4.4); (ii)
383

4

Chapter 4

enhanced clarity on adaptation options to help identify strategic
priorities, sequencing and timing of implementation (Section 4.3);
(iii) robust monitoring and evaluation frameworks; and (iv) political
leadership (Magnan et al., 2015; Magnan and Ribera, 2016; Lesnikowski
et al., 2017; UNEP, 2017a).

4.5.3.1

Feasible adaptation options

This section summarizes the feasibility (defined in Cross-Chapter Box 3,
Table 1 in Chapter 1 and Table 4.4) of select adaptation options using
evidence presented across this chapter and in supplementary material
4.SM.4.3 and the expert-judgement of its authors (Table 4.12). The
options assessed respond to risks and impacts identified in Chapter 3.
They were selected based on options identified in AR5 (Noble et al.,
2014), focusing on those relevant to 1.5C-compatible pathways, where
sufficient literature exists. Selected options were mapped onto system
transitions and clustered through an iterative process of literature
review, expert feedback, and responses to reviewer comments.
Besides gaps in the literature around crucial adaptation questions
on the transition to a 1.5C world (Section 4.6), there is inadequate
current literature to undertake a spatially differentiated assessment
(Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1). There are also limited baselines
for exposure, vulnerability and risk to help policy and implementation
prioritization. Hence, the compiled results can at best provide a broad
framework to inform policymaking. Given the bottom-up nature of
most adaptation implementation evidence, care needs to be taken in
generalizing these findings.

4

Options are considered as part of a systemic approach, recognizing that
no single solution exists to limit warming to 1.5C and adapting to its
impacts. To respond to the local and regional context - and to synergies
and trade-offs between adaptation, mitigation and sustainable
development - packages of options suited to local enabling conditions
can be implemented.
Table 4.12 summarizes the feasibility assessment through its six
dimensions with levels of evidence and agreement and indicates how
the feasibility of an adaptation option may be differentiated by certain
contextual factors (last column).
When considered jointly, the description of adaptation options (Section
4.3), the feasibility assessment (summarized in Table 4.12), and
discussion of enabling conditions (Section 4.4) show us how options
can be implemented and lead towards transformational adaptation if
and when needed.
The adaptation options for energy system transitions focus on existing
power infrastructure resilience and water management, when required,
for any type of generation source. These options are not sufficient for
the far-reaching transformations required in the energy sector, which
have tended to focus on technologies to shift from a fossil-based to a
renewable energy system (Erlinghagen and Markard, 2012; Muench
et al., 2014; Brand and von Gleich, 2015; Monstadt and Wolff, 2015;
Child and Breyer, 2017; Hermwille et al., 2017). There is also need for
integration of such energy system transitions with social-ecological
systems transformations to increase the resilience of the energy sector,
384

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

for which appropriate enabling conditions, such as for technological
innovations, are fundamentally important. Institutional capacities
can be enhanced by expanding the role of actors as transformation
catalysts (Erlinghagen and Markard, 2012). The integration of ethics
and justice within these transformations can help attain SDG7 on clean
energy access (Jenkins et al., 2018), while inclusion of the cultural
dimension and cultural legitimacy (Amars et al., 2017) can provide a
more substantial base for societal transformation. Strengthening policy
instruments and regulatory frameworks and enhancing multilevel
governance that focuses on resilience components can help secure
these transitions (Exner et al., 2016).
For land and ecosystem transitions, the options of conservation
agriculture, efficient irrigation, agroforestry, ecosystem restoration
and avoided deforestation, and coastal defence and hardening have
between medium and robust evidence with medium to high agreement.
The other options assessed have limited or no evidence across one
or more of the feasibility dimensions. Community-based adaptation
is assessed as having medium evidence and high agreement to face
scaling barriers. Scaling community-based adaptation may require
structural changes, implying the need for transformational adaptation in
some regions. This would involve enhanced multilevel governance and
institutional capacities by enabling anticipatory and flexible decisionmaking systems that access and develop collaborative networks
(Dowd et al., 2014), tackling root causes of vulnerability (Chung Tiam
Fook, 2017), and developing synergies between development and
climate change (Burch et al., 2017). Case studies show the use of
transformational adaptation approaches for fire management (Colloff
et al., 2016a), floodplain and wetland management (Colloff et al.,
2016b), and forest management (Chung Tiam Fook, 2017), in which
the strengthening of policy instruments and climate finance are also
required.
There is growing recognition of the need for transformational
adaptation within the agricultural sector but limited evidence on
how to facilitate processes of deep, systemic change (Dowd et al.,
2014). Case studies demonstrate that transformational adaptation in
agriculture requires a sequencing and overlap between incremental and
transformational adaptation actions (Hadarits et al., 2017; Termeer et
al., 2017), e.g., incremental improvements to crop management while
new crop varieties are being researched and field-tested (Rippke et al.,
2016). Broader considerations include addressing stakeholder values
and attitudes (Fleming et al., 2015a), understanding and leveraging the
role of social capital, collaborative networks, and information (Dowd et
al., 2014), and being inclusive with rural and urban communities, and
the social, political, and cultural environment (Rickards and Howden,
2012). Transformational adaptation in agriculture systems could have
significant economic and institutional costs (Mushtaq, 2016), along with
potential unintended negative consequences (Davidson, 2016; Rippke
et al., 2016; Gajjar et al., 2018; Mushtaq, 2018), and a need to focus
on the transitional space between incremental and transformational
adaptation (Hadarits et al., 2017), as well as the timing of the shift from
one to the other (Laderach et al., 2017).
Within urban and infrastructure transitions, green infrastructure and
sustainable water management are assessed as the most feasible
options, followed by sustainable land-use and urban planning. The

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.12 | Feasibility assessment of examples of 1.5C-relevant adaptation options, with dark shading signifying the absence of barriers in the feasibility dimension,
moderate shading indicating that, on average, the dimension does not have a positive or negative effect on the feasibility of the option, or the evidence is mixed,
and light shading indicating the presence of potentially blocking barriers. No shading means that sufficient literature could not be found to make the
assessment. NA signifies that the dimension is not applicable to that adaptation option. For methodology and literature basis, see supplementary material
4.SM.4.
Abbreviations used: Ec: Economic - Tec: Technological - Inst: Institutional - Soc: Socio-cultural - Env: Environmental/Ecological - Geo: Geophysical
System
Energy System
Transitions

Land &
Ecosystem
Transitions

Urban &
Infrastructure
System
Transitions

Industrial
System
Transitions

Overarching
Adaptation
Options

Adaptation Option

Evidence

Agreement

Ec

Tec

Inst

Soc

Env

Geo

Context
Depends on existing power infrastructure,
all generation sources and those with
intensive water requirements

Power infrastructure,
including water

Medium

High

Conservation
agriculture

Medium

Medium

Depends on irrigated/rainfed system, ecosystem
characteristics, crop type, other farming practices

Efficient irrigation

Medium

Medium

Depends on agricultural system, technology used,
regional institutional and biophysical context

Efficient livestock
systems

Limited

High

Dependent on livestock breeds, feed practices,
and biophysical context (e.g., carrying capacity)

Agroforestry

Medium

High

Depends on knowledge, financial support, and market
conditions

Community-based
adaptation

Medium

High

Focus on rural areas and combined with ecosystemsbased adaptation, does not include urban settings

Ecosystem restoration
& avoided deforestation

Robust

Medium

Mostly focused on existing and evaluated REDD+
projects

Biodiversity
management

Medium

Medium

Focus on hotspots of biodiversity vulnerability and
high connectivity

Coastal defence
& hardening

Robust

Medium

Depends on locations that require it as a first
adaptation option

Sustainable aquaculture

Limited

Medium

Depends on locations at risk and socio-cultural context

Sustainable land-use
& urban planning

Medium

Medium

Depends on nature of planning systems
and enforcement mechanisms

Sustainable water
management

Robust

Medium

Balancing sustainable water supply and rising
demand, especially in low-income countries

Green infrastructure
& ecosystem services

Medium

High

Building codes
& standards

Limited

Medium

Intensive industry
infrastructure resilience
and water management

Limited

High

Depends on intensive industry, existing infrastructure
and using or requiring high demand of water

Disaster risk
management

Medium

High

Requires institutional, technical, and financial
capacity in frontline agencies and government

Risk spreading and
sharing: insurance

Medium

Medium

Requires well-developed financial structures and public
understanding

Social safety nets

Medium

Medium

Type and mechanism of safety net, political priorities,
institutional transparency

Climate services

Medium

High

Depends on climate information availability and usability, local infrastructure
and institutions, national priorities

Indigenous knowledge

Medium

High

Dependent on recognition of indigenous
rights, laws, and governance systems

Education and learning

Medium

High

Existing education system, funding

Population health
and health system

Medium

High

Human migration

Medium

Low

Depends on reconciliation of urban development
with green infrastructure

4

Adoption requires legal, educational, and
enforcement mechanisms to regulate buildings

NA

Requires basic health services and infrastructure
Hazard exposure, political and socio-cultural
acceptability (in destination), migrant skills and
social networks

385

Chapter 4

need for transformational adaptation in urban settings arises from the
root causes of poverty, failures in sustainable development, and a lack
of focus on social justice (Revi et al., 2014a; Parnell, 2015; Simon and
Leck, 2015; Shi et al., 2016; Ziervogel et al., 2016a; Burch et al., 2017),
and necessitates a focus on governance structures and the inclusion of
equity and justice concerns (Bos et al., 2015; Shi et al., 2016; Holscher
et al., 2018).
Current implementation of urban ecosystems-based adaptation (EbA)
lacks a systems perspective of transformations and consideration of
the normative and ethical aspects of EbA (Brink et al., 2016). Flexibility
within urban planning could help deal with the multiple uncertainties
of implementing adaptation (Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2014;
Radhakrishnan et al., 2018), for example, urban adaptation pathways
were implemented in the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy in New York,
which is considered as tipping point that led to the implementation of
transformational adaptation practices.

4

Adaptation options for industry focus on infrastructure resilience
and water management. Like with energy system transitions,
technological innovation would be required, but also the enhancement
of institutional capacities. Recent research illustrates transformational
adaptation within industrial transitions focusing on the role of
different actors and tools driving innovation, and points to the role
of nationally appropriate mitigation actions in avoiding lock-ins and
promoting system innovation (Boodoo and Olsen, 2017), the role of
private sector in sustainability governance in the socio-political context
(Burch et al., 2016), and of green entrepreneurs driving transformative
change in the green economy (Gibbs and O'Neill, 2014). Lim-Camacho
et al. (2015) suggest an analysis of the complete lifecycle of supply
chains as a means of identifying additional adaptation strategies, as
opposed to the current focus on a part of the supply chain. Chain-wide
strategies can modify the rest of the chain and present a win-win with
commercial objectives.
The assessed adaptation options also have mitigation synergies
and trade-offs (assessed in Section 4.5.4) that need to be carefully
considered, while planning climate action.

4.5.3.2

adaptation for the purposes of assessing progress (Dupuis and
Biesbroek, 2013; Biesbroek et al., 2015), an absence of comprehensive
and systematically collected data on adaptation to support longitudinal
assessment and comparison (Ford et al., 2015b; Lesnikowski et al.,
2016), a lack of agreement on indicators to measure (Brooks et al.,
2013; Bours et al., 2015; Lesnikowski et al., 2015), and challenges of
attributing altered vulnerability to adaptation actions (Ford et al., 2013;
Bours et al., 2015; UNEP, 2017a).

4.5.4

Synergies and Trade-Offs between
Adaptation and Mitigation

Implementing a particular mitigation or adaptation option may affect the
feasibility and effectiveness of other mitigation and adaptation options.
Supplementary Material 4.SM.5.1 provides examples of possible positive
impacts (synergies) and negative impacts (trade-offs) of mitigation
options for adaptation. For example, renewable energy sources such as
wind energy and solar PV combined with electricity storage can increase
resilience due to distributed grids, thereby enhancing both mitigation
and adaptation. Yet, as another example, urban densification may reduce
GHG emissions, enhancing mitigation, but can also intensify heat island
effects and inhibit restoration of local ecosystems if not accounted for,
thereby increasing adaptation challenges.
The table in Supplementary Material 4.SM.5.2 provides examples
of synergies and trade-offs of adaptation options for mitigation. It
shows, for example, that conservation agriculture can reduce some
GHG emissions and thus enhance mitigation, but at the same time can
increase other GHG emissions, thereby reducing mitigation potential.
As another example, agroforestry can reduce GHG emissions through
reduced deforestation and fossil fuel consumption but has a lower
carbon sequestration potential compared with natural and secondary
forest.
Maladaptive actions could increase the risk of adverse climate-related
outcomes. For example, biofuel targets could lead to indirect land use
change and influence local food security, through a shift in land use
abroad in response to increased domestic biofuel demand, increasing
global GHG emissions rather than decreasing them.

Monitoring and evaluation

Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) in adaptation implementation can
promote accountability and transparency of adaptation financing,
facilitate policy learning and sharing good practices, pressure laggards,
and guide adaptation planning. The majority of research on M&E focuses
on specific policies or programmes, and has typically been driven by
the needs of development organizations, donors, and governments to
measure the impact and attribution of adaptation initiatives (Ford and
Berrang-Ford, 2016). There is growing research examining adaptation
progress across nations, sectors, and scales (Reckien et al., 2014; Araos
et al., 2016a, b; Austin et al., 2016; Heidrich et al., 2016; Lesnikowski et
al., 2016; Robinson, 2017). In response to a need for global, regional
and local adaptation, the development of indicators and standardized
approaches to evaluate and compare adaptation over time and
across regions, countries, and sectors would enhance comparability
and learning. A number of constraints continue to hamper progress
on adaptation M&E, including a debate on what actually constitutes
386

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Various options enhance both climate change mitigation and
adaptation, and would hence serve two 1.5C-related goals: reducing
emissions while adapting to the associated climate change. Examples
of such options are reforestation, urban and spatial planning, and land
and water management.
Synergies between mitigation and adaptation may be enhanced, and
trade-offs reduced, by considering enabling conditions (Section 4.4),
while trade-offs can be amplified when enabling conditions are not
considered (C.A. Scott et al., 2015). For example, information that
is tailored to the personal situation of individuals and communities,
including climate services that are credible and targeted at the point
of decision-making, can enable and promote both mitigation and
adaptation actions (Section 4.4.3). Similarly, multilevel governance
and community participation, respectively, can enable and promote
both adaptation and mitigation actions (Section 4.4.1). Governance,
policies and institutions can facilitate the implementation of the water-

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

energy-food (WEF) nexus (Rasul and Sharma, 2016). The WEF nexus
can enhance food, water and energy security, particularly in cities with
agricultural production areas (Biggs et al., 2015), electricity generation
with intensive water requirements (Conway et al 2015), and in
agriculture (El Gafy et al., 2017) and livelihoods (Biggs et al., 2015). Such
a nexus approach can reduce the transport energy that is embedded
in food value chains (Villarroel Walker et al., 2014), providing diverse
sources of food in the face of changing climates (Tacoli et al., 2013).
Urban agriculture, where integrated, can mitigate climate change and
support urban flood management (Angotti, 2015; Bell et al., 2015; Biggs

Chapter 4

et al., 2015; Gwedla and Shackleton, 2015; Lwasa et al., 2015; Yang
et al., 2016; Sanesi et al., 2017). In the case of electricity generation,
enabling conditions through a combination of carefully selected policy
instruments can maximize the synergic benefits between low GHG
energy production and water for energy (Shang et al., 2018). Despite
the multiple benefits of maximizing synergies between mitigation
and adaptations options through the WEF nexus approach (Chen and
Chen, 2016), there are implementation challenges given institutional
complexity, political economy, and interdependencies between actors
(Leck et al., 2015).

Box 4.10 | Bhutan: Synergies and Trade-Offs in Economic Growth, Carbon Neutrality and Happiness
Bhutan has three national goals: improving its gross national happiness index (GNHI), improving its economic growth (gross
domestic product, GDP) and maintaining its carbon neutrality. These goals increasingly interact and raise questions about whether
they can be sustainably maintained into the future. Interventions in this enabling environment are required to comply with all three
goals.
Bhutan is well known for its GNHI, which is based on a variety of indicators covering psychological well-being, health, education,
cultural and community vitality, living standards, ecological issues and good governance (RGoB, 2012; Schroeder and Schroeder,
2014; Ura, 2015). The GNHI is a precursor to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Allison, 2012; Brooks, 2013) and reflects
local enabling environments. The GNHI has been measured twice, in 2010 and 2015, and this showed an increase of 1.8% (CBS &
GNH, 2016). Like most emerging countries, Bhutan wants to increase its wealth and become a middle-income country (RGoB, 2013,
2016), while remaining carbon-neutral - a goal which has been in place since 2009 at COP15 and was reiterated in its Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution (NEC, 2015). Bhutan achieves its current carbon-neutral status through hydropower and forest
cover (Yangka and Diesendorf, 2016), which are part of its resilience and adaptation strategy.
Nevertheless, Bhutan faces rising GHG emissions. Transport and industry are the largest growth areas (NEC, 2011). Bhutan's carbonneutral status would be threatened by 2044 with business-as-usual approaches to economic growth (Yangka and Newman, 2018).
Increases in hydropower are being planned based on climate change scenarios that suggest sufficient water supply will be available
(NEC, 2011). Forest cover is expected to remain sufficient to maintain co-benefits. The biggest challenge is to electrify both freight
and passenger transport (ADB, 2013). Bhutan wants to be a model for achieving economic growth consistent with limiting climate
change to 1.5C and improving its GNHI (Michaelowa et al., 2018) through synthesizing all three goals and improving its adaptive
capacity.

4.6

Knowledge Gaps and Key Uncertainties

The global response to limiting warming to 1.5C is a new knowledge
area, which has emerged after the Paris Agreement. This section
presents a number of knowledge gaps that have emerged from the
assessment of mitigation, adaptation and carbon dioxide removal
(CDR) options and solar radiation modification (SRM) measures;
enabling conditions; and synergies and trade-offs. Illustrative questions
that emerge synthesizing the more comprehensive Table 4.13 below
include: how much can be realistically expected from innovation,
behaviour and systemic political and economic change in improving
resilience, enhancing adaptation and reducing GHG emissions?
How can rates of changes be accelerated and scaled up? What is
the outcome of realistic assessments of mitigation and adaptation

4

land transitions that are compliant with sustainable development,
poverty eradication and addressing inequality? What are life-cycle
emissions and prospects of early-stage CDR options? How can climate
and sustainable development policies converge, and how can they
be organized within a global governance framework and financial
system, based on principles of justice and ethics (CBDR-RC), reciprocity
and partnership? To what extent would limiting warming to 1.5C
require a harmonization of macro-financial and fiscal policies, which
could include central banks? How can different actors and processes
in climate governance reinforce each other, and hedge against the
fragmentation of initiatives?
These knowledge gaps are highlighted in Table 4.13 along with a crossreference to the respective sections in the last column.

387

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.13 | Knowledge gaps and uncertainties
Knowledge Area

1.5C Pathways and
Ensuing Change

Energy
Systems

4
Options to
Achieve
and Adapt
to 1.5C
Land &
ecosystems

Urban &
infrastructure
systems

388

Adaptation

Reference

* Lack of literature specific to 1.5C on investment costs with
detailed breakdown by technology
* Lack of literature specific to 1.5C on mitigation costs in
terms of GDP and welfare
* Lack of literature on distributional implications of 1.5C
compared to 2C or business-as-usual at sectoral
and regional levels
* Limited 1.5C-specific case studies for mitigation
* Limited knowledge on the systemic and dynamic aspects of
transitions to 1.5C, including how vicious or virtuous circles
might work, how self-reinforcing aspects can be actively
introduced and managed

Mitigation

* Lack of literature specific to 1.5C on adaptation costs
and need
* Lack of literature on what overshoot means for adaptation
* Lack of knowledge on avoided adaptation investments
associated with limiting warming to 1.5C, 2C or
business-as-usual
* Limited 1.5C-specific case studies for adaptation
* Scant literature examining current or future adaptation options,
or examining what different climate pathways mean for
adaptation success
* Need for transformational adaptation at 1.5C and beyond
remains largely unexplored

4.2

* The shift to variable renewables that many countries are
implementing is just reaching a level where large-scale
storage systems or other grid flexibility options, e.g., demand
response, are required to enable resilient grid systems. Thus,
new knowledge on the opportunities and issues associated
with scaling up zero-carbon grids would be needed, including
knowledge about how zero-carbon electric grids can integrate
with the full-scale electrification of transport systems
* CCS suffers mostly from uncertainty about the feasibility
of timely upscaling, both due to lack of regulatory capacity
and concerns about storage safety and cost
* There is not much literature on the distributional implications
of large-scale bioenergy deployment, the assessment of
environmental feasibility is hampered by a diversity of contexts
of individual studies (type of feedstock, technology, land
availability), which could be improved through emerging
meta-studies

* Relatively little literature on individual adaptation options
since AR5
* No evidence on socio-cultural acceptability of adaptation
options
* Lack of regional research on the implementation of adaptation
options

* More knowledge would be needed on how land-based
mitigation can be reconciled with land demands for
adaptation and development
* While there is now more literature on the underlying
mechanisms of land transitions, data is often insufficient
to draw robust conclusions, and there is uncertainty about
land availability
* The lack of data on social and institutional information
(largest knowledge gap indicated for ecosystems restoration
in Table 4.11), which are therefore not widely integrated in
land use modelling
* Examples of successful policy implementation and institutions
related to land-based mitigation leading to co-benefits for
adaptation and development are missing from the literature
* There is relatively little scientific literature on the effects
of dietary shifts and reduction of food wastage on mitigation,
especially regarding the institutional, technical and
environmental concerns

* Regional information on some options does not exist,
especially in the case of land-use transitions
* Limited research examining socio-cultural perspectives and
impacts of adaptation options, especially for efficient irrigation,
coastal defence and hardening, agroforestry and biodiversity
management
* Lack of longitudinal, regional studies assessing the impacts of
certain adaptation options, such as conservation agriculture
and shifting to efficient livestock systems
* More knowledge is needed on the cost-effectiveness and
scalability of various adaptation options. For example, there
is no evidence for the macro-economic viability of communitybased adaptation (CbA) and biodiversity management, or on
employment and productivity enhancement potential for
biodiversity management and coastal defence and hardening.
* More knowledge is needed on risk mitigation and the potential
of biodiversity management
* Lack of evidence of the political acceptability of efficient
livestock systems
* Limited evidence on legal and regulatory feasibility of
conservation agriculture and no evidence on coastal
defence and hardening
* For transparency and accountability potential, there is limited
evidence for conservation agriculture and no evidence for
biodiversity management, coastal defence and hardening and
sustainable aquaculture
* No evidence on hazard risk reduction potential of conservation
agriculture and biodiversity management

* Limited evidence of effective land-use planning in low-income
cities where tenure and land zoning are contested, and the
risks of trying to implement land-use planning under
communal tenure
* Limited evidence on the governance of public transport from
an accountability and transparency perspective

* Regional and sectoral adaptation cost assessments are missing,
particularly in the context of welfare losses of households,
across time and space
* More knowledge is needed on the political economy of
adaptation, particularly on how to impute different types of
cost and benefit in a consistent manner, on adaptation
performance indicators that could stimulate investment,
and the impact of adaptation interventions on socio-economic
and other types of inequality

4.3.1

4.3.2

4.3.3

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.13 (continued)
Knowledge Area

Urban &
infrastructure
systems

Options to
Achieve
and Adapt
to 1.5C
Industrial
systems

Overarching
adaptation
options

Short-lived
climate
forcers

Mitigation

Adaptation

* Limited evidence on relationship between toxic waste
and public transport
* Limited evidence on the impacts of electric vehicles and
non-motorized urban transport, as most schemes are too new
* As changes in shipping and aviation have been limited to
date, limited evidence of social impacts
* Knowledge about how to facilitate disruptive, demand-based
innovations that may be transformative in urban systems,
is needed
* Understanding of the urban form implications of combined
changes from electric, autonomous and shared/public mobility
systems, is needed
* Considering distributional consequences of climate responses
is an on-going need
* Knowledge gaps in the application and scale up of
combinations of new smart technologies, sustainable design,
advanced construction techniques and new insulation
materials, renewable energy and behaviour change in urban
settlements
* The potential for leapfrog technologies to be applied to slums
and new urban developments in developing countries is weak.

* More evidence would be needed on hot-spots, for example
the growth of peri-urban areas populated by large informal
settlements
* Major uncertainties emanate from the lack of knowledge on
the integration of climate adaptation and mitigation, disaster
risk management, and urban poverty alleviation
* There is limited evidence on the institutional, technological
and economic feasibility of green infrastructure and
environmental services and for socio-cultural and
environmental feasibility of codes and standards
* In general, there is no evidence for the employment and
productivity enhancement potential of most adaptation options.
* There is limited evidence on the economic feasibility of
sustainable water management

* Lack of knowledge on potential for scaling up and global
diffusion of zero- and low-emission technologies in industry
* Questions remain on the socio-cultural feasibility of industry
options, including human capacity and private sector
acceptance of new, radically different technologies from
current well-developed practices, as well as distributional
effects of potential new business models
* As the industrial transition unfolds, lack of knowledge on
its dynamic interactions with other sectors, in particular with
the power sector (and infrastructure) for electrification of
industry, with food production and other users of biomass
in case of bio-based industry developments, and with
CDR technologies in the case of CC(U)S
* Life-cycle assessment-based comparative analyses of CCUS
options are missing, as well as life-cycle information on
electrification and hydrogen
* Impacts of industrial system transitions are not well
understood, especially on employment, identity and well-being,
in particular in the case of substitution of conventional,
high-carbon industrial products with lower-carbon alternatives,
as well as electrification and use of hydrogen

* Very limited evidence on how industry would adapt to the
consequences of 1.5C or 2C temperature increases, in
particular large and immobile industrial clusters in low-lying
areas as well as availability of transportation and (cooling)
water resources and infrastructure
* There is limited evidence on the economic, institutional and
socio-cultural feasibility of adaptation options available
to industry

* There is no evidence on technical and institutional feasibility of educational options
* There is limited evidence on employment and productivity enforcement potential of climate services
* There is limited evidence on socio-cultural acceptability of social safety nets
* There is a small but growing literature on human migration as an adaptation strategy. Scant literature on the cost-effectiveness
of migration
* Limited evidence of co-benefits and trade-offs of SLCF
reduction (e.g., better health outcomes, agricultural
productivity improvements)
* Integration of SLCFs into emissions accounting and
international reporting mechanisms enabling a better
understanding of the links between black carbon, air
pollution, climate change and agricultural productivity

Reference

4.3.3

4.3.4

4

4.3.5

4.3.6

389

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Table 4.13 (continued)
Knowledge Area

Options
to Achieve
and Adapt
to 1.5C

Carbon
dioxide
removal

Solar radiation
modification (SRM)

390

Adaptation

Reference

4.3.7

* In spite of increasing attention to the different SRM measures and their potential to keep global temperature below 1.5C,
knowledge gaps remain, not only with respect to the physical understanding of SRM measures but also concerning ethical issues
* We do not know how to govern SRM in order to avoid unilateral action and how to prevent possible reductions
in mitigation (`moral hazard')

4.3.8

* The ability to identify explanatory factors affecting the progress
of climate policy is constrained by a lack of data on adaptation
actions across nations, regions, and sectors, compounded by an
absence of frameworks for assessing progress. Most
hypotheses on what drives adaptation remain untested
* Limited empirical assessment of how governance affects
adaptation across cases
* Focus on `success' stories and leading adaptors overlooks
lessons from situations where no or unsuccessful
adaptation is taking place

Governance

* As technological changes have begun to accelerate, there is
a lack of knowledge on new mechanisms that can enable
private enterprise to mainstream this activity, and reasons
for success and failure need to be researched
* Research is thin on effective multilevel governance, in
particular in developing countries, including participation
by civil society, women and minorities
* Gaps in knowledge remain pertaining to partnerships within
local governance arrangements that may act as mediators
and drivers for achieving global ambition and local action
* Methods for assessing contribution and aggregation of
non-state actors in limiting warming to 1.5C
* Knowledge gap on an enhanced framework for assessment
of the ambition of NDCs

Institutions

* Lack of 1.5C-specific literature
* Role of regulatory financial institutions and their capacity to guarantee financial stability of economies when investments potentially
face risks, both because of climate impacts and because of the systems transitions if lower temperature scenarios are pursued
* Knowledge gaps on how to build capabilities across all countries and regions globally to implement, maintain, manage, govern and
further develop mitigation options for 1.5C.
* While importance of indigenous and local knowledge is recognized, the ability to scale up beyond the local remains challenging
and little examined
* There is a lack of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of adaptation measures, with most studies enumerating M&E challenges and
emphasising the importance of context and social learning. Very few studies evaluate whether and why an adaptation initiative
has been effective. One of the challenges of M&E for both mitigation and adaptation is a lack of high quality information for
modelling. Adaptation M&E is additionally challenged by limited understanding on what indicators to measure and how to attribute
altered vulnerability to adaptation actions

Lifestyle and
behavioural
change

* Whereas mitigation pathways studies address (implicitly or
explicitly) the reduction or elimination of market failures
(e.g., external costs, information asymmetries) via climate or
energy policies, no study addresses behavioural change
strategies in the relationship with mitigation and adaptation
actions in the 1.5C context
* Limited knowledge on GHG emissions reduction potential of
diverse mitigation behaviour across the world
* Most studies on factors enabling lifestyle changes have been
conducted in high-income countries, more knowledge needed
from low- and middle-income countries, and the focus is
typically on enabling individual behaviour change, far less on
enabling change in organizations and political systems

4

Enabling
Conditions

Mitigation
* A bottom-up analysis of CDR options indicates that there
are still key uncertainties around the individual technologies.
Ocean-based options will be assessed in depth in the IPCC
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing
Climate (SROCC)
* Assessments of environmental aspects are missing,
especially for `newer' options like enhanced weathering
or direct air carbon capture
* In order to obtain more information on realistically available
and sustainable removal potentials, more bottom-up, regional
studies, also taking into account also social issues, would
be needed. These can better inform the modelling of 1.5C
pathways
* Knowledge gaps on issues of governance and public
acceptance, the impacts of large-scale removals on the
carbon cycle, the potential to accelerate deployment and
upscaling, and means of incentivization
* Knowledge gaps on integrated systems of renewable energy
and CDR technologies such as enhanced weathering and
DACCS
* Knowledge gaps on under which conditions the use of
captured CO2 is generating negative emissions and would
qualify as a mitigation option

4.4.1

4.4.2

* Knowledge gaps on factors enabling adaptation behaviour,
except for behaviour in agriculture.
* Little is known about cognitive and motivational factors
promoting adaptive behaviour.
* Little is known about how potential adaptation actions might
affect behaviour to influence vulnerability outcomes
4.4.3

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

Table 4.13 (continued)
Knowledge Area
Lifestyle and
behavioural
change

Enabling
Conditions

Mitigation

Adaptation

* Limited understanding and treatment of behavioural change
and the potential effects of related policies in ambitious
mitigation pathways, e.g., in Integrated Assessment Models

Reference

4.4.3

Lack of insight on what can enable changes in adaptation and mitigation behaviour in organizations and political systems

Technological
innovation

* Quantitative estimates for mitigation and adaptation potentials at economy or sector scale as a result of the combination of
general purpose technologies and mitigation technologies have been scarce, except for some evidence in the transport sector
* Evidence on the role of international organizations, including the UNFCCC, in building capabilities and enhancing technological
innovation for 1.5C, except for some parts of the transport sector
* Technology transfer trials to enable leapfrog applications in developing countries have limited evidence

4.4.4

Policy

* More empirical research would be needed to derive
robust conclusions on effectiveness of policies for
enabling transitions to 1.5C and on which factors aid
decision-makers seeking to ratchet up their NDCs

4.4.5

Finance

Knowledge gaps persist with respect to the instruments to match finance to its most effective use in mitigation and adaptation

4.4.5

* Strong claims are made with respect to synergies and trade-offs, but there is little knowledge to underpin these, especially of
co-benefits by region
* Water-energy conservation relationships of individual conservation measures in industries other than the water and energy sectors
have not been investigated in detail
* There is no evidence on synergies with adaptation of CCS in the power sector and of enhanced weathering under carbon
dioxide removal
* There is no evidence on trade-offs with adaptation of low- and zero-energy buildings, and circularity and substitution and
bio-based industrial system transitions
* There is no evidence of synergies or trade-offs with mitigation of CbA
* There is no evidence of trade-offs with mitigation of the built environment, on adaptation options for industrial energy,
and climate services

4.5.4

Synergies and Trade-Offs
Between Adaptation
and Mitigation

* Understanding of what policies work (and do not work) is
limited for adaptation in general and for 1.5C in
particular, beyond specific case studies

4

391

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 4.1 | What Transitions could Enable Limiting Global Warming to 1.5C?
Summary: In order to limit warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, the world would need to transform
in a number of complex and connected ways. While transitions towards lower greenhouse gas emissions are
underway in some cities, regions, countries, businesses and communities, there are few that are currently
consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C. Meeting this challenge would require a rapid escalation in the current
scale and pace of change, particularly in the coming decades. There are many factors that affect the feasibility
of different adaptation and mitigation options that could help limit warming to 1.5C and with adapting to the
consequences.
There are actions across all sectors that can substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This Special Report
assesses energy, land and ecosystems, urban and infrastructure, and industry in developed and developing
nations to see how they would need to be transformed to limit warming to 1.5C. Examples of actions include
shifting to low- or zero-emission power generation, such as renewables; changing food systems, such as diet
changes away from land-intensive animal products; electrifying transport and developing `green infrastructure',
such as building green roofs, or improving energy efficiency by smart urban planning, which will change the
layout of many cities.
Because these different actions are connected, a `whole systems' approach would be needed for the type of
transformations that could limit warming to 1.5C. This means that all relevant companies, industries and
stakeholders would need to be involved to increase the support and chance of successful implementation. As
an illustration, the deployment of low-emission technology (e.g., renewable energy projects or a bio-based
chemical plants) would depend upon economic conditions (e.g., employment generation or capacity to mobilize
investment), but also on social/cultural conditions (e.g., awareness and acceptability) and institutional conditions
(e.g., political support and understanding).
To limit warming to1.5C, mitigation would have to be large-scale and rapid. Transitions can be transformative or
incremental, and they often, but not always, go hand in hand. Transformative change can arise from growth in
demand for a new product or market, such that it displaces an existing one. This is sometimes called `disruptive
innovation'. For example, high demand for LED lighting is now making more energy-intensive, incandescent
lighting near-obsolete, with the support of policy action that spurred rapid industry innovation. Similarly, smart
phones have become global in use within ten years. But electric cars, which were released around the same
time, have not been adopted so quickly because the bigger, more connected transport and energy systems are
harder to change. Renewable energy, especially solar and wind, is considered to be disruptive by some as it
is rapidly being adopted and is transitioning faster than predicted. But its demand is not yet uniform. Urban
systems that are moving towards transformation are coupling solar and wind with battery storage and electric
vehicles in a more incremental transition, though this would still require changes in regulations, tax incentives,
new standards, demonstration projects and education programmes to enable markets for this system to work.

4

Transitional changes are already underway in many systems, but limiting warming to 1.5C would require a
rapid escalation in the scale and pace of transition, particularly in the next 10-20 years. While limiting warming
to 1.5C would involve many of the same types of transitions as limiting warming to 2C, the pace of change
would need to be much faster. While the pace of change that would be required to limit warming to 1.5C can
be found in the past, there is no historical precedent for the scale of the necessary transitions, in particular in a
socially and economically sustainable way. Resolving such speed and scale issues would require people's support,
public-sector interventions and private-sector cooperation.
Different types of transitions carry with them different associated costs and requirements for institutional or
governmental support. Some are also easier to scale up than others, and some need more government support
than others. Transitions between, and within, these systems are connected and none would be sufficient on its
own to limit warming to 1.5C.
The `feasibility' of adaptation and mitigation options or actions within each system that together can limit
warming to 1.5C within the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty requires careful
consideration of multiple different factors. These factors include: (i) whether sufficient natural systems and
resources are available to support the various options for transitioning (known as environmental feasibility); (ii)
the degree to which the required technologies are developed and available (known as technological feasibility);

392

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

FAQ 4.1 (continued)

(iii) the economic conditions and implications (known as economic feasibility); (iv) what are the implications for
human behaviour and health (known as social/cultural feasibility); and (v) what type of institutional support would
be needed, such as governance, institutional capacity and political support (known as institutional feasibility).
An additional factor (vi - known as the geophysical feasibility) addresses the capacity of physical systems to carry
the option, for example, whether it is geophysically possible to implement large-scale afforestation consistent
with 1.5C.
Promoting enabling conditions, such as finance, innovation and behaviour change, would reduce barriers to the
options, make the required speed and scale of the system transitions more likely, and therefore would increase
the overall feasibility limiting warming to 1.5C.

4

FAQ 4.1, Figure 1 | The different dimensions to consider when assessing the `feasibility' of adaptation and mitigation options or actions within
each system that can help to limit warming to 1.5C. These are: (i) the environmental feasibility; (ii) the technological feasibility; (iii) the economic feasibility; (iv)
the social/cultural feasibility; (v) the institutional feasibility; and (vi) the geophysical feasibility.

393

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 4.2 | What are Carbon Dioxide Removal and Negative Emissions?
Summary: Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) refers to the process of removing CO2 from the atmosphere. Since this is
the opposite of emissions, practices or technologies that remove CO2 are often described as achieving `negative
emissions'. The process is sometimes referred to more broadly as greenhouse gas removal if it involves removing
gases other than CO2. There are two main types of CDR: either enhancing existing natural processes that remove
carbon from the atmosphere (e.g., by increasing its uptake by trees, soil, or other `carbon sinks') or using chemical
processes to, for example, capture CO2 directly from the ambient air and store it elsewhere (e.g., underground).
All CDR methods are at different stages of development and some are more conceptual than others, as they have
not been tested at scale.
Limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels would require unprecedented rates of transformation
in many areas, including in the energy and industrial sectors, for example. Conceptually, it is possible that
techniques to draw CO2 out of the atmosphere (known as carbon dioxide removal, or CDR) could contribute to
limiting warming to 1.5C. One use of CDR could be to compensate for greenhouse gas emissions from sectors
that cannot completely decarbonize, or which may take a long time to do so.
If global temperature temporarily overshoots 1.5C, CDR would be required to reduce the atmospheric
concentration of CO2 to bring global temperature back down. To achieve this temperature reduction, the amount
of CO2 drawn out of the atmosphere would need to be greater than the amount entering the atmosphere,
resulting in `net negative emissions'. This would involve a greater amount of CDR than stabilizing atmospheric
CO2 concentration - and, therefore, global temperature - at a certain level. The larger and longer an overshoot,
the greater the reliance on practices that remove CO2 from the atmosphere.
There are a number of CDR methods, each with different potentials for achieving negative emissions, as well
as different associated costs and side effects. They are also at differing levels of development, with some more
conceptual than others. One example of a CDR method in the demonstration phase is a process known as
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), in which atmospheric CO2 is absorbed by plants and trees
as they grow, and then the plant material (biomass) is burned to produce bioenergy. The CO2 released in the
production of bioenergy is captured before it reaches the atmosphere and stored in geological formations deep
underground on very long time scales. Since the plants absorb CO2 as they grow and the process does not emit
CO2, the overall effect can be to reduce atmospheric CO2.

4

Afforestation (planting new trees) and reforestation (replanting trees where they previously existed) are also
considered forms of CDR because they enhance natural CO2 `sinks'. Another category of CDR techniques uses
chemical processes to capture CO2 from the air and store it away on very long time scales. In a process known
as direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS), CO2 is extracted directly from the air and stored in geological
formations deep underground. Converting waste plant material into a charcoal-like substance called biochar and
burying it in soil can also be used to store carbon away from the atmosphere for decades to centuries.
There can be beneficial side effects of some types of CDR, other than removing CO2 from the atmosphere. For
example, restoring forests or mangroves can enhance biodiversity and protect against flooding and storms. But
there could also be risks involved with some CDR methods. For example, deploying BECCS at large scale would
require a large amount of land to cultivate the biomass required for bioenergy. This could have consequences
for sustainable development if the use of land competes with producing food to support a growing population,
biodiversity conservation or land rights. There are also other considerations. For example, there are uncertainties
about how much it would cost to deploy DACCS as a CDR technique, given that removing CO2 from the air
requires considerable energy.

394

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

FAQ 4.2 (continued)

FAQ 4.2, Figure 1 | Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) refers to the process of removing CO2 from the atmosphere. There are a number of CDR techniques,
each with different potential for achieving `negative emissions', as well as different associated costs and side effects.

4

395

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 4.3 | Why is Adaptation Important in a 1.5C-Warmer World?
Summary: Adaptation is the process of adjusting to current or expected changes in climate and its effects. Even
though climate change is a global problem, its impacts are experienced differently across the world. This means
that responses are often specific to the local context, and so people in different regions are adapting in different
ways. A rise in global temperature from the current 1C above pre-industrial levels to 1.5C, and beyond, increases
the need for adaptation. Therefore, stabilizing global temperatures at 1.5C above pre-industrial levels would
require a smaller adaptation effort than at 2C. Despite many successful examples around the world, progress in
adaptation is, in many regions, in its infancy and unevenly distributed globally.
Adaptation refers to the process of adjustment to actual or expected changes in climate and its effects. Since
different parts of the world are experiencing the impacts of climate change differently, there is similar diversity
in how people in a given region are adapting to those impacts.
The world is already experiencing the impacts from 1C of global warming above pre-industrial levels, and there
are many examples of adaptation to impacts associated with this warming. Examples of adaptation efforts taking
place around the world include investing in flood defences such as building sea walls or restoring mangroves,
efforts to guide development away from high risk areas, modifying crops to avoid yield reductions, and using
social learning (social interactions that change understanding on the community level) to modify agricultural
practices, amongst many others. Adaptation also involves building capacity to respond better to climate change
impacts, including making governance more flexible and strengthening financing mechanisms, such as by
providing different types of insurance.
In general, an increase in global temperature from present day to 1.5C or 2C (or higher) above pre-industrial
temperatures would increase the need for adaptation. Stabilizing global temperature increase at 1.5C would
require a smaller adaptation effort than for 2C.
Since adaptation is still in early stages in many regions, there are questions about the capacity of vulnerable
communities to cope with any amount of further warming. Successful adaptation can be supported at
the national and sub-national levels, with national governments playing an important role in coordination,
planning, determining policy priorities, and distributing resources and support. However, given that the need
for adaptation can be very different from one community to the next, the kinds of measures that can successfully
reduce climate risks will also depend heavily on the local context.

4

When done successfully, adaptation can allow individuals to adjust to the impacts of climate change in ways that
minimize negative consequences and to maintain their livelihoods. This could involve, for example, a farmer
switching to drought-tolerant crops to deal with increasing occurrences of heatwaves. In some cases, however,
the impacts of climate change could result in entire systems changing significantly, such as moving to an entirely
new agricultural system in areas where the climate is no longer suitable for current practices. Constructing
sea walls to stop flooding due to sea level rise from climate change is another example of adaptation, but
developing city planning to change how flood water is managed throughout the city would be an example
of transformational adaptation. These actions require significantly more institutional, structural, and financial
support. While this kind of transformational adaptation would not be needed everywhere in a 1.5C world, the
scale of change needed would be challenging to implement, as it requires additional support, such as through
financial assistance and behavioural change. Few empirical examples exist to date.
Examples from around the world show that adaptation is an iterative process. Adaptation pathways describe
how communities can make decisions about adaptation in an ongoing and flexible way. Such pathways allow
for pausing, evaluating the outcomes of specific adaptation actions, and modifying the strategy as appropriate.
Due to their flexible nature, adaptation pathways can help to identify the most effective ways to minimise the
impacts of present and future climate change for a given local context. This is important since adaptation can
sometimes exacerbate vulnerabilities and existing inequalities if poorly designed. The unintended negative
consequences of adaptation that can sometimes occur are known as `maladaptation'. Maladaptation can be seen
if a particular adaptation option has negative consequences for some (e.g., rainwater harvesting upstream might
reduce water availability downstream) or if an adaptation intervention in the present has trade-offs in the future
(e.g., desalination plants may improve water availability in the present but have large energy demands over time).

396

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

Chapter 4

FAQ 4.3 (continued)

While adaptation is important to reduce the negative impacts from climate change, adaptation measures on
their own are not enough to prevent climate change impacts entirely. The more global temperature rises, the
more frequent, severe, and erratic the impacts will be, and adaptation may not protect against all risks. Examples
of where limits may be reached include substantial loss of coral reefs, massive range losses for terrestrial species,
more human deaths from extreme heat, and losses of coastal-dependent livelihoods in low lying islands and
coasts.

4

FAQ 4.3, Figure 1 | Why is adaptation important in a world with global warming of 1.5C? Examples of adaptation and transformational adaptation.
Adapting to further warming requires action at national and sub-national levels and can mean different things to different people in different contexts. While
transformational adaptation would not be needed everywhere in a world limited to 1.5C warming, the scale of change needed would be challenging to implement.

397

Chapter 4

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response

References

4

Aakre, S., S. Kallbekken, R. Van Dingenen, and D.G. Victor, 2018: Incentives for small
clubs of Arctic countries to limit black carbon and methane emissions. Nature
Climate Change, 8(1), 85-90, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0030-8.
Aall, C., K. Groven, and G. Lindseth, 2007: The Scope of Action for Local Climate
Policy: The Case of Norway. Global Environmental Politics, 7(2), 83-101,
doi:10.1162/glep.2007.7.2.83.
Aarts, H. and A.P. Dijksterhuis, 2000: The Automatic Activation of Goal-directed
Behaviour: The case of travel habit. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
20(1), 75-82, doi:10.1006/jevp.1999.0156.
Aarts, H., B. Verplanken, and A. Knippenberg, 1998: Predicting Behavior From
Actions in the Past: Repeated Decision Making or a Matter of Habit? Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 28(15), 1355-1374,
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1998.tb01681.x.
Abanades, J.C., E.S. Rubin, M. Mazzotti, and H.J. Herzog, 2017: On the climate change
mitigation potential of CO2 conversion to fuels. Energy & Environmental
Science, 10(12), 2491-2499, doi:10.1039/c7ee02819a.
Abanades, J.C. et al., 2015: Emerging CO2 capture systems. International Journal
of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40, 126-166, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.04.018.
Abbott, K.W., 2012: The transnational regime complex for climate change.
Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 30(4), 571-590,
doi:10.1068/c11127.
Abbott, K.W. and D. Snidal, 2009: Strengthening International Regulation Through
Transnational New Governance: Overcoming the Orchestration Deficit.
Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 42, 501-578,
https://wp0.vanderbilt.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/78/abbott-cr_final.pdf.
Abdulai, I. et al., 2018: Cocoa agroforestry is less resilient to sub-optimal and
extreme climate than cocoa in full sun. Global Change Biology, 24(1), 273-
286, doi:10.1111/gcb.13885.
Abrahamse, W. and L. Steg, 2013: Social influence approaches to encourage
resource conservation: A meta-analysis. Global Environmental Change, 23,
1773-1785, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.029.
Abrahamse, W., L. Steg, C. Vlek, and T. Rothengatter, 2005: A review of intervention
studies aimed at household energy conservation. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 25(3), 273-291, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2005.08.002.
Abrahamse, W., L. Steg, C. Vlek, and T. Rothengatter, 2007: The effect of tailored
information, goal setting, and tailored feedback on household energy
use, energy-related behaviors, and behavioral antecedents. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 27, 265-276, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.08.002.
ACOLA, 2017: The Role of Energy Storage in Australia's Future Energy Supply Mix.
Australian Council of Learned Academies (ACOLA), Melbourne, Australia, 158 pp.
AdaptationWatch, 2015: Toward Mutual Accountability: The 2015 Adaptation
Finance Transparency Gap Report. AdaptationWatch, 97 pp.
ADB, 2013: Bhutan Transport 2040: Integrated Strategic Vision. Asian Development
Bank (ADB), Manila, Philippines, 24 pp.
Aden, N., 2018: Necessary but not sufficient: the role of energy efficiency in
industrial sector low-carbon transformation. Energy Efficiency, 11(5), 1083-
1101, doi:10.1007/s12053-017-9570-z.
Adenle, A.A. et al., 2017: Managing Climate Change Risks in Africa - A Global
Perspective. Ecological Economics, 141, 190-201,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.06.004.
Adger, W.N., N.W. Arnell, and E.L. Tompkins, 2005: Successful adaptation to
climate change across scales. Global Environmental Change, 15(2), 77-86,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2004.12.005.
Adger, W.N., S. Huq, K. Brown, D. Conway, and M. Hulme, 2003: Adaptation to
climate change in the developing world. Progress in Development Studies,
3(3), 179-195, doi:10.1191/1464993403ps060oa.
Adger, W.N. et al., 2015: Focus on environmental risks and migration: causes
and consequences. Environmental Research Letters, 10(6), 060201,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/6/060201.
Aebischer, B. and L.M. Hilty, 2015: The Energy Demand of ICT: A Historical Perspective
and Current Methodological Challenges. In: ICT Innovations for Sustainability
[Hilty, L.M. and B. Aebischer (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
Switzerland, pp. 71-103, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_4.
AfDB/OECD/UNDP, 2016: African Economic Outlook 2016: Sustainable Cities and
Structural Transformation. African Economic Outlook, OECD Publishing, Paris,
France, 400 pp., doi:10.1787/aeo-2016-en.

398

Afionis, S., L.C. Stringer, N. Favretto, J. Tomei, and M.S. Buckeridge, 2014: Unpacking
Brazil's Leadership in the Global Biofuels Arena: Brazilian Ethanol Diplomacy
in Africa. Global Environmental Politics, 14(2), 82-101, doi:10.1162/glep.
Agee, E.M., A. Orton, E.M. Agee, and A. Orton, 2016: An Initial Laboratory Prototype
Experiment for Sequestration of Atmospheric CO2. Journal of Applied
Meteorology and Climatology, 55(8), 1763-1770,
doi:10.1175/jamc-d-16-0135.1.
Aglietta, M., E. Espagne, and B. Perrissin Fabert, 2015a: A proposal to finance low
carbon investment in Europe. La Note D'Analyse Feb. 2015 No. 4, France
Strategie, Paris, France, 8 pp.
Aglietta, M., J.-C. Hourcade, C. Jaeger, and B.P. Fabert, 2015b: Financing transition
in an adverse context: climate finance beyond carbon finance. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 15(4), 403-420,
doi:10.1007/s10784-015-9298-1.
Agrawal, A., C. E.R., and E.R. Gerber, 2015: Motivational Crowding in Sustainable
Development Interventions. American Political Science Review, 109(3), 470-
487, doi:10.1017/s0003055415000209.
Agrawala, S., M. Carraro, N. Kingsmill, E. Lanzi, and G. Prudent-richard, 2011:
Private Sector Engagement in Adaptation to Climate Change: Approaches
to Managing Climate Risks. OECD Environment Working Paper No 39, OECD
Publishing, Paris, France, 56 pp., doi:10.1787/5kg221jkf1g7-en.
Aguilera, E., L. Lassaletta, A. Gattinger, and B.S. Gimeno, 2013: Managing soil
carbon for climate change mitigation and adaptation in Mediterranean
cropping systems: A meta-analysis. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment,
168, 25-36, doi:10.1016/j.agee.2013.02.003.
Ahern, J., S. Cilliers, and J. Niemela, 2014: The concept of ecosystem services in
adaptive urban planning and design: A framework for supporting innovation.
Landscape and Urban Planning, 125, 254-259,
doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.01.020.
Ahlfeldt, G. and E. Pietrostefani, 2017: Demystifying Compact Urban Growth:
Evidence From 300 Studies From Across the World. Coalition for Urban
Transitions, London, UK and Washington DC, USA, 84 pp.
Ahlm, L. et al., 2017: Marine cloud brightening - as effective without clouds.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 17(21), 13071-13087,
doi:10.5194/acp-17-13071-2017.
Ahman, M., L.J. Nilsson, and B. Johansson, 2016: Global climate policy and deep
decarbonization of energy-intensive industries. Climate Policy, 17(5), 634-
649, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1167009.
Aitken, M., 2010:Wind power and community benefits: Challenges and opportunities.
Energy Policy, 38(10), 6066-6075, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.05.062.
Ajanovic, A. and R. Haas, 2017: The impact of energy policies in scenarios on GHG
emission reduction in passenger car mobility in the EU-15. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 68, 1088-1096, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.02.013.
Akbari, H., H.D. Matthews, and D. Seto, 2012: The long-term effect of increasing
the albedo of urban areas. Environmental Research Letters, 7(2), 024004,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/7/2/024004.
Akerman, J., 2011: The role of high-speed rail in mitigating climate change - The
Swedish case Europabanan from a life cycle perspective. Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 16(3), 208-217,
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2010.12.004.
Akter, S., T.J. Krupnik, and F. Khanam, 2017: Climate change skepticism and index
versus standard crop insurance demand in coastal Bangladesh. Regional
Environmental Change, 17(8), 2455-2466,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1174-9.
Akter, S., T.J. Krupnik, F. Rossi, and F. Khanam, 2016: The influence of gender and
product design on farmers' preferences for weather-indexed crop insurance.
Global Environmental Change, 38, 217-229,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.03.010.
Albers, R.A.W. et al., 2015: Overview of challenges and achievements in the climate
adaptation of cities and in the Climate Proof Cities program. Building and
Environment, 83, 1-10, doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.09.006.
Albright, R. et al., 2016: Reversal of ocean acidification enhances net coral reef
calcification. Nature, 531(7594), 362-365, doi:10.1038/nature17155.
Alcalde, J. et al., 2018: Estimating geological CO2 storage security to deliver on
climate mitigation. Nature Communications, 9(1), 2201,
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-04423-1.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Aldrich, D.P., C. Page, and C.J. Paul, 2016: Social Capital and Climate Change
Adaptation. In: Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.342.
Aldy, J. et al., 2016: Economic tools to promote transparency and comparability in
the Paris Agreement. Nature Climate Change, 6, 1000-1004,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3106.
Alexander, C. et al., 2011: Linking indigenous and scientific knowledge of climate
change. BioScience, 61(6), 477-484, doi:10.1525/bio.2011.61.6.10.
Alexander, P. et al., 2017: Losses, inefficiencies and waste in the global food system.
Agricultural Systems, 153, 190-200, doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.014.
Alexandratos, N. and J. Bruinsma, 2012: World agriculture towards 2030/2050:
the 2012 revision. ESA Working paper No. 12-03, Agricultural Development
Economics Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Rome, Italy, 147 pp.
Alfieri, L. et al., 2017: Global projections of river flood risk in a warmer world.
Earth's Future, 5(2), 171-182, doi:10.1002/2016ef000485.
Ali, S.H. et al., 2017: Mineral supply for sustainable development requires resource
governance. Nature, 543, 367-372, doi:10.1038/nature21359.
Alkama, R. and A. Cescatti, 2016: Biophysical climate impacts of recent changes in
global forest cover. Science, 351(6273), 600-604,
doi:10.1126/science.aac8083.
Allan, J.I. and J. Hadden, 2017: Exploring the framing power of NGOs in global
climate politics. Environmental Politics, 26(4), 600-620,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1319017.
Allcott, H., 2011: Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public
Economics, 95(9-10), 1082-1095, doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.03.003.
Allison, E., 2012: Gross National Happiness. In: The Berkshire Encyclopedia
of Sustainability: Measurements, Indicators, and Research Methods for
Sustainability [Spellerberg, I., D.S. Fogel, L.M. Butler Harrington, and S.E.
Fredericks (eds.)]. Berkshire Publishing Group, Great Barrington, MA, USA,
pp. 180-184.
Allo, M. and M.L. Loureiro, 2014: The role of social norms on preferences towards
climate change policies: A meta-analysis. Energy Policy, 73, 563-574,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.04.042.
Almeida Prado, F. et al., 2016: How much is enough? An integrated examination of
energy security, economic growth and climate change related to hydropower
expansion in Brazil. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 53, 1132-
1136, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.09.050.
Alterskjaer, K., J.E. Kristjansson, and O. Seland, 2012: Sensitivity to deliberate
sea salt seeding of marine clouds - Observations and model simulations.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 12(5), 2795-2807,
doi:10.5194/acp-12-2795-2012.
Altieri, K.E. et al., 2016: Achieving development and mitigation objectives through
a decarbonization development pathway in South Africa. Climate Policy,
16(Sup 1), s78-s91, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1150250.
AMAP, 2017a: Adaptation Actions for a Changing Arctic: Barents Area Overview
Report. Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway,
24 pp.
AMAP, 2017b: Adaptation Actions for a Changing Arctic: Perspectives from
the Bering-Chukchi-Beaufort Region. Arctic Monitoring and Assessment
Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway, 269 pp.
AMAP, 2018: Adaptation Actions for a Changing Arctic: Perspectives from the
Baffin Bay/Davis Strait Region. Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme
(AMAP), Oslo, Norway, 370 pp.
Amars, L., M. Fridahl, M. Hagemann, F. Roser, and B.-O. Linner, 2017: The
transformational potential of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions in
Tanzania: assessing the concept's cultural legitimacy among stakeholders in
the solar energy sector. Local Environment, 22(1), 86-105,
doi:10.1080/13549839.2016.1161607.
Amin, A. and L.R. Cirolia, 2018: Politics/matter: Governing Cape Town's informal
settlements. Urban Studies, 55(2), 274-295, doi:10.1177/0042098017694133.
Amorim, H., M.L. Lopes, J.V. De Castro Oliveira, M.S. Buckeridge, and G.H. Goldman,
2011: Scientific challenges of bioethanol production in Brazil. Applied
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 91(5), 1267-1275,
doi:10.1007/s00253-011-3437-6.
Amundsen, H., G.K. Hovelsrud, C. Aall, M. Karlsson, and H. Westskog, 2018: Local
governments as drivers for societal transformation: towards the 1.5C
ambition. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 23-29,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.004.

Chapter 4
Anacona, P.I., A. Mackintosh, and K. Norton, 2015: Reconstruction of a glacial lake
outburst flood (GLOF) in the Engano Valley, Chilean Patagonia: Lessons for
GLOF risk management. Science of The Total Environment, 527-528, 1-11,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.04.096.
Anderegg, W.R.L. et al., 2015: Tropical nighttime warming as a dominant driver of
variability in the terrestrial carbon sink. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 112(51), 15591-15596, doi:10.1073/pnas.1521479112.
Anderson, S.T. and R.G. Newell, 2004: Information programs for technology
adoption: the case of energy-efficiency audits. Resource and Energy
Economics, 26(1), 27-50, doi:10.1016/j.reseneeco.2003.07.001.
Andersson, M., P. Bolton, and F. Samama, 2016: Hedging Climate Risk. Financial
Analysts Journal, 72(3), 13-32, doi:10.2469/faj.v72.n3.4.
Andonova, L., T.N. Hale, and C. Roger, 2017: National Policies and Transnational
Governance of Climate Change: Substitutes or Complements? International
Studies Quarterly, 1-16, doi:10.1093/isq/sqx014.
Andow, D.A. and C. Zwahlen, 2006: Assessing environmental risks of transgenic
plants. Ecology Letters, 9(2), 196-214,
doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2005.00846.x.
Andre, C., D. Boulet, H. Rey-Valette, and B. Rulleau, 2016: Protection by hard defence
structures or relocation of assets exposed to coastal risks: Contributions
and drawbacks of cost-benefit analysis for long-term adaptation choices to
climate change. Ocean and Coastal Management, 134, 173-182,
doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.10.003.
Andrews-Speed, P. and G. Ma, 2016: Household Energy Saving in China: The
Challenge of Changing Behaviour. In: China's Energy Efficiency and
Conservation: Household Behaviour, Leglisation, Regional Analysis and
Impacts [Su, B. and E. Thomson (eds.)]. SpringerBriefs in Environment, Security,
Development and Peace, pp. 23-39, doi:10.1007/978-981-10-0928-0_3.
Anenberg, S.C. et al., 2012: Global Air Quality and Health Co-benefits of Mitigating
Near-Term Climate Change through Methane and Black Carbon Emission
Controls. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(6), 831-839,
doi:10.1289/ehp.1104301.
Angotti, T., 2015: Urban agriculture: long-term strategy or impossible dream?
Public Health, 129(4), 336-341, doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2014.12.008.
Anguelovski, I., E. Chu, and J.A. Carmin, 2014: Variations in approaches to urban
climate adaptation: Experiences and experimentation from the global South.
Global Environmental Change, 27(1), 156-167,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.010.
Annicchiarico, B. and F. Di Dio, 2015: Environmental policy and macroeconomic
dynamics in a new Keynesian model. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 69(1), 1-21, doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2014.10.002.
Annicchiarico, B. and F. Di Dio, 2016: GHG Emissions Control and Monetary Policy.
Environmental and Resource Economics, 1-29,
doi:10.1007/s10640-016-0007-5.
Anshelm, J. and A. Hansson, 2014: Battling Promethean dreams and Trojan horses:
Revealing the critical discourses of geoengineering. Energy Research & Social
Science, 2, 135-144, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2014.04.001.
Arab, A., A. Khodaei, Z. Han, and S.K. Khator, 2015: Proactive Recovery of
Electric Power Assets for Resiliency Enhancement. IEEE Access, 3, 99-109,
doi:10.1109/access.2015.2404215.
Araos, M., J. Ford, L. Berrang-Ford, R. Biesbroek, and S. Moser, 2016a: Climate
change adaptation planning for Global South megacities: the case of Dhaka.
Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 19(6), 682-696,
doi:10.1080/1523908x.2016.1264873.
Araos, M. et al., 2016b: Climate change adaptation planning in large cities: A
systematic global assessment. Environmental Science & Policy, 66, 375-382,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.06.009.
Archer, D., 2016: Building urban climate resilience through community-driven
approaches to development. International Journal of Climate Change Strategies
and Management, 8(5), 654-669, doi:10.1108/ijccsm-03-2014-0035.
Archer, D. et al., 2014: Moving towards inclusive urban adaptation: approaches
to integrating community-based adaptation to climate change at city and
national scale. Climate and Development, 6(4), 345-356,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.918868.
Arezki, R., P. Bolton, S. Peters, F. Samama, and J. Stiglitz, 2016: From Global Savings
Glut to Financing Infrastructure: The Advent of Investment Platforms. IMF
Working Paper WP/16/18, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Washington
DC, USA, 46 pp.

399

4

Chapter 4

4

Arino, Y. et al., 2016: Estimating option values of solar radiation management
assuming that climate sensitivity is uncertain. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(21), 5886-91,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1520795113.
Armah, F.A., I. Luginaah, H. Hambati, R. Chuenpagdee, and G. Campbell, 2015:
Assessing barriers to adaptation to climate change in coastal Tanzania:
Does where you live matter? Population and Environment, 37(2), 231-263,
doi:10.1007/s11111-015-0232-9.
Arnold, U., A. De Palmenaer, T. Bruck, and K. Kuse, 2018: Energy-Efficient Carbon
Fiber Production with Concentrated Solar Power: Process Design and Technoeconomic Analysis. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 57(23),
7934-7945, doi:10.1021/acs.iecr.7b04841.
Arthur, W.B., 2009: The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves. Free
Press, New York, NY, USA, 256 pp.
Arunrat, N., C. Wang, N. Pumijumnong, S. Sereenonchai, and W. Cai, 2017: Farmers'
intention and decision to adapt to climate change: A case study in the Yom
and Nan basins, Phichit province of Thailand. Journal of Cleaner Production,
143, 672-685, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.058.
Arze del Granado, F.J., D. Coady, and R. Gillingham, 2012: The Unequal Benefits
of Fuel Subsidies: A Review of Evidence for Developing Countries. World
Development, 40(11), 2234-2248,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.05.005.
Asayama, S., M. Sugiyama, and A. Ishii, 2017: Ambivalent climate of opinions:
Tensions and dilemmas in understanding geoengineering experimentation.
Geoforum, 80, 82-92,
doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2017.01.012.
Asensio, O.I. and M.A. Delmas, 2015: Nonprice incentives and energy conservation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(6), 1-6,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1401880112.
Asfaw, S. and B. Davis, 2018: Can Cash Transfer Programmes Promote Household
Resilience? Cross-Country Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa. In: Climate
Smart Agriculture : Building Resilience to Climate Change [Lipper, L., N.
McCarthy, D. Zilberman, S. Asfaw, and G. Branca (eds.)]. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 227-250,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-61194-5_11.
Asfaw, S., A. Carraro, B. Davis, S. Handa, and D. Seidenfeld, 2017: Cash transfer
programmes, weather shocks and household welfare: evidence from a
randomised experiment in Zambia. Journal of Development Effectiveness,
9(4), 419-442, doi:10.1080/19439342.2017.1377751.
Ashworth, P., S. Wade, D. Reiner, and X. Liang, 2015: Developments in public
communications on CCS. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control,
40, 449-458, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.06.002.
Atela, J.O., C.H. Quinn, and P.A. Minang, 2014: Are REDD projects pro-poor in
their spatial targeting? Evidence from Kenya. Applied Geography, 52, 14-24,
doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.04.009.
Attari, S.Z., M.L. DeKay, C.I. Davidson, and W. Bruine de Bruin, 2010: Public
perceptions of energy consumption and savings. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(37), 16054-16059,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1001509107.
Aumont, O. and L. Bopp, 2006: Globalizing results from ocean in situ iron
fertilization studies. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 20(2), GB2017,
doi:10.1029/2005gb002591.
Austin, S.E. et al., 2015: Public Health Adaptation to Climate Change in Canadian
Jurisdictions. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 12(1), 623-651, doi:10.3390/ijerph120100623.
Austin, S.E. et al., 2016: Public health adaptation to climate change in OECD
countries. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
13(9), 889, doi:10.3390/ijerph13090889.
Averchenkova, A., F. Crick, A. Kocornik-Mina, H. Leck, and S. Surminski, 2016:
Multinational and large national corporations and climate adaptation: are
we asking the right questions? A review of current knowledge and a new
research perspective. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(4),
517-536, doi:10.1002/wcc.402.
Axelrod, R. and W.D. Hamilton, 1981: The Evolution of Cooperation. Science,
211(4489), 1390-1396, doi:10.1126/science.7466396.
Aykut, S.C., 2016: Taking a wider view on climate governance: moving beyond
the `iceberg', the `elephant', and the `forest'. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 7(3), 318-328, doi:10.1002/wcc.391.
Ayling, J. and N. Gunningham, 2017: Non-state governance and climate policy: the
fossil fuel divestment movement. Climate Policy, 17(2), 131-149,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1094729.

400

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Azeiteiro, U.M. and W. Leal Filho, 2017: Editorial. International Journal of Global
Warming, 12(3/4), 297-298.
Azevedo, I. and V.M.S. Leal, 2017: Methodologies for the evaluation of local climate
change mitigation actions: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 79, 681-690, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.100.
Backstrand, K. and J.W. Kuyper, 2017: The democratic legitimacy of orchestration:
the UNFCCC, non-state actors, and transnational climate governance.
Environmental Politics, 26(4), 764-788,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1323579.
Badre, B., 2018: Can Finance Save the World?: Regaining Power over Money to
Serve the Common Good. Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Oakland, CA, USA,
288 pp.
Bager, S. and L. Mundaca, 2017: Making `Smart Meters' smarter? Insights from
a behavioural economics pilot field experiment in Copenhagen, Denmark.
Energy Research & Social Science, 28, 68-76,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.04.008.
Bahadur, A. and T. Tanner, 2014: Transformational resilience thinking: putting people,
power and politics at the heart of urban climate resilience. Environment and
Urbanization, 26(1), 200-214, doi:10.1177/0956247814522154.
Bahn, O., M. Chesney, J. Gheyssens, R. Knutti, and A.C. Pana, 2015: Is there room
for geoengineering in the optimal climate policy mix? Environmental Science
& Policy, 48, 67-76, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.12.014.
Bai, X. et al., 2018: Six research priorities for cities and climate change. Nature,
555(7694), 23-25, doi:10.1038/d41586-018-02409-z.
Baik, E. et al., 2018: Geospatial analysis of near-term potential for carbon-negative
bioenergy in the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 115(13), 3290-3295, doi:10.1073/pnas.1720338115.
Bajelj, B. et al., 2014: Importance of food-demand management for climate
mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 4(10), 924-929,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2353.
Baker, L.H. et al., 2015: Climate responses to anthropogenic emissions of shortlived climate pollutants. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 15(14), 8201-
8216, doi:10.5194/acp-15-8201-2015.
Bakker, D.C.E., A.J. Watson, and C.S. Law, 2001: Southern Ocean iron enrichment
promotes inorganic carbon drawdown. Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical
Studies in Oceanography, 48(11), 2483-2507,
doi:10.1016/s0967-0645(01)00005-4.
Bakker, S. et al., 2017: Low-Carbon Transport Policy in Four ASEAN Countries:
Developments in Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam.
Sustainability, 9(7), 1217, doi:10.3390/su9071217.
Bala, G. et al., 2007: Combined climate and carbon-cycle effects of large-scale
deforestation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(16),
6550-6555, doi:10.1073/pnas.0608998104.
Balcombe, P., D. Rigby, and A. Azapagic, 2013: Motivations and barriers associated
with adopting microgeneration energy technologies in the UK. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 22, 655-666,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.02.012.
Baltz, E.A. et al., 2017: Achievement of Sustained Net Plasma Heating in a Fusion
Experiment with the Optometrist Algorithm. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 6425,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-06645-7.
Bamberg, S., 2000: The Promotion of New Behavior by Forming an
Implementation Intention: Results of a Field Experiment in the Domain of
Travel Mode Choice. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 1903-1922,
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2000.tb02474.x.
Bamberg, S., 2002: Implementation intention versus monetary incentive comparing
the effects of interventions to promote the purchase of organically produced
food. Journal of Economic Psychology, 23, 573-587,
doi:10.1016/s0167-4870(02)00118-6.
Banerjee, A. and B.D. Solomon, 2003: Eco-labeling for energy efficiency and
sustainability: a meta-evaluation of US programs. Energy Policy, 31, 109-123,
doi:10.1016/s0301-4215(02)00012-5.
Barbarossa, C., P. De Pelsmacker, and I. Moons, 2017: Personal Values, Green Selfidentity and Electric Car Adoption. Ecological Economics, 140, 190-200,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.05.015.
Barkakaty, B. et al., 2017: Emerging materials for lowering atmospheric carbon.
Environmental Technology & Innovation, 7, 30-43,
doi:10.1016/j.eti.2016.12.001.
Barker, T. and J. Kohler, 1998: Equity and Ecotax Reform in the EU: Achieving a 10
per cent Reduction in CO2 Emissions Using Excise Duties. Fiscal Studies, 19(4),
375-402, doi:10.1111/j.1475-5890.1998.tb00292.x.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Barrett, S., 2015: Subnational Adaptation Finance Allocation: Comparing
Decentralized and Devolved Political Institutions in Kenya. Global
Environmental Politics, 15(3), 118-139, doi:10.1162/glep_a_00314.
Bartos, M.D. and M. Chester, 2015: Impacts of climate change on electric power
supply in the Western United States. Nature Climate Change, 5(8), 748-752,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2648.
BASIC experts, 2011: Equitable access to sustainable development: Contribution to
the body of scientific knowledge. BASIC Expert group, Beijing, Brasilia, Cape
Town, and Mumbai, 91 pp.
Bataille, C., D. Sawyer, and N. Melton, 2015: Pathways to deep decarbonization in
Canada. Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) and Institute for
Sustainable Development and International Relations (IDDRI), 54 pp.
Bataille, C. et al., 2018: A review of technology and policy deep decarbonization
pathway options for making energy-intensive industry production consistent
with the Paris Agreement. Journal of Cleaner Production, 187, 960-973,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.03.107.
Bates, B.R., B.L. Quick, and A.A. Kloss, 2009: Antecedents of intention to help
mitigate wildfire: Implications for campaigns promoting wildfire mitigation
to the general public in the wildland-urban interface. Safety Science, 47(3),
374-381, doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2008.06.002.
Bathiany, S., V. Dakos, M. Scheffer, and T.M. Lenton, 2018: Climate models predict
increasing temperature variability in poor countries. Science Advances, 4(5),
eaar5809, doi:10.1126/sciadv.aar5809.
Battiston, S. et al., 2017: A climate stress-test of the financial system. Nature
Climate Change, 7(4), 283-288, doi:10.1038/nclimate3255.
Baudron, F., C. Thierfelder, I. Nyagumbo, and B. Gerard, 2015: Where to Target
Conservation Agriculture for African Smallholders? How to Overcome
Challenges Associated with its Implementation? Experience from Eastern and
Southern Africa. Environments, 2(3), 338-357,
doi:10.3390/environments2030338.
Bauer, N. et al., 2018: Global energy sector emission reductions and bioenergy use:
overview of the bioenergy demand phase of the EMF-33 model comparison.
Climatic Change, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2226-y.
Baul, T.K., A. Alam, H. Strandman, and A. Kilpelainen, 2017: Net climate impacts and
economic profitability of forest biomass production and utilization in fossil fuel
and fossil-based material substitution under alternative forest management.
Biomass and Bioenergy, 98, 291-305, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2017.02.007.
Baumgartner, S., M.A. Drupp, J.N. Meya, J.M. Munz, and M.F. Quaas, 2017: Income
inequality and willingness to pay for environmental public goods. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 85, 35-61,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2017.04.005.
Bayraktarov, E. et al., 2016: The cost and feasibility of marine coastal restoration.
Ecological Applications, 26(4), 1055-1074, doi:10.1890/15-1077.
Beatley, T., 2011: Biophilic Cities: Integrating Nature into Urban Design and
Planning. Island Press, Washington DC, USA, 208 pp.
Beaudoin, M. and P. Gosselin, 2016: An effective public health program to reduce
urban heat islands in Quebec, Canada. Revista Panamericana de Salud
Publica, 40(3), 160-166.
Beccali, M., M. Bonomolo, G. Ciulla, A. Galatioto, and V. Brano, 2015: Improvement
of energy efficiency and quality of street lighting in South Italy as an action
of Sustainable Energy Action Plans. The case study of Comiso (RG). Energy,
92(3), 394-408, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2015.05.003.
Bekera, B. and R.A. Francis, 2015: A Bayesian method for thermo-electric power
generation drought risk assessment. In: Safety and Reliability of Complex
Engineered Systems - Proceedings of the 25th European Safety and
Reliability Conference, ESREL 2015, Zurich, Switzerland, 7-10 September
2015 [Podofillini, L., B. Sudret, B. Stojadinovic, E. Zio, and W. Kroger (eds.)].
CRC Press/Balkema, Leiden, The Netherlands, 1921-1927 pp.
Bell, L.W., A.D. Moore, and J.A. Kirkegaard, 2014: Evolution in crop-livestock
integration systems that improve farm productivity and environmental
performance in Australia. European Journal of Agronomy, 57, 10-20,
doi:10.1016/j.eja.2013.04.007.
Bell, T., R. Briggs, R. Bachmayer, and S. Li, 2015: Augmenting Inuit knowledge for
safe sea-ice travel - The SmartICE information system. In: 2014 Oceans - St.
John's. IEEE, pp. 1-9, doi:10.1109/oceans.2014.7003290.
Bellamy, R. and P. Healey, 2018: `Slippery slope' or `uphill struggle'? Broadening
out expert scenarios of climate engineering research and development.
Environmental Science & Policy, 83, 1-10, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2018.01.021.
Bellamy, R., J. Lezaun, and J. Palmer, 2017: Public perceptions of geoengineering
research governance: An experimental deliberative approach. Global
Environmental Change, 45, 194-202, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.06.004.

Chapter 4
Bellassen, V. et al., 2015: Monitoring, reporting and verifying emissions in the
climate economy. Nature Climate Change, 5, 319-328,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2089-7.
Belmonte, N. et al., 2016: A comparison of energy storage from renewable sources
through batteries and fuel cells: A case study in Turin, Italy. International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 41(46), 21427-21438,
doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.07.260.
Bendito, A. and E. Barrios, 2016: Convergent Agency: Encouraging Transdisciplinary
Approaches for Effective Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk
Reduction. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 7(4), 430-435,
doi:10.1007/s13753-016-0102-9.
Benmarhnia, T. et al., 2016: A Difference-in-Differences Approach to Assess the
Effect of a Heat Action Plan on Heat-Related Mortality, and Differences in
Effectiveness According to Sex, Age, and Socioeconomic Status (Montreal,
Quebec). Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(11), 1694-1699,
doi:10.1289/ehp203.
Berdahl, M. et al., 2014: Arctic cryosphere response in the Geoengineering Model
Intercomparison Project G3 and G4 scenarios. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres, 119, 1308-1321,
doi:10.1002/2013jd021264.received.
Bergek, A., S. Jacobsson, B. Carlsson, S. Lindmark, and A. Rickne, 2008: Analyzing
the functional dynamics of technological innovation systems: A scheme of
analysis. Research Policy, 37(3), 407-429,
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2007.12.003.
Berle, A.A. and G.C. Means, 1932: The Modern Corporation and Private Property.
Harcourt, Brace and World, New York, NY, USA, 380 pp.
Bernauer, T. and R. Gampfer, 2013: Effects of civil society involvement on popular
legitimacy of global environmental governance. Global Environmental
Change, 23(2), 439-449, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.01.001.
Bernauer, T. and R. Gampfer, 2015: How robust is public support for unilateral
climate policy? Environmental Science & Policy, 54, 316-330,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.07.010.
Bernauer, T., R. Gampfer, T. Meng, and Y.-S. Su, 2016a: Could more civil society
involvement increase public support for climate policy-making ? Evidence
from a survey experiment in China. Global Environmental Change, 40, 1-12,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.001.
Bernauer, T., L. Dong, L.F. McGrath, I. Shaymerdenova, and H. Zhang, 2016b:
Unilateral or Reciprocal Climate Policy? Experimental Evidence from China.
Politics and Governance, 4(3), 152-171, doi:10.17645/pag.v4i3.650.
Berrang-Ford, L., J.D. Ford, and J. Paterson, 2011: Are we adapting to climate
change? Global Environmental Change, 21(1), 25-33,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.09.012.
Berrang-Ford, L. et al., 2014: What drives national adaptation? A global assessment.
Climatic Change, 124(1-2), 441-450, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1078-3.
Bertheau, P., A. Oyewo, C. Cader, C. Breyer, and P. Blechinger, 2017: Visualizing
National Electrification Scenarios for Sub-Saharan African Countries. Energies,
10(11), 1899, doi:10.3390/en10111899.
Bertoldi, P., 2017: Are current policies promoting a change in behaviour, conservation
and sufficiency? An analysis of existing policies and recommendations for
new and effective policies. In: Proceedings of the ECEEE 2017 Summer Study
on Consumption, Efficiency & Limits. European Council for an Energy Efficient
Economy (ECEEE) Secretariat, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 201-211.
Bertoldi, P., S. Rezessy, and V. Oikonomou, 2013: Rewarding energy savings rather
than energy efficiency: Exploring the concept of a feed-in tariff for energy
savings. Energy Policy, 56, 526-535, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.01.019.
Bertoldi, P., T. Ribeiro Serrenho, and P. Zangheri, 2016: Consumer Feedback Systems:
How Much Energy Saving Will They Deliver and for How Long? In: Proceedings
of the 2016 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings. American
Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE), Washington DC, USA,
pp. 1-13.
Bertoldi, P., A. Kona, S. Rivas, and J.F. Dallemand, 2018: Towards a global
comprehensive and transparent framework for cities and local governments
enabling an effective contribution to the Paris climate agreement. Current
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 30, 67-74,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.03.009.
Bertram, C., 2010: Ocean iron fertilization in the context of the Kyoto protocol and
the post-Kyoto process. Energy Policy, 38(2), 1130-1139,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.10.065.
Betsill, M.M. and H. Bulkeley, 2006: Cities and the Multilevel Governance of Global
Climate Change. Global Governance, 12(2), 141-159,
doi:10.2307/27800607.

401

4

Chapter 4

4

Bettini, Y., R.R. Brown, and F.J. de Haan, 2015: Exploring institutional adaptive
capacity in practice: examining water governance adaptation in Australia.
Ecology and Society, 20(1), art47, doi:10.5751/es-07291-200147.
Betts, R.A. et al., 2018: Changes in climate extremes, fresh water availability and
vulnerability to food insecurity projected at 1.5C and 2C global warming
with a higher-resolution global climate model. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
376(2119), 20160452, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0452.
Betzold, C., 2015: Adapting to climate change in small island developing states.
Climatic Change, 133(3), 481-489, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1408-0.
Beyer, C., 2014: Strategic Implications of Current Trends in Additive Manufacturing.
Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, 136(6), 064701,
doi:10.1115/1.4028599.
Bhagat, R., 2017: Migration, Gender and Right to the City. Economic & Political
Weekly, 52(32), 35-40,
www.epw.in/journal/2017/32/perspectives/migration-gender-and-right-city.
html.
Bhattacharya, A., J. Oppenheim, and N. Stern, 2015: Driving sustainable
development through better infrastructure: key elements of a transformation
program. Global Economy & Development Working Paper 91, Brookings,
Washington DC, USA, 38 pp.
Bhattacharya, S., K. Giannakas, and K. Schoengold, 2017: Market and welfare
effects of renewable portfolio standards in United States electricity markets.
Energy Economics, 64, 384-401, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2017.03.011.
Bhave, A. et al., 2017: Screening and techno-economic assessment of biomassbased power generation with CCS technologies to meet 2050 CO2 targets.
Applied Energy, 190, 481-489,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.120.
Biddau, F., A. Armenti, and P. Cottone, 2012: Socio-Psychological Aspects of
Grassroots Participation in the Transition Movement: An Italian Case Study.
Journal of Social and Political Psychology, 4(1), 142-165,
doi:10.5964/jspp.v4i1.518.
Bidwell, D., 2016: Thinking through participation in renewable energy decisions.
Nature Energy, 1(5), 16051, doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.51.
Biermann, F., 2010: Beyond the intergovernmental regime: Recent trends in global
carbon governance. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 2(4),
284-288, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2010.05.002.
Biesbroek, R. et al., 2015: Opening up the black box of adaptation decision-making.
Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 493-494,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2615.
Biggs, E.M. et al., 2015: Sustainable development and the water-energy-food
nexus: A perspective on livelihoods. Environmental Science & Policy, 54, 389-
397, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.08.002.
Bikhchandani, S. and S. Sharma, 2000: Herd Behavior in Financial Markets. IMF
Working Paper WP/00/48, International Monetary Fund (IMF), 32 pp.
Birk, T. and K. Rasmussen, 2014: Migration from atolls as climate change adaptation:
Current practices, barriers and options in Solomon Islands. Natural Resources
Forum, 38(1), 1-13, doi:10.1111/1477-8947.12038.
Bishop, M.L. and A. Payne, 2012: Climate Change and the Future of Caribbean
Development. The Journal of Development Studies, 48(10), 1536-1553,
doi:10.1080/00220388.2012.693166.
Blaabjerg, F., Z. Chen, and S.B. Kjaer, 2004: Power Electronics as Efficient Interface in
Dispersed Power Generation Systems. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics,
19(5), 1184-1194, doi:10.1109/tpel.2004.833453.
Black, A. and P. Fraser, 2002: Stock market short-termism-an international
perspective. Journal of Multinational Financial Management, 12(2), 135-158,
doi:10.1016/s1042-444x(01)00044-5.
Blanchet, T., 2015: Struggle over energy transition in Berlin: How do grassroots
initiatives affect local energy policy-making? Energy Policy, 78, 246-254,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.11.001.
Blanco, G. et al., 2014: Drivers, Trends and Mitigation. In: Climate Change 2014:
Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth,
A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S.
Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
pp. 351-411.
Blennow, K., J. Persson, M. Tome, and M. Hanewinkel, 2012: Climate Change:
Believing and Seeing Implies Adapting. PLOS ONE, 7(11), 1435-1439,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0050182.

402

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
BNEF, 2018: New Energy Outlook 2018. Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF),
New York, NY, USA. Retrieved from:
https://about.bnef.com/new-energy-outlook.
Bodansky, D., 2013: The who, what, and wherefore of geoengineering governance.
Climatic Change, 121(3), 539-551,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0759-7.
Bodansky, D. and E. Diringer, 2014: Alternative Models for the 2015 Climate Change
Agreement. FNI Climate Policy Perspectives 13, Fridtjof Nansen Institute (FNI),
Lysaker, Norway, 1-8 pp.
Bodle, R., G. Homan, S. Schiele, and E. Tedsen, 2012: Part II: The Regulatory
Framework for Climate-Related Geoengineering Relevant to the Convention
on Biological Diversity. In: Geoengineering in Relation to the Convention on
Biological Diversity: Technical and Regulatory Matters. CBD Technical Series
No. 66, Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Montreal, QC,
Canada, pp. 99-145.
Bodnar, P. et al., 2018: Underwriting 1.5C: competitive approaches to financing
accelerated climate change mitigation. Climate Policy, 18(3), 368-382,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1389687.
Bohringer, C. and V. Alexeeva-Talebi, 2013: Unilateral Climate Policy and
Competitiveness: Economic Implications of Differential Emission Pricing. The
World Economy, 36(2), 121-154,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9701.2012.01470.x.
Bohringer, C., A. Loschel, U. Moslener, and T.F. Rutherford, 2009: EU climate policy
up to 2020: An economic impact assessment. Energy Economics, 31, S295 -
S305, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2009.09.009.
Bolderdijk, J.W., J. Knockaert, E.M. Steg, and E.T. Verhoef, 2011: Effects of PayAs-You-Drive vehicle insurance on young drivers' speed choice: Results of a
Dutch field experiment. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 43(3), 1181-1186,
doi:10.1016/j.aap.2010.12.032.
Bolderdijk, J.W., M. Gorsira, K. Keizer, and L. Steg, 2013a: Values determine the (in)
effectiveness of informational interventions in promoting pro-environmental
behavior. PLOS ONE, 8(12), e83911, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0083911.
Bolderdijk, J.W., L. Steg, E.S. Geller, P.K. Lehman, and T. Postmes, 2013b: Comparing
the effectiveness of monetary versus moral motives in environmental
campaigning. Nature Climate Change, 3(1), 1-4,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1767.
Bond, T.C. et al., 2013: Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system:
A scientific assessment. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres,
118(11), 5380-5552, doi:10.1002/jgrd.50171.
Bonsch, M. et al., 2016: Trade-offs between land and water requirements for largescale bioenergy production. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 11-24,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12226.
Boodoo, Z. and K.H. Olsen, 2017: Assessing transformational change potential:
the case of the Tunisian cement Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action
(NAMA). Climate Policy, 1-19,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1386081.
Booth, M.S., 2018: Not carbon neutral: Assessing the net emissions impact of
residues burned for bioenergy. Environmental Research Letters, 13(3),
035001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaac88.
Bord, R.J., R.E. O'Connor, and A. Fisher, 2000: In what sense does the public need
to understand global climate change? Public Understanding of Science, 9(3),
205-218, doi:10.1088/0963-6625/9/3/301.
Bos, J.J., R.R. Brown, and M.A. Farrelly, 2015: Building networks and coalitions to
promote transformational change: Insights from an Australian urban water
planning case study. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 15,
11-25, doi:10.1016/j.eist.2014.10.002.
Bosomworth, K., A. Harwood, P. Leith, and P. Wallis, 2015: Adaptation Pathways:
a playbook for developing options for climate change adaptation in NRM.
Southern Slopes Climate Adaptation Research Partnership (SCARP): RMIT
University, University of Tasmania, and Monash University, Australia, 26 pp.,
doi:978-1-86295-792-3.
Boucher, O. and G.A. Folberth, 2010: New Directions: Atmospheric methane
removal as a way to mitigate climate change? Atmospheric Environment,
44(27), 3343-3345, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2010.04.032.
Boulamanti, A. and J.A. Moya, 2017: Energy efficiency and GHG emissions:
Prospective scenarios for the Chemical and Petrochemical Industry. 237 pp.,
doi:10.2760/20486.
Bouman, E.A., E. Lindstad, A.I. Rialland, and A.H. Stromman, 2017: State-ofthe-art technologies, measures, and potential for reducing GHG emissions
from shipping - A review. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, 52(Part A), 408-421, doi:10.1016/j.trd.2017.03.022.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Bours, D., C. McGinn, and P. Pringle (eds.), 2015: Monitoring and Evaluation of
Climate Change Adaptation: A Review of the Landscape: New Directions for
Evaluation, Number 147. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 160 pp.
Bovenberg, A.L., 1999: Green Tax Reforms and the Double Dividend: an Updated
Reader's Guide. International Tax and Public Finance, 6(3), 421-443,
doi:10.1023/a:1008715920337.
Bowen, K.J. et al., 2017: Implementing the "Sustainable Development Goals":
towards addressing three key governance challenges - collective action, tradeoffs, and accountability. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
26-27, 90-96, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.05.002.
Bows, A. and T. Smith, 2012: The (low-carbon) shipping forecast: opportunities on
the high seas. Carbon Management, 3(6), 525-528,
doi:10.4155/cmt.12.68.
Bows-Larkin, A., 2015: All adrift: aviation, shipping, and climate change policy.
Climate Policy, 15(6), 681-702, doi:10.1080/14693062.2014.965125.
Boyd, P.W., 2016: Development of geopolitically relevant ranking criteria
for geoengineering methods. Earth's Future, 4(11), 523-531,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000447.
Boyd, P.W. and K.L. Denman, 2008: Implications of large-scale iron fertilization of
the oceans. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 364, 213-218,
doi:10.3354/meps07541.
Boykoff, M.T., A. Ghoshi, and K. Venkateswaran, 2013: Media Coverage of Discourse
on Adaptation: Competing Visions of "Success" in the Indian Context. In:
Successful Adaptation to Climate Change: Linking Science and Policy in a
Rapidly Changing World [Moser, S.C. and M.T. Boykoff (eds.)]. Routledge,
Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 237-252.
Boysen, L.R. et al., 2017: The limits to global-warming mitigation by terrestrial
carbon removal. Earth's Future, 5(5), 463-474,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000469.
Bradley, P., A. Coke, and M. Leach, 2016: Financial incentive approaches for reducing
peak electricity demand, experience from pilot trials with a UK energy
provider. Energy Policy, 98, 108-120, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.07.022.
Brambilla, A., G. Salvalai, M. Imperadori, and M.M. Sesana, 2018: Nearly zero energy
building renovation: From energy efficiency to environmental efficiency, a
pilot case study. Energy and Buildings, 166, 271-283,
doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.02.002.
Brand, U. and A. von Gleich, 2015: Transformation toward a Secure and
Precaution-Oriented Energy System with the Guiding Concept of Resilience -
Implementation of Low-Exergy Solutions in Northwestern Germany. Energies,
8(7), 6995-7019, doi:10.3390/en8076995.
Branger, F. and P. Quirion, 2014: Climate policy and the `carbon haven' effect. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(1), 53-71, doi:10.1002/wcc.245.
Branger, F., P. Quirion, and J. Chevallier, 2016: Carbon leakage and competitiveness
of cement and steel industries under the EU ETS: Much ado about nothing.
Energy Journal, 37(3), 109-135, doi:10.5547/01956574.37.3.fbra.
Braun, C., C. Merk, G. Ponitzsch, K. Rehdanz, and U. Schmidt, 2017: Public perception
of climate engineering and carbon capture and storage in Germany: survey
evidence. Climate Policy, 3062, 1-14,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1304888.
Bredenkamp, H. and C. Pattillo, 2010: Financing the Response to Climate Change.
IMF Station Position Note SPN10/06, International Monetary Fund (IMF),
Washington DC, USA, 14 pp.
Bremer, J. and M.K. Linnenluecke, 2016: Determinants of the perceived
importance of organisational adaptation to climate change in the Australian
energy industry. Australian Journal of Management, 42(3), 502-521,
doi:10.1177/0312896216672273.
Breyer, C. et al., 2017: On the role of solar photovoltaics in global energy transition
scenarios. Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 25(8), 727-
745, doi:10.1002/pip.2885.
Bridgeman, B., 2017: Population growth underlies most other environmental
problems: Comment on Clayton et al. (2016). American Psychologist, 72(4),
386-387, doi:10.1037/amp0000137.
Bright, R.M., K. Zhao, R.B. Jackson, and F. Cherubini, 2015: Quantifying surface
albedo and other direct biogeophysical climate forcings of forestry activities.
Global Change Biology, 21(9), 3246-3266, doi:10.1111/gcb.12951.
Briley, L., D. Brown, and S.E. Kalafatis, 2015: Overcoming barriers during the
co-production of climate information for decision-making. Climate Risk
Management, 9, 41-49, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2015.04.004.
Bring, A. et al., 2016: Arctic terrestrial hydrology: A synthesis of processes,
regional effects, and research challenges. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Biogeosciences, 121(3), 621-649, doi:10.1002/2015jg003131.

Chapter 4
Brink, E. et al., 2016: Cascades of green: A review of ecosystem-based adaptation
in urban areas. Global Environmental Change, 36, 111-123,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.11.003.
Brockington, J.D., I.M. Harris, and R.M. Brook, 2016: Beyond the project cycle: a
medium-term evaluation of agroforestry adoption and diffusion in a south
Indian village. Agroforestry Systems, 90(3), 489-508,
doi:10.1007/s10457-015-9872-0.
Broehm, M., J. Strefler, and N. Bauer, 2015: Techno-Economic Review of Direct Air
Capture Systems for Large Scale Mitigation of Atmospheric CO2. Potsdam
Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam, Germany, 28 pp.,
doi:10.2139/ssrn.2665702.
Broekhoff, D., G. Piggot, and P. Erickson, 2018: Building Thriving, Low-Carbon Cities:
An Overview of Policy Options for National Governments. Coalition for Urban
Transitions, London, UK and Washington DC, USA, 124 pp.
Brondizio, E.S., A.C.B. de Lima, S. Schramski, and C. Adams, 2016: Social and health
dimensions of climate change in the Amazon. Annals of Human Biology,
43(4), 405-414, doi:10.1080/03014460.2016.1193222.
Brooks, N. et al., 2013: An operational framework for Tracking Adaptation and
Measuring Development (TAMD). IIED Climate Change Working Paper Series
No. 5, International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London
and Edinburgh, UK, 39 pp.
Brooks, S.J., 2013: Avoiding the Limits to Growth: Gross National Happiness in
Bhutan as a Model for Sustainable Development. Sustainability, 5(9), 3640-
3664, doi:10.3390/su5093640.
Brosch, T., M.K. Patel, and D. Sander, 2014: Affective influences on energy-related
decisions and behaviors. Frontiers in Energy Research, 2, 1-12,
doi:10.3389/fenrg.2014.00011.
Broto, V.C., 2017: Energy landscapes and urban trajectories towards sustainability.
Energy Policy, 108, 755-764, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.01.009.
Brown, D. and G. McGranahan, 2016: The urban informal economy, local inclusion
and achieving a global green transformation. Habitat International, 53, 97-
105, doi:10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.11.002.
Brown, M.A., G. Kim, A.M. Smith, and K. Southworth, 2017: Exploring the impact
of energy efficiency as a carbon mitigation strategy in the U.S.. Energy Policy,
109, 249-259, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.06.044.
Brown, R.M., C.R. Dillon, J. Schieffer, and J.M. Shockley, 2016: The carbon footprint
and economic impact of precision agriculture technology on a corn and
soybean farm. Journal of Environmental Economics and Policy, 5(3), 335-348,
doi:10.1080/21606544.2015.1090932.
BRTData, 2018: Key Indicators Per Region. World Resources Institute (WRI) Brasil
Ross Center for Sustainable Cities. Retrieved from: https://brtdata.org.
Bruce, P., R. Catlow, and P. Edwards, 2010: Energy materials to combat climate
change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368(1923), 3225,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0105.
Bruckner, T. et al., 2014: Energy Systems. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of
Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O.,
R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I.
Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C.
von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 511-597.
Bruggemann, M., F. De Silva-Schmidt, I. Hoppe, D. Arlt, and J.B. Schmitt, 2017:
The appeasement effect of a United Nations climate summit on the German
public. Nature Climate Change, 1-7, doi:10.1038/nclimate3409.
Brugger, A., T.A. Morton, and S. Dessai, 2015: Hand in hand: Public endorsement
of climate change mitigation and adaptation. PLOS ONE, 10(4), 1-18,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0124843.
Brugnach, M., M. Craps, and A. Dewulf, 2017: Including indigenous peoples in
climate change mitigation: addressing issues of scale, knowledge and power.
Climatic Change, 140(1), 19-32, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1280-3.
Brulle, R.J., J. Carmichael, and J.C. Jenkins, 2012: Shifting public opinion on
climate change: an empirical assessment of factors influencing concern over
climate change in the U.S., 2002-2010. Climatic Change, 114(2), 169-188,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0403-y.
Brunes, E. and D. Ohlhorst, 2011: Wind Power Generation in Germany - a
transdisciplinary view on the innovation biography. The Journal of
Transdisciplinary Environmental Studies, 10(1), 45-67,
http://journal-tes.dk/vol_10_no_1_page_17/no_5_elke_bruns.html.
Bryan, E., T.T. Deressa, G.A. Gbetibouo, and C. Ringler, 2009: Adaptation to climate
change in Ethiopia and South Africa: options and constraints. Environmental

403

4

Chapter 4

4

Science & Policy, 12(4), 413-426,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2008.11.002.
Bryan, E., Q. Bernier, M. Espinal, and C. Ringler, 2017: Making climate change
adaptation programmes in sub-Saharan Africa more gender responsive:
insights from implementing organizations on the barriers and opportunities.
Climate and Development, 1-15,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1301870.
Brzoska, M. and C. Frohlich, 2016: Climate change, migration and violent
conflict: vulnerabilities, pathways and adaptation strategies. Migration and
Development, 5(2), 190-210,
doi:10.1080/21632324.2015.1022973.
Buchholz, T., M.D. Hurteau, J. Gunn, and D. Saah, 2016: A global meta-analysis of
forest bioenergy greenhouse gas emission accounting studies. GCB Bioenergy,
8(2), 281-289, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12245.
Buck, H.J., 2012: Geoengineering: Re-making Climate for Profit or Humanitarian
Intervention? Development and Change, 43(1), 253-270,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-7660.2011.01744.x.
Buck, H.J., 2016: Rapid scale-up of negative emissions technologies: social barriers
and social implications. Climatic Change, 139(2), 155-167,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1770-6.
Buck, H.J., A.R. Gammon, and C.J. Preston, 2014: Gender and geoengineering.
Hypatia, 29(3), 651-669, doi:10.1111/hypa.12083.
Buckeridge, M.S., 2015: Arvores urbanas em Sao Paulo: planejamento, economia e
agua (in Portugese). Estudos Avancados, 29(84), 85-101,
doi:10.1590/s0103-40142015000200006.
Budnitz, R.J., 2016: Nuclear power: Status report and future prospects. Energy
Policy, 96, 735-739, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.03.011.
Bui, M. et al., 2018: Carbon capture and storage (CCS): the way forward. Energy &
Environmental Science, 11(5), 1062-1176, doi:10.1039/c7ee02342a.
Bulkeley, H., 2005: Reconfiguring environmental governance: Towards a politics of
scales and networks. Political Geography, 24(8), 875-902,
doi:10.1016/j.polgeo.2005.07.002.
Bulkeley, H. et al., 2011: The Role of Institutions, Governance, and Urban Planning
for Mitigation and Adaptation. In: Cities and Climate Change. The World Bank,
pp. 125-159, doi:10.1596/9780821384930_ch05.
Bulkeley, H. et al., 2012: Governing climate change transnationally: Assessing the
evidence from a database of sixty initiatives. Environment and Planning C:
Government and Policy, 30(4), 591-612, doi:10.1068/c11126.
Bunce, A. and J. Ford, 2015: How is adaptation, resilience, and vulnerability research
engaging with gender? Environmental Research Letters, 10(10), 123003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/123003.
Burch, S., C. Mitchell, M. Berbes-Blazquez, and J. Wandel, 2017: Tipping Toward
Transformation: Progress, Patterns and Potential for Climate Change
Adaptation in the Global South. Journal of Extreme Events, 04(01), 1750003,
doi:10.1142/s2345737617500038.
Burch, S. et al., 2016: Governing and accelerating transformative entrepreneurship:
exploring the potential for small business innovation on urban sustainability
transitions. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 22, 26-32,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.04.002.
Burney, J.A. and R.L. Naylor, 2012: Smallholder Irrigation as a Poverty Alleviation
Tool in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Development, 40(1), 110-123,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.05.007.
Burnham, M. and Z. Ma, 2017: Climate change adaptation: factors influencing
Chinese smallholder farmers' perceived self-efficacy and adaptation intent.
Regional Environmental Change, 17(1), 171-186,
doi:10.1007/s10113-016-0975-6.
Burns, W. and S. Nicholson, 2017: Bioenergy and carbon capture with storage
(BECCS): the prospects and challenges of an emerging climate policy response.
Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, 15(2), 527-534,
doi:10.1007/s13412-017-0445-6.
Burns, W.C.G., 2011: Climate Geoengineering: Solar Radiation Management
and its Implications for Intergenerational Equity. Stanford Journal of Law,
Science & Policy, 4(1), 39-55, https://law.stanford.edu/publications/climategeoengineering-solar-radiation-management-and-its-implications-forintergenerational-equity.
Burt, A., B. Hughes, and G. Milante, 2014: Eradicating Poverty in Fragile States:
Prospects of Reaching The `High-Hanging' Fruit by 2030. WPS7002, World
Bank, Washington DC, USA, 35 pp.
Bushee, B.J., 2001: Do Institutional Investors Prefer Near-Term Earnings over
Long-Run Value? Contemporary Accounting Research, 18(2), 207-246,
doi:10.1506/j4gu-bhwh-8hme-le0x.

404

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Bustamante, J.G., A.S. Rattner, and S. Garimella, 2016: Achieving near-watercooled power plant performance with air-cooled condensers. Applied Thermal
Engineering, 105, 362-371, doi:10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.05.065.
Butler, C. and J. Adamowski, 2015: Empowering marginalized communities in water
resources management: Addressing inequitable practices in Participatory
Model Building. Journal of Environmental Management, 153, 153-162,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.02.010.
Butler, J.R.A. et al., 2015: Integrating Top-Down and Bottom-Up Adaptation
Planning to Build Adaptive Capacity: A Structured Learning Approach. Coastal
Management, 43(4), 346-364, doi:10.1080/08920753.2015.1046802.
Butler, J.R.A. et al., 2016: Scenario planning to leap-frog the Sustainable
Development Goals: An adaptation pathways approach. Climate Risk
Management, 12, 83-99, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2015.11.003.
Butler, L. and K. Neuhoff, 2008: Comparison of feed-in tariff, quota and auction
mechanisms to support wind power development. Renewable Energy, 33(8),
1854-1867, doi:10.1016/j.renene.2007.10.008.
Cabeza, L.F. et al., 2013: Affordable construction towards sustainable buildings:
review on embodied energy in building materials. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 5(2), 229-236,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.05.005.
Caldecott, B., 2017: Introduction to special issue: stranded assets and the
environment. Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment, 7(1), 1-13,
doi:10.1080/20430795.2016.1266748.
Caldeira, K. and G. Bala, 2017: Reflecting on 50 years of geoengineering research.
Earth's Future, 5(1), 10-17, doi:10.1002/2016ef000454.
Calel, R. and A. Dechezlepretre, 2016: Environmental Policy and Directed
Technological Change: Evidence from the European Carbon Market. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 98(1), 173-191,
doi:10.1162/rest_a_00470.
Calvin, K. et al., 2014: Trade-offs of different land and bioenergy policies on the
path to achieving climate targets. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 691-704,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0897-y.
Campbell, T.H. and A.C. Kay, 2014: Solution aversion: On the relation between
ideology and motivated disbelief. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
107(5), 809-824, doi:10.1037/a0037963.
Campiglio, E., 2016: Beyond carbon pricing: The role of banking and monetary
policy in financing the transition to a low-carbon economy. Ecological
Economics, 121, 220-230, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.03.020.
Campos, I.S. et al., 2016: Climate adaptation, transitions, and socially innovative
action-research approaches. Ecology and Society, 21(1), art13,
doi:10.5751/es-08059-210113.
Camps-Calvet, M., J. Langemeyer, L. Calvet-Mir, and E. Gomez-Baggethun,
2016: Ecosystem services provided by urban gardens in Barcelona, Spain:
Insights for policy and planning. Environmental Science & Policy, 62, 14-23,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.01.007.
Canadell, J.G. and E.D. Schulze, 2014: Global potential of biospheric carbon
management for climate mitigation. Nature Communications, 5, 1-12,
doi:10.1038/ncomms6282.
Canales, F.A., A. Beluco, and C.A.B. Mendes, 2015: A comparative study of a wind
hydro hybrid system with water storage capacity: Conventional reservoir or
pumped storage plant? Journal of Energy Storage, 4, 96-105,
doi:10.1016/j.est.2015.09.007.
Caney, S., 2012: Just Emissions. Philosophy & Public Affairs, 40(4), 255-300,
doi:10.1111/papa.12005.
Caney, S., 2014: Two Kinds of Climate Justice: Avoiding Harm and Sharing Burdens.
Journal of Political Philosophy, 22(2), 125-149, doi:10.1111/jopp.12030.
Cannon, T., 2015: Disasters, climate change and the significance of `culture'. In:
Cultures and Disasters: Understanding Cultural Framings in Disaster Risk
Reduction [Kruger, F., G. Bankoff, T. Cannon, B. Orlowski, and E.L.F. Schipper
(eds.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 88-106.
Capon, S.J. et al., 2013: Riparian Ecosystems in the 21st Century: Hotspots for
Climate Change Adaptation? Ecosystems, 16(3), 359-381,
doi:10.1007/s10021-013-9656-1.
Carlsson-Kanyama, A. and A.D. Gonzalez, 2009: Potential contributions of food
consumption patterns to climate change. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 89(5), 1704S-1709S, doi:10.3945/ajcn.2009.26736aa.
Carney, M., 2016: Breaking the tragedy of the horizon climate change and financial
stability. Speech given at Lloyd's of London, London, UK. Retrieved from:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/pages/speeches/2015/844.aspx.
Carr, W.A. et al., 2013: Public engagement on solar radiation management and why
it needs to happen now. Climatic Change, 121(3), 567-577,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0763-y.
Carreno, M.L. et al., 2017: Holistic Disaster Risk Evaluation for the Urban Risk
Management Plan of Manizales, Colombia. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Science, 8(3), 258-269, doi:10.1007/s13753-017-0136-7.
Carrico, A.R., H.B. Truelove, M.P. Vandenbergh, and D. Dana, 2015: Does learning
about climate change adaptation change support for mitigation? Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 41, 19-29, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.10.009.
Carter, J.G. et al., 2015: Climate change and the city: Building capacity for urban
adaptation. Progress in Planning, 95, 1-66, doi:10.1016/j.progress.2013.08.001.
Cartwright, A., 2015: Better Growth, Better Cities: Rethinking and Redirecting
Urbanisation in Africa. New Climate Economy, Washington DC, USA and
London, UK, 44 pp.
Cartwright, A. et al., 2013: Economics of climate change adaptation at the local
scale under conditions of uncertainty and resource constraints: the case
of Durban, South Africa. Environment and Urbanization, 25(1), 139-156,
doi:10.1177/0956247813477814.
Cass, N., G. Walker, and P. Devine-Wright, 2010: Good neighbours, public relations
and bribes: The politics and perceptions of community benefit provision in
renewable energy development in the UK. Journal of Environmental Policy &
Planning, 12(3), 255-275, doi:10.1080/1523908x.2010.509558.
Castan Broto, V., 2017: Urban Governance and the Politics of Climate change.
World Development, 93, 1-15, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.12.031.
Castan Broto, V. and H. Bulkeley, 2013: A survey of urban climate change
experiments in 100 cities. Global Environmental Change, 23(1), 92-102,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.07.005.
Cayuela, M.L. et al., 2014: Biochar's role in mitigating soil nitrous oxide emissions:
A review and meta-analysis. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 191,
5-16, doi:10.1016/j.agee.2013.10.009.
CBD, 2008: Decision IX/16: Biodiversity and Climate Change. Decision Adopted
by the Conference of the Partis to the Convention on Biological Diversity
at its Ninth Meeting. UNEP/CBD/COP/DEC/IX/16, Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD), 12 pp.
CBD, 2010: Decision X/33: Biodiversity and climate change. Decision adopted by
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity at its
Tenth Meeting. UNEP/CBD/COP/DEC/X/33, Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD), 9 pp.
CBS & GNH, 2016: A Compass Towards a Just and Harmonious Society: 2015
GNH Survey Report. Centre for Bhutan Studies & Gross National Happiness
Research (CBS & GNH), Thimphu, Bhutan, 342 pp.
CCFLA, 2016: Localizing Climate Finance: Mapping Gaps and Opportunities,
Designing solutions. Cities Climate Finance Leadership Alliance (CCFLA),
29 pp.
CCRIF, 2017: Annual Report 2016-2017. The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance
Facility Segregated Portfolio Company (CCRIF SPC), Grand Cayman, Cayman
Islands, 107 pp.
Chadburn, S.E. et al., 2017: An observation-based constraint on permafrost loss
as a function of global warming. Nature Climate Change, 7(5), 340-344,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3262.
Chaffin, B.C. and L.H. Gunderson, 2016: Emergence, institutionalization and
renewal: Rhythms of adaptive governance in complex social-ecological
systems. Journal of Environmental Management, 165, 81-87,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.09.003.
Chaffin, B.C., H. Gosnell, and B.A. Cosens, 2014: A decade of adaptive governance
scholarship: synthesis and future directions. Ecology and Society, 19(3), 56,
doi:10.5751/es-06824-190356.
Challinor, A.J. et al., 2014: A meta-analysis of crop yield under climate change and
adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 4(4), 287-291,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2153.
Chambers, L.E. et al., 2017: A database for traditional knowledge of weather
and climate in the Pacific. Meteorological Applications, 24(3), 491-502,
doi:10.1002/met.1648.
Chandel, M.K., L.F. Pratson, and R.B. Jackson, 2011: The potential impacts of
climate-change policy on freshwater use in thermoelectric power generation.
Energy Policy, 39(10), 6234-6242, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.07.022.
Chandel, S.S., A. Sharma, and B.M. Marwaha, 2016: Review of energy efficiency
initiatives and regulations for residential buildings in India. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 54, 1443-1458, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.060.
Chang, N., M.V. Vasquez, C.F. Chen, S. Imen, and L. Mullon, 2015: Global nonlinear
and nonstationary climate change effects on regional precipitation and forest
phenology in Panama, Central America. Hydrological Processes, 29(3), 339-
355, doi:10.1002/hyp.10151.

Chapter 4
Chang'a, L.B., P.Z. Yanda, and J. Ngana, 2010: Indigenous knowledge in seasonal
rainfall prediction in Tanzania: A case of the South-western Highland of
Tanzania. Journal of Geography and Regional Planning, 3, 66-72.
Chant, S., M. Klett-davies, and J. Ramalho, 2017: Challenges and potential solutions
for adolescent girls in urban settings: a rapid evidence review. Gender &
Adolescence: Global Evidence (GAGE), 47 pp.
Chapin, F.S., C.N. Knapp, T.J. Brinkman, R. Bronen, and P. Cochran, 2016: Communityempowered adaptation for self-reliance. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 19, 67-75, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.12.008.
Chatrchyan, A.M. et al., 2017: United States agricultural stakeholder views and
decisions on climate change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change,
8(5), e469, doi:10.1002/wcc.469.
Chelleri, L., J.J. Waters, M. Olazabal, and G. Minucci, 2015: Resilience trade-offs:
addressing multiple scales and temporal aspects of urban resilience.Environment
and Urbanization, 27(1), 181-198, doi:10.1177/0956247814550780.
Chen, C. and M. Tavoni, 2013: Direct air capture of CO2 and climate stabilization: A
model based assessment. Climatic Change, 118(1), 59-72,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0714-7.
Chen, M.-F., 2015: An examination of the value-belief-norm theory model in
predicting pro-environmental behaviour in Taiwan. Asian Journal of Social
Psychology, 18, 145-151, doi:10.1111/ajsp.12096.
Chen, S. and B. Chen, 2016: Urban energy-water nexus: A network perspective.
Applied Energy, 184, 905-914, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.03.042.
Chen, Y. and Y. Xin, 2017: Implications of geoengineering under the 1.5C target:
Analysis and policy suggestions. Advances in Climate Change Research, 7,
1-7, doi:10.1016/j.accre.2017.05.003.
Cheng, V.K.M. and G.P. Hammond, 2017: Life-cycle energy densities and land-take
requirements of various power generators: A UK perspective. Journal of the
Energy Institute, 90(2), 201-213, doi:10.1016/j.joei.2016.02.003.
Cheshmehzangi, A., 2016: China's New-type Urbanisation Plan (NUP) and the
Foreseeing Challenges for Decarbonization of Cities: A Review. Energy
Procedia, 104(5), 146-152, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2016.12.026.
Chichilnisky, G. and G. Heal (eds.), 2000: Equity and Efficiency in Environmental
Markets: Global Trade in Carbon Dioxide Emissions. Columbia University
Press, New York, NY, USA, 280 pp.
Child, M. and C. Breyer, 2017: Transition and transformation: A review of the
concept of change in the progress towards future sustainable energy systems.
Energy Policy, 107, 11-26, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.04.022.
Chiroleu-Assouline, M. and M. Fodha, 2011: Environmental Tax and the Distribution
of Income among Heterogeneous Workers. Annals of Economics and Statistics,
103/104(103), 71-92, doi:10.2307/41615494.
Chitnis, M. and S. Sorrell, 2015: Living up to expectations: Estimating direct and
indirect rebound effects for UK households. Energy Economics, 52, S100-
S116, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2015.08.026.
Chou, W.-C. et al., 2015: Potential impacts of effluent from accelerated weathering
of limestone on seawater carbon chemistry: A case study for the Hoping
power plant in northeastern Taiwan. Marine Chemistry, 168, 27-36,
doi:10.1016/j.marchem.2014.10.008.
Christensen, C., M. Raynor, and R. McDonald, 2015: What is Disruptive Innovation?
Harvard Business Review, December, 44-53.
Christoforidis, G.C., K.C. Chatzisavvas, S. Lazarou, and C. Parisses, 2013: Covenant
of Mayors initiative - Public perception issues and barriers in Greece. Energy
Policy, 60, 643-655, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.079.
Christophers, B., 2017: Climate Change and Financial Instability: Risk Disclosure
and the Problematics of Neoliberal Governance. Annals of the American
Association of Geographers, 107(5), 1108-1127,
doi:10.1080/24694452.2017.1293502.
Chu, E., I. Anguelovski, and J.A. Carmin, 2016: Inclusive approaches to urban
climate adaptation planning and implementation in the Global South. Climate
Policy, 16(3), 372-392, doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1019822.
Chu, E., I. Anguelovski, and D. Roberts, 2017: Climate adaptation as strategic
urbanism: assessing opportunities and uncertainties for equity and inclusive
development in cities. Cities, 60, 378-387, doi:10.1016/j.cities.2016.10.016.
Chu, S., 2015: Car restraint policies and mileage in Singapore. Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 77, 404-412,
doi:10.1016/j.tra.2015.04.028.
Chum, H. et al., 2011: Bioenergy. In: IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy
Sources and Climate Change Mitigation [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga,
Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G.
Hansen, S. Schlomer, and C. von Stechow (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 209-332.

405

4

Chapter 4

4

Chung Tiam Fook, T., 2017: Transformational processes for community-focused
adaptation and social change: a synthesis. Climate and Development, 9(1),
5-21, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1086294.
Ciplet, D., J.T. Roberts, and M.R. Khan, 2015: Power in a Warming World: The
New Global Politics of Climate Change and the Remaking of Environmental
Inequality. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 342 pp.
CISL, 2015: Unhedgeable Risk: How climate change sentiment impacts investment.
University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership (CISL),
Cambridge, UK, 64 pp.
Clack, C.T.M. et al., 2017: Evaluation of a proposal for reliable low-cost grid power
with 100% wind, water, and solar. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 114(26), 6722-6727,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1610381114.
Clark, M. and D. Tilman, 2017: Comparative analysis of environmental impacts of
agricultural production systems, agricultural input efficiency, and food choice.
Environmental Research Letters, 12(6), 064016,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa6cd5.
Clarke, L. et al., 2014: Assessing transformation pathways. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp.
413-510.
Clayton, S. et al., 2015: Psychological research and global climate change. Nature
Climate Change, 5(7), 640-646, doi:10.1038/nclimate2622.
Clayton, S. et al., 2017: Psychologists and the Problem of Population Growth: Reply
to Bridgeman ( 2017 ). American Psychologist, 72(4), 388-389,
doi:10.1037/amp0000152.
Clemencon, R., 2016: The two sides of the Paris climate agreement: Dismal failure
or historic breakthrough? Journal of Environment & Development, 25(1),
3-24, doi:10.1177/1070496516631362.
Clemens, M., J. Rijke, A. Pathirana, J. Evers, and N. Hong Quan, 2015: Social learning
for adaptation to climate change in developing countries: insights from
Vietnam. Journal of Water and Climate Change, 8(4), 365-378,
doi:10.2166/wcc.2015.004.
Clements, J., A. Ray, and G. Anderson, 2013: The Value of Climate Services Across
Economic and Public Sectors: A Review of Relevant Literature. United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), Washington DC, USA, 43 pp.
Cloutier, G. et al., 2015: Planning adaptation based on local actors' knowledge
and participation: a climate governance experiment. Climate Policy, 15(4),
458-474, doi:10.1080/14693062.2014.937388.
Coady, D., I. Parry, L. Sears, and B. Shang, 2017: How Large Are Global Fossil Fuel
Subsidies? World Development, 91, 11-27,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.10.004.
Cochran, P. et al., 2013: Indigenous frameworks for observing and responding to
climate change in Alaska. Climatic Change, 120(3), 557-567,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0735-2.
Cochrani, I., R. Hubert, V. Marchal, and R. Youngman, 2014: Public Financial
Institutions and the Low-carbon Transition: Five Case Studies on Low-Carbon
Infrastructure and Project Investment. OECD Environment Working Papers No.
72, OECD Publishing, Paris, France, 93 pp.,
doi:10.1787/5jxt3rhpgn9t-en.
Coe, R., F. Sinclair, and E. Barrios, 2014: Scaling up agroforestry requires research
`in' rather than `for' development. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 6(1), 73-77, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.10.013.
Cole, D.H., 2015: Advantages of a polycentric approach to climate change policy.
Nature Climate Change, 5(2), 114-118, doi:10.1038/nclimate2490.
Colenbrander, S. et al., 2017: Can low-carbon urban development be pro-poor?
The case of Kolkata, India. Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 139-158,
doi:10.1177/0956247816677775.
Collas, L., R.E. Green, A. Ross, J.H. Wastell, and A. Balmford, 2017: Urban
development, land sharing and land sparing: the importance of considering
restoration. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54(6), 1865-1873,
doi:10.1111/1365-2664.12908.
Colloff, M.J. et al., 2016a: Adaptation services and pathways for the management of
temperate montane forests under transformational climate change. Climatic
Change, 138(1-2), 267-282, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1724-z.

406

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Colloff, M.J. et al., 2016b: Adaptation services of floodplains and wetlands under
transformational climate change. Ecological Applications, 26(4), 1003-1017,
doi:10.1890/15-0848.
Colloff, M.J. et al., 2017: An integrative research framework for enabling
transformative adaptation. Environmental Science & Policy, 68, 87-96,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.11.007.
Colman, A.M., T.W. Korner, O. Musy, and T. Tazdait, 2011: Mutual support in games:
Some properties of Berge equilibria. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
55(2), 166-175, doi:10.1016/j.jmp.2011.02.001.
Combet, E., 2013: Fiscalite carbone et progres social. Application au cas francais.,
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS), Paris, France, 412 pp.
Combet, E., F. Ghersi, J.C. Hourcade, and D. Thery, 2010: Carbon Tax and Equity:
The Importance of Policy Design. In: Critical Issues In Environmental Taxation
Volume VIII [Dias Soares, C., J. Milne, H. Ashiabor, K. Deketelaere, and L. Kreiser
(eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 277-295.
Cooney, G., J. Littlefield, J. Marriott, and T.J. Skone, 2015: Evaluating the
Climate Benefits of CO2-Enhanced Oil Recovery Using Life Cycle Analysis.
Environmental Science & Technology, 49(12), 7491-7500,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b00700.
Cooper, J.A.G., M.C. O'Connor, and S. McIvor, 2016: Coastal defences versus coastal
ecosystems: A regional appraisal. Marine Policy,
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2016.02.021.
Cooper-Searle, S., F. Livesey, and J.M. Allwood, 2018: Why are Material Efficiency
Solutions a Limited Part of the Climate Policy Agenda? An application of
the Multiple Streams Framework to UK policy on CO2 emissions from cars.
Environmental Policy and Governance, 28(1), 51-64,
doi:10.1002/eet.1782.
Coq-Huelva, D., A. Higuchi, R. Alfalla-Luque, R. Burgos-Moran, and R. AriasGutierrez, 2017: Co-Evolution and Bio-Social Construction: The Kichwa
Agroforestry Systems (Chakras) in the Ecuadorian Amazonia. Sustainability,
9(11), 1920, doi:10.3390/su9101920.
Corfee-Morlot, J., I. Cochran, S. Hallegatte, and P.J. Teasdale, 2011: Multilevel risk
governance and urban adaptation policy. Climatic Change, 104(1), 169-197,
doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9980-9.
Corner, A. and A. Randall, 2011: Selling climate change? The limitations of social
marketing as a strategy for climate change public engagement. Global
Environmental Change, 21(3), 1005-1014,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.05.002.
Cortekar, J. and M. Groth, 2015: Adapting energy infrastructure to climate change
- Is there a need for government interventions and legal obligations within
the German "energiewende"? Energy Procedia, 73, 12-17,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.552.
Costa, D., P. Burlando, and C. Priadi, 2016: The importance of integrated solutions
to flooding and water quality problems in the tropical megacity of Jakarta.
Sustainable Cities and Society, 20, 199-209, doi:10.1016/j.scs.2015.09.009.
Coulibaly, J.Y., B. Chiputwa, T. Nakelse, and G. Kundhlande, 2017: Adoption of
agroforestry and the impact on household food security among farmers in
Malawi. Agricultural Systems, 155, 52-69, doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2017.03.017.
Courtois, P., R. Nessah, and T. Tazdait, 2015: How to play games? Nash versus Berge
Behaviour Rules. Economics and Philosophy, 31(1), 123-139,
doi:10.1017/s026626711400042x.
Cowen, L. and B. Gatersleben, 2017: Testing for the size heuristic in householders'
perceptions of energy consumption. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 54,
103-115, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2017.10.002.
Cox, K., M. Renouf, A. Dargan, C. Turner, and D. Klein-Marcuschamer, 2014:
Environmental life cycle assessment (LCA) of aviation biofuel from microalgae,
Pongamia pinnata, and sugarcane molasses. Biofuels, Bioproducts and
Biorefining, 8(4), 579-593, doi:10.1002/bbb.1488.
Craig, R.K. et al., 2017: Balancing stability and flexibility in adaptive governance:
an analysis of tools available in U.S. environmental law. Ecology and Society,
22(2), 3, doi:10.5751/es-08983-220203.
Crassous, R., J.C. Hourcade, and O. Sassi, 2006: Endogenous Structural Change and
Climate Targets Modeling Experiments with Imaclim-R. The Energy Journal,
27, 259-276, www.jstor.org/stable/23297067.
Creutzig, F., E. Corbera, S. Bolwig, and C. Hunsberger, 2013: Integrating placespecific livelihood and equity outcomes into global assessments of
bioenergy deployment. Environmental Research Letters, 8(3), 035047,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/035047.
Creutzig, F., G. Baiocchi, R. Bierkandt, P.-P. Pichler, and K.C. Seto, 2015a: Global
typology of urban energy use and potentials for an urbanization mitigation

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
wedge. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(20), 6283-
6288, doi:10.1073/pnas.1315545112.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2015b: Bioenergy and climate change mitigation: an assessment.
GCB Bioenergy, 7(5), 916-944, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12205.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2017: The underestimated potential of solar energy to mitigate
climate change. Nature Energy, 2, 17140,
doi:10.1038/nenergy.2017.140.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2018: Towards demand-side solutions for mitigating climate
change. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 268-271,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0121-1.
Croci, E., B. Lucchitta, G. Janssens-Maenhout, S. Martelli, and T. Molteni, 2017:
Urban CO2 mitigation strategies under the Covenant of Mayors: An
assessment of 124 European cities. Journal of Cleaner Production, 169, 161-
177, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.05.165.
Crook, J.A., L.S. Jackson, and P.M. Forster, 2016: Can increasing albedo of existing
ship wakes reduce climate change? Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 121(4), 1549-1558, doi:10.1002/2015jd024201.
Crook, J.A., L.S. Jackson, S.M. Osprey, and P.M. Forster, 2015: A comparison
of temperature and precipitation responses to different Earth radiation
management geoengineering schemes. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 120(18), 9352-9373, doi:10.1002/2015jd023269.
Cui, X. et al., 2016: Radiative absorption enhancement from coatings on black
carbon aerosols. Science of The Total Environment, 551-552, 51-56,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.02.026.
Cui, Z. et al., 2018: Pursuing sustainable productivity with millions of smallholder
farmers. Nature, 555(7696), 363-366, doi:10.1038/nature25785.
Culwick, C. and K. Bobbins, 2016: A Framework for a Green Infrastructure Planning
Approach in the Gauteng City-Region. GCRO Research Report No. 04, Gauteng
City-Region Observatory (GCRO), Johannesburg, South Africa, 132 pp.
Cunningham, S.C. et al., 2015: Balancing the environmental benefits of
reforestation in agricultural regions. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution
and Systematics, 17(4), 301-317, doi:10.1016/j.ppees.2015.06.001.
Cunsolo, A. and N.R. Ellis, 2018: Ecological grief as a mental health response
to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 275-281,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0092-2.
Cunsolo Willox, A., S.L. Harper, and V.L. Edge, 2013: Storytelling in a digital age:
digital storytelling as an emerging narrative method for preserving and
promoting indigenous oral wisdom. Qualitative Research, 13(2), 127-147,
doi:10.1177/1468794112446105.
Cunsolo Willox, A. et al., 2012: "From this place and of this place:" Climate change,
sense of place, and health in Nunatsiavut, Canada. Social Science & Medicine,
75(3), 538-547, doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.03.043.
DAgostino, D., 2015: Assessment of the progress towards the establishment of
definitions of Nearly Zero Energy Buildings (nZEBs) in European Member
States. Journal of Building Engineering, 1, 20-32,
doi:10.1016/j.jobe.2015.01.002.
D'Agostino, D. and D. Parker, 2018: A framework for the cost-optimal design of
nearly zero energy buildings (NZEBs) in representative climates across Europe.
Energy, 149, 814-829, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2018.02.020.
Daamen, D.D.L., H. Staats, H.A.M. Wilke, and M. Engelen, 2001: Improving
Environmental Behavior in Companies. Environment and Behavior, 33(2),
229-248, doi:10.1177/00139160121972963.
Dagnet, Y. et al., 2016: Staying on Track from Paris: Advancing the Key Elements of
the Paris Agreement. World Resources Institute, Washington DC, USA.
Dahlmann, K. et al., 2016: Climate-Compatible Air Transport System - Climate
Impact Mitigation Potential for Actual and Future Aircraft. Aerospace, 3(4),
38, doi:10.3390/aerospace3040038.
Daioglou, V. et al., 2017: Greenhouse gas emission curves for advanced biofuel
supply chains. Nature Climate Change, 7(12), 920-924,
doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0006-8.
DaMatta, F.M., A. Grandis, B.C. Arenque, and M.S. Buckeridge, 2010: Impacts
of climate changes on crop physiology and food quality. Food Research
International, 43(7), 1814-1823,
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2009.11.001.
Dang, H., E. Li, I. Nuberg, and J. Bruwer, 2014: Understanding farmers' adaptation
intention to climate change: A structural equation modelling study in
the Mekong Delta, Vietnam. Environmental Science & Policy, 41, 11-22,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.04.002.
Dang Phan, T.-H., R. Brouwer, and M. Davidson, 2014: The economic costs of
avoided deforestation in the developing world: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Forest Economics, 20(1), 1-16, doi:10.1016/j.jfe.2013.06.004.

Chapter 4
Darela, J.P., D.M. Lapola, R.R. Torres, and M.C. Lemos, 2016: Socio-climatic hotspots
in Brazil: how do changes driven by the new set of IPCC climatic projections
affect their relevance for policy? Climatic Change, 136(3-4), 413-425,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1635-z.
Daron, J.D., K. Sutherland, C. Jack, and B.C. Hewitson, 2015: The role of regional
climate projections in managing complex socio-ecological systems. Regional
Environmental Change, 15(1), 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0631-y.
Davidson, D., 2016: Gaps in agricultural climate adaptation research. Nature
Climate Change, 6(5), 433-435, doi:10.1038/nclimate3007.
Davidson, P., C. Burgoyne, H. Hunt, and M. Causier, 2012: Lifting options for
stratospheric aerosol geoengineering: advantages of tethered balloon
systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 4263-4300,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2011.0639.
Davin, E.L., S.I. Seneviratne, P. Ciais, A. Olioso, and T. Wang, 2014: Preferential
cooling of hot extremes from cropland albedo management. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(27), 9757-9761,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1317323111.
Dawson, J., E.J. Stewart, M.E. Johnston, and C.J. Lemieux, 2016: Identifying and
evaluating adaptation strategies for cruise tourism in Arctic Canada. Journal
of Sustainable Tourism, 24(10), 1425-1441,
doi:10.1080/09669582.2015.1125358.
de Boer, J., W.J.W. Botzen, and T. Terpstra, 2016a: Flood risk and climate change
in the Rotterdam area, The Netherlands: enhancing citizen's climate
risk perceptions and prevention responses despite skepticism. Regional
Environmental Change, 16(6), 1613-1622,
doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0900-4.
de Boer, J., A. de Witt, and H. Aiking, 2016b: Help the climate, change your diet: A
cross-sectional study on how to involve consumers in a transition to a lowcarbon society. Appetite, 98, 19-27,
doi:10.1016/j.appet.2015.12.001.
de Coninck, H.C. and S.M. Benson, 2014: Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage:
Issues and Prospects. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 39,
243-70, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-032112-095222.
de Coninck, H.C. and D. Puig, 2015: Assessing climate change mitigation technology
interventions by international institutions. Climatic Change, 131(3), 417-433,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1344-z.
de Coninck, H.C. and A. Sagar, 2017: Technology Development and Transfer (Article
10). In: The Paris Agreement on Climate Change [Klein, D., M.P. Carazo, M.
Doelle, J. Bulmer, and A. Higham (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
pp. 258-276.
de Freitas, L.C. and S. Kaneko, 2011: Ethanol demand under the flex-fuel technology
regime in Brazil. Energy Economics, 33(6), 1146-1154,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2011.03.011.
de Gouvello, C. and I. Zelenko, 2010: A Financing Facility for Low-Carbon
Development in Developing Countries. World Bank Working Papers 203, The
World Bank, Washington DC, USA, doi:10.1596/978-0-8213-8521-0.
de Haan, P., M.G. Mueller, and R.W. Scholz, 2009: How much do incentives affect
car purchase? Agent-based microsimulation of consumer choice of new cars
- Part II: Forecasting effects of feebates based on energy-efficiency. Energy
Policy, 37(3), 1083-1094, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2008.11.003.
de Jong, S. et al., 2017: Life-cycle analysis of greenhouse gas emissions from
renewable jet fuel production. Biotechnology for Biofuels, 10(1), 64,
doi:10.1186/s13068-017-0739-7.
de Richter, R., T. Ming, P. Davies, W. Liu, and S. Caillol, 2017: Removal of non-CO2
greenhouse gases by large-scale atmospheric solar photocatalysis. Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science, 60, 68-96,
doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2017.01.001.
De Souza, A.P., A. Grandis, D.C.C. Leite, and M.S. Buckeridge, 2014: Sugarcane
as a Bioenergy Source: History, Performance, and Perspectives for SecondGeneration Bioethanol. Bioenergy Research, 7(1), 24-35,
doi:10.1007/s12155-013-9366-8.
De Souza, A.P., B.C. Arenque, E.Q.P. Tavares, and M.S. Buckeridge, 2016:
Transcriptomics and Genetics Associated with Plant Responses to Elevated
CO2 Atmospheric Concentrations. In: Plant Genomics and Climate Change
[Edwards, D. and J. Batley (eds.)]. Springer New York, New York, NY, USA, pp.
67-83, doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-3536-9_4.
De Souza, A.P., J.-C. Cocuron, A.C. Garcia, A.P. Alonso, and M.S. Buckeridge,
2015: Changes in Whole-Plant Metabolism during the Grain-Filling Stage in
Sorghum Grown under Elevated CO2 and Drought. Plant physiology, 169(3),
1755-65, doi:10.1104/pp.15.01054.

407

4

Chapter 4

4

De Stefano, A. and M.G. Jacobson, 2018: Soil carbon sequestration in agroforestry
systems: a meta-analysis. Agroforestry Systems, 92(2), 285-299,
doi:10.1007/s10457-017-0147-9.
de Wit, M. and A. Faaij, 2010: European biomass resource potential and costs.
Biomass and Bioenergy, 34(2), 188-202, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2009.07.011.
Deaton, A., 2013: The Great Escape Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 376 pp.
Deau, T. and J. Touati, 2017: Financing Sustainable Infrastructure. In: Coping with
the Climate Crisis Mitigation Policies and Global Coordination [Arezki, R., P.
Bolton, K. Aynaoui, and M. Obstfeld (eds.)]. Columbia University Press, New
York, NY, USA, pp. 167-178.
DeBeer, C.M., H.S. Wheater, S.K. Carey, and K.P. Chun, 2016: Recent climatic,
cryospheric, and hydrological changes over the interior of western Canada:
A review and synthesis. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 20(4), 1573-
1598, doi:10.5194/hess-20-1573-2016.
Decanio, S.J., 1993: Barriers within firms to energy- efficient investments. Energy
Policy, 21(9), 906-914, doi:10.1016/0301-4215(93)90178-i.
DeCicco, J.M. et al., 2016: Carbon balance effects of U.S. biofuel production and
use. Climatic Change, 138(3-4), 667-680, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1764-4.
del Ninno, C., S. Coll-Black, and P. Fallavier, 2016: Social Protection: Building
Resilience Among the Poor and Protecting the Most Vulnerable. In: Confronting
Drought in Africa's Drylands: Opportunities for Enhancing Resilience. The
World Bank, Washington DC, USA, pp. 165-184,
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0817-3_ch10.
Delmas, M.A., M. Fischlein, and O.I. Asensio, 2013: Information strategies and
energy conservation behavior: A meta-analysis of experimental studies from
1975 to 2012. Energy Policy, 61, 729-739, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.109.
Demailly, D. and P. Quirion, 2008: European Emission Trading Scheme and
competitiveness: A case study on the iron and steel industry. Energy
Economics, 30(4), 2009-2027, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2007.01.020.
Demski, C., C. Butler, K.A. Parkhill, A. Spence, and N.F. Pidgeon, 2015: Public
values for energy system change. Global Environmental Change, 34, 59-69,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.06.014.
Demski, C., S. Capstick, N. Pidgeon, N. Frank, and A. Spence, 2017: Experience of
extreme weather affects climate change mitigation and adaptation responses.
Climatic Change, 140(2), 149-1164, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1837-4.
Demuzere, M. et al., 2014: Mitigating and adapting to climate change: Multifunctional and multi-scale assessment of green urban infrastructure. Journal
of Environmental Management, 146, 107-115,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.07.025.
den Elzen, M. et al., 2016: Contribution of the G20 economies to the global impact
of the Paris agreement climate proposals. Climatic Change, 137(3-4), 655-
665, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1700-7.
Deng, X. and C. Zhao, 2015: Identification of Water Scarcity and Providing Solutions
for Adapting to Climate Changes in the Heihe River Basin of China. Advances
in Meteorology, 2015, 1-13, doi:10.1155/2015/279173.
Deo, R.C., 2011: On meteorological droughts in tropical Pacific Islands: Timeseries analysis of observed rainfall using Fiji as a case study. Meteorological
Applications, 18(2), 171-180, doi:10.1002/met.216.
Devereux, S., 2016: Social protection for enhanced food security in sub-Saharan
Africa. Food Policy, 60, 52-62, doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2015.03.009.
Devine-Wright, P., 2009: Rethinking NIMBYism: The role of place attachment and
place identity in explaining place-protective action. Journal of Community &
Applied Social Psychology, 19(6), 426-441, doi:10.1002/casp.1004.
Devine-Wright, P., 2013: Think global, act local? The relevance of place attachments
and place identities in a climate changed world. Global Environmental
Change, 23(1), 61-69, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.08.003.
Devine-wright, P. and Y. Howes, 2010: Disruption to place attachment and the
protection of restorative environments: A wind energy case study. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 30(3), 271-280, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.008.
Dhar, S., M. Pathak, and P.R. Shukla, 2017: Electric vehicles and India's low carbon
passenger transport: a long-term co-benefits assessment. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 146, 139-148, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.05.111.
Dhar, T.K. and L. Khirfan, 2017: Climate change adaptation in the urban planning and
design research: missing links and research agenda. Journal of Environmental
Planning and Management, 60(4), 602-627,
doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1178107.
Diekmann, A. and P. Preisendorfer, 2003: Rationality and Society. Rational, 15,
441-472, doi:10.1177/1043463103154002.
Dietz, T., 2013: Bringing values and deliberation to science communication.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, 14081-14087,

408

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
doi:10.1073/pnas.1212740110.
Dietz, T., A. Dan, and R. Shwom, 2007: Support for Climate Change Policy: Social
Psychological and Social Structural Influences. Rural Sociology, 72(2), 185-
214, doi:10.1526/003601107781170026.
Dietz, T., P.C. Stern, and E.U. Weber, 2013: Reducing Carbon-Based Energy
Consumption through Changes in Household Behavior. Daedalus, 142(1),
78-89, doi:10.1162/daed_a_00186.
Dietz, T., G.T. Gardner, J. Gilligan, P.C. Stern, and M.P. Vandenbergh, 2009:
Household actions can provide a behavioral wedge to rapidly reduce US
carbon emissions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(44),
18452-18456, doi:10.1073/pnas.0908738106.
Dietz, T., K.A. Frank, C.T. Whitley, J. Kelly, and R. Kelly, 2015: Political influences
on greenhouse gas emissions from US states. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112(27), 8254-8259, doi:10.1073/pnas.1417806112.
Dilling, L. and R. Hauser, 2013: Governing geoengineering research: Why, when and
how? Climatic Change, 121(3), 553-565,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0835-z.
Ding, D., E.W. Maibach, X. Zhao, C. Roser-Renouf, and A. Leiserowitz, 2011: Support
for climate policy and societal action are linked to perceptions about scientific
agreement. Nature Climate Change, 1(9), 462-466,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1295.
Dinner, I., E.J. Johnson, D.G. Goldstein, and K. Liu, 2011: Partitioning default effects:
Why people choose not to choose. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 17(4), 432-432, doi:10.1037/a0026470.
Dircke, P. and A. Molenaar, 2015: Climate change adaptation; innovative tools and
strategies in Delta City Rotterdam. Water Practice and Technology, 10(4),
674-680, doi:10.2166/wpt.2015.080.
Dobson, S., 2017: Community-driven pathways for implementation of global urban
resilience goals in Africa. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 26,
78-84, doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.028.
Doci, G. and E. Vasileiadou, 2015: "Let's do it ourselves" Individual motivations
for investing in renewables at community level. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 49, 41-50, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.051.
Dodman, D., 2009: Blaming cities for climate change? An analysis of urban
greenhouse gas emissions inventories. Environment and Urbanization, 21(1),
185-201, doi:10.1177/0956247809103016.
Dodman, D., S. Colenbrander, and D. Archer, 2017a: Conclusion: towards adaptive
urban governance. In: Responding to climate change in Asian cities:
Governance for a more resilient urban future [Archer, D., S. Colenbrander, and
D. Dodman (eds.)]. Routledge Earthscan, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 200-217.
Dodman, D., H. Leck, M. Rusca, and S. Colenbrander, 2017b: African Urbanisation
and Urbanism: Implications for risk accumulation and reduction. International
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 26, 7-15, doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.06.029.
Dogan, E., J.W. Bolderdijk, and L. Steg, 2014: Making Small Numbers Count:
Environmental and Financial Feedback in Promoting Eco-driving Behaviours.
Journal of Consumer Policy, 37(3), 413-422, doi:10.1007/s10603-014-9259-z.
Donner, S.D., M. Kandlikar, and S. Webber, 2016: Measuring and tracking the flow
of climate change adaptation aid to the developing world. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(5), 054006, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/054006.
Dooley, K., 2017: Routines, Rigidity and Real Estate: Organisational Innovations in
the Workplace. Sustainability, 9(6), 998, doi:10.3390/su9060998.
Dorsch, M.J. and C. Flachsland, 2017: A Polycentric Approach to Global Climate
Governance. Global Environmental Politics, 17(2), 45-64,
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00400.
Dorward, P., G. Clarkson, and R. Stern, 2015: Participatory integrated climate
services for agriculture (PICSA): Field manual. Walker Institute, University of
Reading, Reading, UK, 65 pp.
Dougill, A.J. et al., 2017: Mainstreaming conservation agriculture in Malawi:
Knowledge gaps and institutional barriers. Journal of Environmental
Management, 195, 25-34, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.09.076.
Douglas, I., 2017: Flooding in African cities, scales of causes, teleconnections, risks,
vulnerability and impacts. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction,
26, 34-42, doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.024.
Dowd, A.-M. et al., 2014: The role of networks in transforming Australian agriculture.
Nature Climate Change, 4(7), 558-563, doi:10.1038/nclimate2275.
Doyle, J., 2011: Acclimatizing nuclear? Climate change, nuclear power and the
reframing of risk in the UK news media. International Communication
Gazette, 73(1-2), 107-125, doi:10.1177/1748048510386744.
Drews, S. and J.C.J.M. Van den Bergh, 2016: What explains public support for
climate policies ? A review of empirical and experimental studies review of

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
empirical and experimental studies. Climate Policy, 16(7), 855-876,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1058240.
Dreze, J. and N. Stern, 1990: Policy Reform, Shadow Prices, and Market Prices.
Journal of Public Economics, 42, 1-45, doi:10.1016/0047-2727(90)90042-g.
Droste, N. et al., 2016: Steering innovations towards a green economy:
Understanding government intervention. Journal of Cleaner Production, 135,
426-434, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.123.
Dubois, U., 2012: From targeting to implementation: The role of identification of
fuel poor households. Energy Policy, 49, 107-115,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.11.087.
Dunlap, R.E. and A.M. McCright, 2011: Organized Climate Change Denial. In: The
Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society [Dryzek, J.S., R.B. Norgaard,
and D. Schlosberg (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 144-160,
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199566600.001.0001.
Dupuis, J. and R. Biesbroek, 2013: Comparing apples and oranges: The dependent
variable problem in comparing and evaluating climate change adaptation
policies. Global Environmental Change, 23(6), 1476-1487,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.022.
Durand, A. et al., 2016: Financing Options for Loss and Damage: a Review and
Roadmap. Deutsches Institut fur Entwicklungspolitik gGmbH, Bonn, Germany,
41 pp.
Eakin, H. et al., 2015: Information and communication technologies and climate
change adaptation in Latin America and the Caribbean: a framework for
action. Climate and Development, 7(3), 208-222,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.951021.
Eakin, H. et al., 2016: Cognitive and institutional influences on farmers' adaptive
capacity: insights into barriers and opportunities for transformative change
in central Arizona. Regional Environmental Change, 16(3), 801-814,
doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0789-y.
Eakin, H.C.C., M.C.C. Lemos, and D.R.R. Nelson, 2014: Differentiating capacities
as a means to sustainable climate change adaptation. Global Environmental
Change, 27(1), 1-8, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.013.
Eastham, S.D., D.W. Keith, and S.R.H. Barrett, 2018: Mortality tradeoff between air
quality and skin cancer from changes in stratospheric ozone. Environmental
Research Letters, 13(3), 034035, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaad2e.
Ebeling, F. and S. Lotz, 2015: Domestic uptake of green energy promoted by opt-out
tariffs. Nature Climate Change, 5, 868-871, doi:10.1038/nclimate2681.
Eberhard, A., O. Rosnes, M. Shkaratan, and H. Vennemo, 2011: Africa's Power
Infrastructure: Investment, Integration, Efficiency. The World Bank, Washington
DC, USA, 352 pp., doi:10.1596/978-0-8213-8455-8.
Eberhard, A., K. Gratwick, E. Morella, and P. Antmann, 2016: Independent Power
Projects in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from Five Key Countries. The World
Bank, Washington DC, USA, 382 pp.,
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0800-5.
Eberhard, A., K. Gratwick, E. Morella, and P. Antmann, 2017: Accelerating
investments in power in sub-Saharan Africa. Nature Energy, 2(2), 17005,
doi:10.1038/nenergy.2017.5.
Ecker, F., U.J.J. Hahnel, and H. Spada, 2017: Promoting Decentralized Sustainable
Energy Systems in Different Supply Scenarios: The Role of Autarky Aspiration.
Frontiers in Energy Research, 5, 14,
doi:10.3389/fenrg.2017.00014.
Edenhofer, O. et al., 2015: Closing the emission price gap. Global Environmental
Change, 31, 132-143, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.003.
Edler, J. and J. Fagerberg, 2017: Innovation policy: what, why, and how. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 33(1), 2-23, doi:10.1093/oxrep/grx001.
EEA, 2017: Aviation and shipping - impacts on Europe's environment: TERM 2017:
Transport and Environment Reporting Mechanism (TERM) report. European
Environment Agency (EEA), Copenhagen, 70 pp.
Eisenack, K. and R. Stecker, 2012: A framework for analyzing climate change
adaptations as actions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global
Change, 17(3), 243-260, doi:10.1007/s11027-011-9323-9.
Eisenberg, D.A., 2016: Transforming building regulatory systems to address climate
change. Building Research & Information, 44(5-6), 468-473,
doi:10.1080/09613218.2016.1126943.
Ek, K. and P. Soderholm, 2008: Households' switching behavior between electricity
suppliers in Sweden. Utilities Policy, 16(4), 254-261,
doi:10.1016/j.jup.2008.04.005.
Ek, K. and P. Soderholm, 2010: The devil is in the details: Household electricity
saving behavior and the role of information. Energy Policy, 38(3), 1578-1587,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.11.041.

Chapter 4
Ekblom, A., L. Gillson, and M. Notelid, 2017: Water flow, ecological dynamics,
and management in the lower Limpopo Valley: a long-term view. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 4(5), e1228, doi:10.1002/wat2.1228.
El Gafy, I., N. Grigg, and W. Reagan, 2017: Dynamic Behaviour of the Water-FoodEnergy Nexus: Focus on Crop Production and Consumption. Irrigation and
Drainage, 66(1), 19-33, doi:10.1002/ird.2060.
Elia, E.F., S. Mutula, and C. Stilwell, 2014: Indigenous Knowledge use in seasonal
weather forecasting in Tanzania : the case of semi-arid central Tanzania.
South African Journal of Libraries and Information Science, 80(1), 18-27,
doi:10.7553/80-1-180.
Eliasson, J., 2014: The role of attitude structures, direct experience and reframing
for the success of congestion pricing. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice, 67, 81-95, doi:10.1016/j.tra.2014.06.007.
Eliseev, A., 2012: Climate change mitigation via sulfate injection to the stratosphere:
impact on the global carbon cycle and terrestrial biosphere. Atmospheric and
Oceanic Optics, 25(6), 405-413, doi:10.1134/s1024856012060024.
Elliott, J. et al., 2014: Constraints and potentials of future irrigation water
availability on agricultural production under climate change. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3239-3244,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222474110.
Ellison, D. et al., 2017: Trees, forests and water: Cool insights for a hot world. Global
Environmental Change, 43, 51-61,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.01.002.
Elmqvist, T. et al., 2013: Urbanization, Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services:
Challenges and Opportunities: A Global Assessment. Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 755 pp.
Elmqvist, T. et al., 2015: Benefits of restoring ecosystem services in urban areas.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 14, 101-108,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.05.001.
Elshout, P.M.F., R. van Zelm, R. Karuppiah, I.J. Laurenzi, and M.A.J. Huijbregts, 2014:
A spatially explicit data-driven approach to assess the effect of agricultural
land occupation on species groups. The International Journal of Life Cycle
Assessment, 19(4), 758-769, doi:10.1007/s11367-014-0701-x.
Emin, G., M. Lepetit, A. Grandjean, and O. Ortega, 2014: Massive financing of the
energy transition. SFTE feasibility study: synthesis report. Energy renovation
of public buildings. Association for the Financing of the EneRgy Transition
(A.F.T.E.R), 37 pp.
Emmer, A., J. Klime, M. Mergili, V. Vilimek, and A. Cochachin, 2016: 882 lakes of
the Cordillera Blanca: An inventory, classification, evolution and assessment
of susceptibility to outburst floods. CATENA, 147, 269-279,
doi:10.1016/j.catena.2016.07.032.
Ensor, J. and B. Harvey, 2015: Social learning and climate change adaptation:
evidence for international development practice. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 6(5), 509-522, doi:10.1002/wcc.348.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2009: Eating the Planet: Feeding and fuelling the world sustainably,
fairly and humanely - a scoping study. Social Ecology Working Paper No. 116,
Institute of Social Ecology, Alpen-Adria Universitat, Vienna, Austria, 132 pp.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2016a: Exploring the biophysical option space for feeding the world
without deforestation. Nature Communications, 7, 11382,
doi:10.1038/ncomms11382.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2016b: Land management: data availability and process
understanding for global change studies. Global Change Biology, 23(2), 512-
533, doi:10.1111/gcb.13443.
Erb, K.-H. et al., 2017: Unexpectedly large impact of forest management and
grazing on global vegetation biomass. Nature, 553(7686), 73-76,
doi:10.1038/nature25138.
Eric Bickel, J., 2013: Climate engineering and climate tipping-point scenarios.
Environment Systems & Decisions, 33(1), 152-167,
doi:10.1007/s10669-013-9435-8.
Ericsson, K. and S. Werner, 2016: The introduction and expansion of biomass use
in Swedish district heating systems. Biomass and Bioenergy, 94, 57-65,
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2016.08.011.
Eriksson, L., J. Garvill, and A.M. Nordlund, 2006: Acceptability of travel demand
management measures: The importance of problem awareness, personal
norm, freedom, and fairness. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 26, 15-26,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2006.05.003.
Eriksson, L., J. Garvill, and A.M. Nordlund, 2008: Acceptability of single and
combined transport policy measures: The importance of environmental and
policy specific beliefs. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
42(8), 1117-1128, doi:10.1016/j.tra.2008.03.006.

409

4

Chapter 4

4

Erker, S., R. Stangl, and G. Stoeglehner, 2017: Resilience in the light of energy crises
- Part II: Application of the regional energy resilience assessment. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 164, 495-507,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.06.162.
Erlinghagen, S. and J. Markard, 2012: Smart grids and the transformation of the
electricity sector: ICT firms as potential catalysts for sectoral change. Energy
Policy, 51, 895-906, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.09.045.
Esham, M. and C. Garforth, 2013: Agricultural adaptation to climate change:
insights from a farming community in Sri Lanka. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change, 18(5), 535-549,
doi:10.1007/s11027-012-9374-6.
ESRB ASC, 2016: Too late, too sudden: Transition to a low-carbon economy and
systemic risk. ESRB ASC Report No 6, European Systemic Risk Board, Frankfurt,
Germany, 22 pp.
Evans, J., J. O'Brien, and B. Ch Ng, 2018: Towards a geography of informal transport:
Mobility, infrastructure and urban sustainability from the back of a motorbike.
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 43(4), 674-688,
doi:10.1111/tran.12239.
Evans, L. et al., 2012: Self-interest and pro-environmental behaviour. Nature
Climate Change, 3(2), 122-125, doi:10.1038/nclimate1662.
Evans, M., V. Roshchanka, and P. Graham, 2017: An international survey of building
energy codes and their implementation. Journal of Cleaner Production, 158,
382-389, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.01.007.
Ewing, R., S. Hamidi, and J.B. Grace, 2016: Compact development and
VMT-Environmental determinism, self-selection, or some of both?
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 43(4), 737-755,
doi:10.1177/0265813515594811.
Exner, A. et al., 2016: Measuring regional resilience towards fossil fuel supply
constraints. Adaptability and vulnerability in socio-ecological Transformationsthe case of Austria. Energy Policy, 91, 128-137,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2015.12.031.
Eyre, N., S.J. Darby, P. Grunewald, E. McKenna, and R. Ford, 2018: Reaching
a 1.5C target: socio-technical challenges for a rapid transition to lowcarbon electricity systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160462,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0462.
Ezeji, T., 2017: Production of Bio-Derived Fuels and Chemicals. Fermentation, 3(3),
42, doi:10.3390/fermentation3030042.
Fader, M., S. Shi, W. von Bloh, A. Bondeau, and W. Cramer, 2016: Mediterranean
irrigation under climate change: more efficient irrigation needed to
compensate for increases in irrigation water requirements. Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences, 20(2), 953-973,
doi:10.5194/hess-20-953-2016.
Faehn, T. and E.T. Isaksen, 2016: Diffusion of Climate Technologies in the
Presence of Commitment Problems. The Energy Journal, 37(2), 155-180,
doi:10.5547/01956574.37.2.tfae.
Fainstein, S.S., 2018: Resilience and justice: planning for New York City. Urban
Geography, 1-8, doi:10.1080/02723638.2018.1448571.
Fajardy, M. and N. Mac Dowell, 2017: Can BECCS deliver sustainable and resource
efficient negative emissions? Energy & Environmental Science, 10(6), 1389-
1426, doi:10.1039/c7ee00465f.
Falkner, R., 2016: The Paris Agreement and the new logic of international climate
politics. International Affairs, 92(5), 1107-1125,
doi:10.1111/1468-2346.12708.
Faludi, J., C. Bayley, S. Bhogal, and M. Iribarne, 2015: Comparing environmental
impacts of additive manufacturing vs traditional machining via life-cycle
assessment. Rapid Prototyping Journal, 21(1), 14-33,
doi:10.1108/rpj-07-2013-0067.
Fang, Y., B. Singh, B.P. Singh, and E. Krull, 2014: Biochar carbon stability in four
contrasting soils. European Journal of Soil Science, 65(1), 60-71,
doi:10.1111/ejss.12094.
Fankhauser, S. and G. Schmidt-Traub, 2011: From adaptation to climate-resilient
development: The costs of climate-proofing the Millennium Development
Goals in Africa. Climate and Development, 3(2), 94-113,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2011.582267.
Fankhauser, S. and T.K.J. McDermott, 2014: Understanding the adaptation deficit:
Why are poor countries more vulnerable to climate events than rich countries?
Global Environmental Change, 27(1), 9-18,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.014.

410

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
FAO, 2013: Food wastage footprint. Impacts on natural resources. Summary Report.
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy,
63 pp.
FAO and NZAGRC, 2017a: Low emissions development of the beef cattle sector in
Uruguay - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy and
New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre (NZAGRC), 34 pp.
FAO and NZAGRC, 2017b: Options for low emission development in the Kenya dairy
sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy and New
Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre (NZAGRC), 43 pp.
FAO and NZAGRC, 2017c: Supporting low emissions development in the Ethiopian
dairy cattle sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and
livelihoods. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
Rome, Italy and New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre
(NZAGRC), 34 pp.
Farfan, J. and C. Breyer, 2017: Structural changes of global power generation
capacity towards sustainability and the risk of stranded investments
supported by a sustainability indicator. Journal of Cleaner Production, 141,
370-384, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.068.
Farrow, K., G. Grolleau, and L. Ibanez, 2017: Social Norms and Pro-environmental
Behavior: A Review of the Evidence. Ecological Economics, 140, 1-13,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.04.017.
Fasihi, M., D. Bogdanov, and C. Breyer, 2017: Long-Term Hydrocarbon Trade Options
for the Maghreb Region and Europe-Renewable Energy Based Synthetic Fuels
for a Net Zero Emissions World. Sustainability, 9(2), 306,
doi:10.3390/su9020306.
Favretto, N., L.C. Stringer, M.S. Buckeridge, and S. Afionis, 2017: Policy and
Diplomacy in the Production of Second Generation Ethanol in Brazil:
International Relations with the EU, the USA and Africa. In: Advances of Basic
Science for Second Generation from Sugarcane [Buckeridge, M.S. and A.P.
De Souza (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, New York, pp. 197-212,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-49826-3_11.
Fawcett, T., F. Hvelplund, and N.I. Meyer, 2010: Making It Personal: Per Capita
Carbon Allowances. In: Generating Electricity in a Carbon-Constrained
World [Sioshansi, F.P. (ed.)]. Academic Press, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 87-107,
doi:10.1016/b978-1-85617-655-2.00004-3.
Fazey, I. et al., 2017: Transformation in a changing climate: a research agenda.
Climate and Development, 1-21, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1301864.
Fazey, I. et al., 2018: Energy Research & Social Science Ten essentials for actionoriented and second order energy transitions, transformations and climate
change research. Energy Research & Social Science, 40, 54-70,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.11.026.
Fell, H., D. Burtraw, R.D. Morgenstern, and K.L. Palmer, 2012: Soft and hard
price collars in a cap-and-trade system: A comparative analysis. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 64(2), 183-198,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2011.11.004.
Feng, E.Y., D.P. Keller, W. Koeve, and A. Oschlies, 2016: Could artificial ocean
alkalinization protect tropical coral ecosystems from ocean acidification?
Environmental Research Letters, 11(7), 074008,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/074008.
Feola, G., A.M. Lerner, M. Jain, M.J.F. Montefrio, and K. Nicholas, 2015: Researching
farmer behaviour in climate change adaptation and sustainable agriculture:
Lessons learned from five case studies. Journal of Rural Studies, 39, 74-84,
doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.03.009.
Fernandez-Gimenez, M.E., B. Batkhishig, B. Batbuyan, and T. Ulambayar, 2015:
Lessons from the Dzud: Community-Based Rangeland Management Increases
the Adaptive Capacity of Mongolian Herders to Winter Disasters. World
Development, 68, 48-65, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.11.015.
Ferrario, F. et al., 2014: The effectiveness of coral reefs for coastal hazard risk
reduction and adaptation. Nature Communications, 5, 1-9,
doi:10.1038/ncomms4794.
Few, R., D. Morchain, D. Spear, A. Mensah, and R. Bendapudi, 2017: Transformation,
adaptation and development: relating concepts to practice. Palgrave
Communications, 3, 17092, doi:10.1057/palcomms.2017.92.
Fielding, K.S. and M.J. Hornsey, 2016: A Social Identity Analysis of Climate Change
and Environmental Attitudes and Behaviors: Insights and Opportunities.
Frontiers in Psychology, 7(FEB), 1-12, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00121.
Fielding, K.S., R. Mcdonald, and W.R. Louis, 2008: Theory of planned behaviour,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
identity and intentions to engage in environmental activism. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 28, 318-326, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2008.03.003.
Figueres, C. et al., 2017: Three years to safeguard our climate. Nature, 546(7660),
593-595, doi:10.1038/546593a.
Fink, J.H., 2013: Geoengineering cities to stabilise climate. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers - Engineering Sustainability, 166(5), 242-248,
doi:10.1680/ensu.13.00002.
Finlayson, C., 2012: Forty years of wetland conservation and wise use. Aquatic
Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 22(2), 139-143,
doi:10.1002/aqc.2233.
Finlayson, C.M. et al., 2017: Policy considerations for managing wetlands under
a changing climate. Marine and Freshwater Research, 68(10), 1803-1815,
doi:10.1071/mf16244.
Finley, R.J., 2014: An overview of the Illinois Basin - Decatur Project. Greenhouse
Gases: Science and Technology, 4(5), 571-579, doi:10.1002/ghg.1433.
Finon, D., 2013: Towards a global governance of nuclear safety: an impossible
quest? Revue de l'Energie (in French), 616, 440-450.
Finon, D. and F. Roques, 2013: European Electricity Market Reforms: The "Visible
Hand" of Public Coordination. Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy,
2(2), doi:10.5547/2160-5890.2.2.6.
Fischer, C., M. Greaker, and K.E. Rosendahl, 2017: Robust technology policy against
emission leakage: The case of upstream subsidies. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 84, 44-61, doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2017.02.001.
Fishman, E., S. Washington, and N. Haworth, 2015: Bikeshare's impact on active
travel: Evidence from the United States, Great Britain, and Australia. Journal of
Transport & Health, 2(2), 135-142, doi:10.1016/j.jth.2015.03.004.
Fishman, R., N. Devineni, and S. Raman, 2015: Can improved agricultural water use
efficiency save India's groundwater? Environmental Research Letters, 10(8),
084022, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084022.
Fleming, A., S.E. Park, and N.A. Marshall, 2015a: Enhancing adaptation outcomes
for transformation: climate change in the Australian wine industry. Journal of
Wine Research, 26(2), 99-114, doi:10.1080/09571264.2015.1031883.
Fleming, A., A.M. Dowd, E. Gaillard, S. Park, and M. Howden, 2015b: "Climate
change is the least of my worries": Stress limitations on adaptive capacity.
Rural Society, 24(1), 24-41,
doi:10.1080/10371656.2014.1001481.
Fleurbaey, M. and P.J. Hammond, 2004: Interpersonally Comparable Utility. In:
Handbook of Utility Theory: Volume 2 Extensions [Barbera, S., P.J. Hammond,
and C. Seidl (eds.)]. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
pp. 1179-1285, doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-7964-1_8.
Fleurbaey, M. et al., 2014: Sustainable Development and Equity. In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp.
283-350.
Floater, G. et al., 2014: Cities and the New Climate Economy: the transformative
role of global urban growth. NCE Cities - Paper 01, LSE Cities. London School
of Economics and Political Science, London, UK, 70 pp.
Flynn, M., J. Ford, T. Pearce, S. Harper, and IHACC Research Team, 2018: Participatory
scenario planning and climate change impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability
research in the Arctic. Environmental Science & Policy, 79, 45-53,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.10.012.
Foley, J.A. et al., 2011: Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature, 478(7369), 337-
342, doi:10.1038/nature10452.
Forbes, B.C. et al., 2009: High resilience in the Yamal-Nenets social-ecological
system, West Siberian Arctic, Russia. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106(52), 22041-22048, doi:10.1073/pnas.0908286106.
Forbis Jr, R. and K. Hayhoe, 2018: Does Arctic governance hold the key to achieving
climate policy targets? Environmental Research Letters, 13(2), 020201,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa359.
Ford, J.D., 2012: Indigenous health and climate change. American Journal of Public
Health, 102(7), 1260-1266, doi:10.2105/ajph.2012.300752.
Ford, J.D. and D. King, 2015: Coverage and framing of climate change adaptation in
the media: A review of influential North American newspapers during 19932013. Environmental Science & Policy, 48, 137-146,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.12.003.

Chapter 4
Ford, J.D. and L. Berrang-Ford, 2016: The 4Cs of adaptation tracking: consistency,
comparability, comprehensiveness, coherency. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change, 21(6), 839-859,
doi:10.1007/s11027-014-9627-7.
Ford, J.D., G. McDowell, and J. Jones, 2014a: The state of climate change
adaptation in the Arctic. Environmental Research Letters, 9(10), 104005,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/10/104005.
Ford, J.D., G. McDowell, and T. Pearce, 2015a: The adaptation challenge in the Arctic.
Nature Climate Change, 5(12), 1046-1053, doi:10.1038/nclimate2723.
Ford, J.D., L. Berrang-Ford, A. Lesnikowski, M. Barrera, and S.J. Heymann, 2013:
How to Track Adaptation to Climate Change: A Typology of Approaches for
National-Level Application. Ecology and Society, 18(3), art40,
doi:10.5751/es-05732-180340.
Ford, J.D. et al., 2014b: Adapting to the Effects of Climate Change on Inuit Health.
American Journal of Public Health, 104(S3), e9-e17,
doi:10.2105/ajph.2013.301724.
Ford, J.D. et al., 2015b: Adaptation tracking for a post-2015 climate agreement.
Nature Climate Change, 5(11), 967-969, doi:10.1038/nclimate2744.
Ford, J.D. et al., 2015c: Evaluating climate change vulnerability assessments: a
case study of research focusing on the built environment in northern Canada.
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 20(8), 1267-1288,
doi:10.1007/s11027-014-9543-x.
Ford, J.D. et al., 2016: Community-based adaptation research in the Canadian
Arctic. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(2), 175-191,
doi:10.1002/wcc.376.
Ford, J.D. et al., 2018: Preparing for the health impacts of climate change in
Indigenous communities: The role of community-based adaptation. Global
Environmental Change, 49, 129-139, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.02.006.
Forman, C., I.K. Muritala, R. Pardemann, and B. Meyer, 2016: Estimating the global
waste heat potential. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 57, 1568-
1579, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.192.
Fornell, R., T. Berntsson, and A. Asblad, 2013: Techno-economic analysis of a kraft
pulp-mill-based biorefinery producing both ethanol and dimethyl ether.
Energy, 50(1), 83-92, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2012.11.041.
Forsell, N. et al., 2016: Assessing the INDCs' land use, land use change, and
forest emission projections. Carbon Balance and Management, 11(1), 26,
doi:10.1186/s13021-016-0068-3.
Forster, J., I.R. Lake, A.R. Watkinson, and J.A. Gill, 2011: Marine biodiversity in
the Caribbean UK overseas territories: Perceived threats and constraints to
environmental management. Marine Policy, 35(5), 647-657,
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2011.02.005.
Fouquet, R., 2016: Lessons from energy history for climate policy: Technological
change, demand and economic development. Energy Research & Social
Science, 22, 79-93, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.09.001.
Francesch-Huidobro, M., M. Dabrowski, Y. Tai, F. Chan, and D. Stead, 2017:
Governance challenges of flood-prone delta cities: Integrating flood risk
management and climate change in spatial planning. Progress in Planning,
114, 1-27, doi:10.1016/j.progress.2015.11.001.
Francis, R. and B. Bekera, 2014: A metric and frameworks for resilience analysis
of engineered and infrastructure systems. Reliability Engineering & System
Safety, 121, 90-103, doi:10.1016/j.ress.2013.07.004.
Frank, S. et al., 2013: How effective are the sustainability criteria accompanying
the European Union 2020 biofuel targets? GCB Bioenergy, 5(3), 306-314,
doi:10.1111/j.1757-1707.2012.01188.x.
Fraser, A. et al., 2017: Meeting the challenge of risk-sensitive and resilient urban
development in sub-Saharan Africa: Directions for future research and
practice. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 26, 106-109,
doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.10.001.
Frederiks, E.R., K. Stenner, and E. Hobman, 2015: Household energy use: Applying
behavioural economics to understand consumer decision-making and
behaviour. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 41, 1385-1394,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.09.026.
Freire, M.E., S. Lall, and D. Leipziger, 2014: Africa's urbanization: challenges and
opportunities. Working Paper No. 7, The Growth Dialogue, Washington DC,
USA, 44 pp.
Freire-Gonzalez, J., 2017: Evidence of direct and indirect rebound effect in
households in EU-27 countries. Energy Policy, 102, 270-276,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.12.002.
Fridahl, M., 2017: Socio-political prioritization of bioenergy with carbon capture

411

4

Chapter 4

4

and storage. Energy Policy, 104, 89-99, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.01.050.
Friedlingstein, P. et al., 2014: Uncertainties in CMIP5 climate projections due to
carbon cycle feedbacks. Journal of Climate, 27(2), 511-526,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-12-00579.1.
Fritz, S. et al., 2011: Highlighting continued uncertainty in global land cover maps
for the user community. Environmental Research Letters, 6(4), 044005,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/6/4/044005.
Froud, J., C. Haslam, S. Johal, and K. Williams, 2000: Shareholder value and
Financialization: consultancy promises, management moves. Economy and
Society, 29(1), 80-110, doi:10.1080/030851400360578.
Fryer, E., 2017: Digital infrastructure: And the impacts of climate change. Journal of
the Institute of Telecommunications Professionals, 11(2), 8-13.
Fu, G. et al., 2017: Integrated Approach to Assess the Resilience of Future Electricity
Infrastructure Networks to Climate Hazards. IEEE Systems Journal, 1-12,
doi:10.1109/jsyst.2017.2700791.
Fudge, S., M. Peters, and B. Woodman, 2016: Local authorities as niche actors: the
case of energy governance in the UK. Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions, 18, 1-17, doi:10.1016/j.eist.2015.06.004.
Fuhr, H., T. Hickmann, and K. Kern, 2018: The role of cities in multi-level climate
governance: local climate policies and the 1.5C target. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 30, 1-6,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.10.006.
Fujii, S. and R. Kitamura, 2003: What does a one-month free bus ticket do to
habitual drivers? An experimental analysis of habit and attitude change.
Transportation, 30(1), 81-95, doi:10.1023/a:1021234607980.
Fujimori, S. et al., 2016: Implication of Paris Agreement in the context of long-term
climate mitigation goals. SpringerPlus, 5(1), 1620,
doi:10.1186/s40064-016-3235-9.
Fulton, L., J. Mason, and D. Meroux, 2017: Three Revolutions in Urban Transportation.
University of California - Davis (UC Davis) Sustainable Transportation Energy
Pathways and Institute for Transporation & Development Policy (ITDP), 38 pp.
Fuss, S. et al., 2014: Betting on negative emissions. Nature Climate Change, 4(10),
850-853, doi:10.1038/nclimate2392.
Fuss, S. et al., 2018: Negative emissions - Part 2: Costs, potentials and side effects.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063002,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9f.
Gajjar, S.P., C. Singh, and T. Deshpande, 2018: Tracing back to move ahead: a review
of development pathways that constrain adaptation futures. Climate and
Development, 1-15, doi:10.1080/17565529.2018.1442793.
Gambhir, A. et al., 2017: Assessing the Feasibility of Global Long-Term Mitigation
Scenarios. Energies, 10(1), e89,
doi:10.3390/en10010089.
Gandure, S., S. Walker, and J.J. Botha, 2013: Farmers' perceptions of adaptation
to climate change and water stress in a South African rural community.
Environmental Development, 5(1), 39-53,
doi:10.1016/j.envdev.2012.11.004.
Gao, C., 2018: The future of CRISPR technologies in agriculture. Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology, 19(5), 275-276, doi:10.1038/nrm.2018.2.
Gao, Y. and J. Kenworthy, 2017: China. In: The Urban Transport Crisis in Emerging
Economies [Pojani, D. and D. Stead (eds.)]. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp.
33-58, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-43851-1_3.
Gao, Y. and P. Newman, 2018: Beijing's Peak Car Transition: Hope for Emerging
Cities in the 1.5C Agenda. Urban Planning, 3(2), 82-93,
doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1246.
Gao, Y., J. Kenworthy, and P. Newman, 2015: Growth of a Giant: A Historical and
Current Perspective on the Chinese Automobile Industry. World Transport
Policy and Practice, 21.2, 40-55, http://worldtransportjournal.com/wpcontent/uploads/2015/05/30th-april-opt.pdf.
Garcia Romero, H. and A. Molina, 2015: Agriculture and Adaptation to Climate
Change: The Role of Insurance in Risk Management: The Case of Colombia.
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), Washington DC, USA, 49 pp.,
doi:10.18235/0000053.
Garcia-Alvarez, M.T., L. Cabeza-Garcia, and I. Soares, 2017: Analysis of the
promotion of onshore wind energy in the EU: Feed-in tariff or renewable
portfolio standard? Renewable Energy, 111, 256-264,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2017.03.067.
Gardiner, S.M., 2013: Why geoengineering is not a `global public good', and why it
is ethically misleading to frame it as one. Climatic Change, 121(3), 513-525,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0764-x.
Garg, A., J. Maheshwari, P.R. Shukla, and R. Rawal, 2017: Energy appliance
transformation in commercial buildings in India under alternate policy

412

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
scenarios. Energy, 140, 952-965,
doi:10.1016/j.energy.2017.09.004.
Gasc, F., D. Guerrier, S. Barrett, and S. Anderson, 2014: Assessing the effectiveness
of investments in climate information services. International Institute for
Environment and Development (IIED), London, UK, 4 pp.
Gawith, D., A. Daigneault, and P. Brown, 2016: Does community resilience mitigate
loss and damage from climate-related disasters? Evidence based on survey
data. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 59(12), 2102-
2123, doi:10.1080/09640568.2015.1126241.
GCEC, 2014: Better growth, Better Climate: The New Climate Economy Report. The
Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, New Climate Economy,
Washington DC, USA, 308 pp.
GEA, 2012: Global Energy Assessment - Toward a sustainable future. Global
Energy Assessment (GEA). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA and the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 113 pp.
Gebrehiwot, T. and A. van der Veen, 2015: Farmers Prone to Drought Risk: Why
Some Farmers Undertake Farm-Level Risk-Reduction Measures While Others
Not? Environmental Management, 55(3), 588-602,
doi:10.1007/s00267-014-0415-7.
Gebru, B., P. Kibaya, T. Ramahaleo, K. Kwena, and P. Mapfumo, 2015: Improving
access to climate-related information for adaptation. International
Development Research Centre (IDRC), Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4 pp.
Geden, O., V. Scott, and J. Palmer, 2018: Integrating carbon dioxide removal into EU
climate policy: Prospects for a paradigm shift. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 9(4), e521, doi:10.1002/wcc.521.
Geels, F.W., 2014: Regime Resistance against Low-Carbon Transitions: Introducing
Politics and Power into the Multi-Level Perspective. Theory, Culture & Society,
31(5), 21-40, doi:10.1177/0263276414531627.
Geels, F.W. and J. Schot, 2007: Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways.
Research Policy, 36(3), 399-417, doi:10.1016/j.respol.2007.01.003.
Geels, F.W., F. Berkhout, and D.P. van Vuuren, 2016a: Bridging analytical approaches
for low-carbon transitions. Nature Climate Change, 6(6), 576-583,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2980.
Geels, F.W., B.K. Sovacool, T. Schwanen, and S. Sorrell, 2017: Sociotechnical
transitions for deep decarbonization. Science, 357(6357), 1242-1244,
doi:10.1126/science.aao3760.
Geels, F.W. et al., 2016b: The enactment of socio-technical transition pathways: A
reformulated typology and a comparative multi-level analysis of the German
and UK low-carbon electricity transitions (1990-2014). Research Policy, 45(4),
896-913, doi:10.1016/j.respol.2016.01.015.
Gemenne, F. and J. Blocher, 2017: How can migration serve adaptation to climate
change? Challenges to fleshing out a policy ideal. Geographical Journal, 183,
336-347, doi:10.1111/geoj.12205.
Georgeson, L., M. Maslin, M. Poessinouw, and S. Howard, 2016: Adaptation
responses to climate change differ between global megacities. Nature Climate
Change, 6(6), 584-588, doi:10.1038/nclimate2944.
Gerbens-Leenes, W., A.Y. Hoekstra, and T.H. van der Meer, 2009: The water footprint
of bioenergy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(25),
10219-10223, doi:10.1073/pnas.0812619106.
Gerber, P.J. et al., 2013: Tackling climate change through livestock - A global
assessment of emissions and mitigation opportunities. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 133 pp.
GeSI, 2015: SMARTEer2030: ICT Solutions for 21st Century Challenges. Global
e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI), Brussels, Belgium, 134 pp.
Gheewala, S.H., G. Berndes, and G. Jewitt, 2011: The bioenergy and water nexus.
Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining, 5(4), 353-360, doi:10.1002/bbb.295.
Ghorbani, N., A. Aghahosseini, and C. Breyer, 2017: Transition towards a 100%
Renewable Energy System and the Role of Storage Technologies: A Case Study
of Iran. Energy Procedia, 135, 23-36, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.484.
Gibbs, D. and K. O'Neill, 2014: Rethinking Sociotechnical Transitions and Green
Entrepreneurship: The Potential for Transformative Change in the Green
Building Sector. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 46(5),
1088-1107, doi:10.1068/a46259.
Gillard, R., 2016: Questioning the Diffusion of Resilience Discourses in Pursuit
of Transformational Change. Global Environmental Politics, 16(1), 13-20,
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00334.
Gillard, R., A. Gouldson, J. Paavola, and J. Van Alstine, 2016: Transformational
responses to climate change: beyond a systems perspective of social change
in mitigation and adaptation. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate
Change, 7(2), 251-265, doi:10.1002/wcc.384.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Gillingham, K. and K. Palmer, 2017: Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap:
Policy Insights from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence. Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 8(1), 18-38, doi:10.1093/reep/ret021.
Gillingham, K., M.J. Kotchen, D.S. Rapson, and G. Wagner, 2013: Energy
policy: The rebound effect is overplayed. Nature, 493(7433), 475-476,
doi:10.1038/493475a.
Gimenez-Gomez, J.-M., J. Teixido-Figueras, and C. Vilella, 2016: The global carbon
budget: a conflicting claims problem. Climatic Change, 136(3-4), 693-703,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1633-1.
Girod, B., T. Stucki, and M. Woerter, 2017: How do policies for efficient energy use
in the household sector induce energy-efficiency innovation? An evaluation of
European countries. Energy Policy, 103, 223-237,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.12.054.
Glaas, E., E.C.H. Keskitalo, and M. Hjerpe, 2017: Insurance sector management of
climate change adaptation in three Nordic countries: the influence of policy
and market factors. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
60(9), 1601-1621, doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1245654.
Glachant, M. and A. Dechezlepretre, 2016: What role for climate negotiations on
technology transfer? Climate Policy, 1-15,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1222257.
Glazebrook, G. and P. Newman, 2018: The City of the Future. Urban Planning, 3(2),
1-20, doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1247.
Global CCS Institute, 2017: The Global Status of CCS 2016 Summary Report. Global
CCS Institute, Canberra, Australia, 28 pp.
Goeppert, A., M. Czaun, G.K. Surya Prakash, and G.A. Olah, 2012: Air as the
renewable carbon source of the future: an overview of CO2 capture from the
atmosphere. Energy & Environmental Science, 5(7), 7833-7853,
doi:10.1039/c2ee21586a.
Goldemberg, J., 2011: The Role of Biomass in the World's Energy System. In: Routes
to Cellulosic Ethanol [Buckeridge, M.S. and G.H. Goldman (eds.)]. Springer,
New York, NY, USA, pp. 3-14,
doi:10.1007/978-0-387-92740-4_1.
Golz, S. and U.J.J. Hahnel, 2016: What motivates people to use energy feedback
systems? A multiple goal approach to predict long-term usage behaviour in
daily life. Energy Research & Social Science, 21, 155-166,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.07.006.
Gonzales, M.H., E. Aronson, and M.A. Costanzo, 1988: Using Social
Cognition and Persuasion to Promote Energy Conservation: A QuasiExperiment. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 18(12), 1049-1066,
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1988.tb01192.x.
Gonzalez, M.F. and T. Ilyina, 2016: Impacts of artificial ocean alkalinization on the
carbon cycle and climate in Earth system simulations. Geophysical Research
Letters, 43(12), 6493-6502, doi:10.1002/2016gl068576.
Goodwin, P. and K. Van Dender, 2013: `Peak Car' - Themes and Issues. Transport
Reviews, 33(3), 243-254, doi:10.1080/01441647.2013.804133.
Gopfert, C., C. Wamsler, and W. Lang, 2018: A framework for the joint
institutionalization of climate change mitigation and adaptation in city
administrations. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
1-21, doi:10.1007/s11027-018-9789-9.
Gorayeb, A., C. Brannstrom, A.J. de Andrade Meireles, and J. de Sousa Mendes,
2018: Wind power gone bad: Critiquing wind power planning processes
in northeastern Brazil. Energy Research & Social Science, 40, 82-88,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.11.027.
Gordon, D.J. and C.A. Johnson, 2017: The orchestration of global urban climate
governance: conducting power in the post-Paris climate regime. Environmental
Politics, 26(4), 694-714, doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1320829.
Gota, S., C. Huizenga, K. Peet, N. Medimorec, and S. Bakker, 2018: Decarbonising
transport to achieve Paris Agreement targets. Energy Efficiency, 1-24,
doi:10.1007/s12053-018-9671-3.
Goulder, L.H., 1995: Effects of Carbon Taxes in an Economy with Prior Tax
Distortions: An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Analysis. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 29(3), 271-297,
doi:10.1006/jeem.1995.1047.
Goulder, L.H., 2013: Climate change policy's interactions with the tax system.
Energy Economics, 40, S3-S11, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2013.09.017.
Goytia, S., M. Pettersson, T. Schellenberger, W.J. van Doorn-Hoekveld, and S. Priest,
2016: Dealing with change and uncertainty within the regulatory frameworks
for flood defense infrastructure in selected European countries. Ecology and
Society, 21(4), 23, doi:10.5751/es-08908-210423.
Grace, J., E. Mitchard, and E. Gloor, 2014: Perturbations in the carbon budget of the
tropics. Global Change Biology, 20(10), 3238-3255, doi:10.1111/gcb.12600.

Chapter 4
Graham, S., J. Barnett, R. Fincher, C. Mortreux, and A. Hurlimann, 2015: Towards
fair local outcomes in adaptation to sea-level rise. Climatic Change, 130(3),
411-424, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1171-7.
Granderson, A.A., 2017: The Role of Traditional Knowledge in Building Adaptive
Capacity for Climate Change: Perspectives from Vanuatu. Weather, Climate,
and Society, 9(3), 545-561, doi:10.1175/wcas-d-16-0094.1.
Grassi, G. et al., 2017: The key role of forests in meeting climate targets requires
science for credible mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 7(3), 220-226,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3227.
Grecequet, M., J. DeWaard, J.J. Hellmann, and G.J. Abel, 2017: Climate Vulnerability
and Human Migration in Global Perspective. Sustainability, 9(5), 720,
doi:10.3390/su9050720.
Green, D. and L. Minchin, 2014: Living on climate-changed country: Indigenous
health, well-being and climate change in remote Australian communities.
EcoHealth, 11(2), 263-272, doi:10.1007/s10393-013-0892-9.
Green, J. and P. Newman, 2017a: Citizen utilities: The emerging power paradigm.
Energy Policy, 105, 283-293, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.02.004.
Green, J. and P. Newman, 2017b: Disruptive innovation, stranded assets and
forecasting: the rise and rise of renewable energy. Journal of Sustainable
Finance & Investment, 7(2), 169-187,
doi:10.1080/20430795.2016.1265410.
Green, K.E., 2016: A political ecology of scaling: Struggles over power, land and
authority. Geoforum, 74, 88-97, doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.05.007.
Green, O.O. et al., 2016: Adaptive governance to promote ecosystem services in
urban green spaces. Urban Ecosystems, 19(1), 77-93,
doi:10.1007/s11252-015-0476-2.
Greenblatt, J.B. and S. Saxena, 2015: Autonomous taxis could greatly reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions of US light-duty vehicles. Nature Climate Change,
5(9), 860-863, doi:10.1038/nclimate2685.
Greene, C.H. et al., 2017: Geoengineering, marine microalgae, and climate
stabilization in the 21st century. Earth's Future, 5(3), 278-284,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000486.
Greene, D.L., 2011: Uncertainty, loss aversion, and markets for energy efficiency.
Energy Economics, 33(4), 608-616,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2010.08.009.
Greening, L.A., D.L. Greene, and C. Difiglio, 2000: Energy efficiency and
consumption - the rebound effect - a survey. Energy Policy, 28(6-7), 389-
401, doi:10.1016/s0301-4215(00)00021-5.
Gregorio, M. et al., 2016: Integrating mitigation and adaptation in climate and
land use policies in Brazil: a policy document analysis. CCEP Working Papers
no. 257, Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy (CCCEP), Leeds,
UK, 54 pp.
Gregory, R., S. Lichtenstein, and P. Slovic, 1993: Valuing environmental resources:
A constructive approach. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 7(2), 177-197,
doi:10.1007/bf01065813.
Grewe, V., E. Tsati, M. Mertens, C. Fromming, and P. Jockel, 2017: Contribution
of emissions to concentrations: the TAGGING 1.0 submodel based on
the Modular Earth Submodel System (MESSy 2.52). Geoscientific Model
Development, 10(7), 2615-2633, doi:10.5194/gmd-10-2615-2017.
Griscom, B.W. et al., 2017: Natural climate solutions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(44), 11645-11650,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1710465114.
Gross, R., W. Blyth, and P. Heptonstall, 2010: Risks, revenues and investment
in electricity generation: Why policy needs to look beyond costs. Energy
Economics, 32(4), 796-804, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2009.09.017.
Grosse, G., S. Goetz, A.D. McGuire, V.E. Romanovsky, and E.A.G. Schuur, 2016:
Changing permafrost in a warming world and feedbacks to the Earth system.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(4), 040201,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/040201.
Grothmann, T. and F. Reusswig, 2006: People at Risk of Flooding: Why Some
Residents Take Precautionary Action While Others Do Not. Natural Hazards,
38(1-2), 101-120, doi:10.1007/s11069-005-8604-6.
Grottera, C., W. Wills, and E.L. La Rovere, 2016: The Transition to a Low Carbon
Economy and Its Effects on Jobs and Welfare - A Long-Term Scenario for
Brazil. In: The Fourth Green Growth Knowledge Platform Annual Conference,
6-7 September 2016, Jeju, Republic of Korea. The Fourth Green Growth
Knowledge Platform Annual Conference, 6-7 September 2016. Jeju, Republic
of Korea, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1-7.
Grove, K.J., 2013: From Emergency Management to Managing Emergence: A
Genealogy of Disaster Management in Jamaica. Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 103(3), 570-588,

413

4

Chapter 4

4

doi:10.1080/00045608.2012.740357.
Grubb, M., 1990: The Greenhouse Effect: Negotiating Targets. International Affairs,
66(1), 67-89, www.jstor.org/stable/2622190.
Grubb, M., J.C. Hourcade, and K. Neuhoff, 2014: Planetary Economics: Energy,
climate change and the three domains of sustainable development. Routledge,
Abingdon, UK, 548 pp.
Grubler, A., 2010: The costs of the French nuclear scale-up: A case of negative
learning by doing. Energy Policy, 38(9), 5174-5188,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.05.003.
Grubler, A. et al., 2012: Policies for the Energy Technology Innovation System (ETIS).
In: Global Energy Assessment - Toward a Sustainable Future. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA and the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 1665-1744.
Grubler, A. et al., 2018: A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5C target
and sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies.
Nature Energy, 3(6), 515-527, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0172-6.
Guerra, A., 2017: La Crisis como Oportunidad, Analisis de la sequia en la costa
sur de Guatemala en 2016 (in Spanish). Red Nacional de Formacion e
Investigacion Ambiental Guatemala C.A., 17, 21-27.
Guivarch, C. and S. Hallegatte, 2011: Existing infrastructure and the 2C target.
Climatic Change, 109(3-4), 801-805, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0268-5.
Gupta, J., 2014: The History of Global Climate Governance. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 262 pp.,
doi:10.1017/cbo9781139629072.
Gupta, S. et al., 2007: Policies, Instruments and Co-operative Arrangements. In:
Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Metz, B., O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, and L.A. Meyer
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 746-807.
Gurara, D. et al., 2017: Trends and Challenges in Infrastructure Investment in
Low-Income Developing Countries. WP/17/233, International Monetary Fund
(IMF), Washington DC, USA, 31 pp.
GWA, 2016: Statistics Digest 2015-16. Government of Western Australia (GWA),
Department of Mines and Petroleum, Perth, Australia, 74 pp.
Gwedla, N. and C.M. Shackleton, 2015: The development visions and attitudes
towards urban forestry of officials responsible for greening in South African
towns. Land Use Policy, 42, 17-26, doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.07.004.
Haas, W., F. Krausmann, D. Wiedenhofer, and M. Heinz, 2015: How Circular is the
Global Economy?: An Assessment of Material Flows, Waste Production, and
Recycling in the European Union and the World in 2005. Journal of Industrial
Ecology, 19(5), 765-777, doi:10.1111/jiec.12244.
Haasnoot, M., J.H. Kwakkel, W.E. Walker, and J. ter Maat, 2013: Dynamic adaptive
policy pathways: A method for crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain
world. Global Environmental Change, 23(2), 485-498,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.12.006.
Hackmann, H., S.C. Moser, and A.L. St. Clair, 2014: The social heart of global
environmental change. Nature Climate Change, 4(8), 653-655,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2320.
Hadarits, M. et al., 2017: The interplay between incremental, transitional, and
transformational adaptation: a case study of Canadian agriculture. Regional
Environmental Change, 17(5), 1515-1525,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1111-y.
Hagen, A., L. Kahler, and K. Eisenack, 2017: Transnational environmental
agreements with heterogeneous actors. In: Economics of International
Environmental Agreements: A Critical Approach [Kayalica, M., S. Caatay, and
H. Mihci (eds.)]. Routledge, London, UK.
Hagen, B., A. Middel, and D. Pijawka, 2016: European Climate Change Perceptions:
Public support for mitigation and adaptation policies. Environmental Policy
and Governance, 26(3), 170-183, doi:10.1002/eet.1701.
Hahnel, U.J.J. et al., 2015: The power of putting a label on it: green labels weigh
heavier than contradicting product information for consumers' purchase
decisions and post-purchase behavior. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1392,
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01392.
Haines, A. et al., 2017: Short-lived climate pollutant mitigation and the Sustainable
Development Goals. Nature Climate Change, 7(12), 863-869,
doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0012-x.
Hallegatte, S. and K.J. Mach, 2016: Make climate-change assessments more
relevant. Nature, 534(7609), 613-615, doi:10.1038/534613a.
Hallegatte, S. and J. Rozenberg, 2017: Climate change through a poverty lens.
Nature Climate Change, 7, 250-256, doi:10.1038/nclimate3253.

414

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Hallegatte, S., J.-C. Hourcade, and P. Dumas, 2007: Why economic dynamics
matter in assessing climate change damages: Illustration on extreme events.
Ecological Economics, 62(2), 330-340, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.06.006.
Hallegatte, S., C. Green, R.J. Nicholls, and J. Corfee-Morlot, 2013: Future flood losses
in major coastal cities. Nature Climate Change, 3(9), 802-806,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1979.
Hallegatte, S., A. Vogt-Schilb, M. Bangalore, and J. Rozenberg, 2017: Unbreakable:
Building the Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters. The World
Bank, Washington DC, USA, 201 pp., doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1003-9.
Hallegatte, S. et al., 2016: Shock waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change
on Poverty. World Bank Group, Washington DC, USA, 227 pp.,
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0673-5.
Halpern, B.S. et al., 2015: Spatial and temporal changes in cumulative human
impacts on the world's ocean. Nature Communications, 6, 7615,
doi:10.1038/ncomms8615.
Hammill, A., R. Matthew, and E. McCarter, 2008: Microfinance and climate change
adaptation. IDS bulletin, 39(4), 113-122.
Handgraaf, M.J.J., M.A. Lidth, D. Jeude, and K.C. Appelt, 2013: Public praise vs.
private pay: Effects of rewards on energy conservation in the workplace.
Ecological Economics, 86, 86-92, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.11.008.
Hangx, S.J.T. and C.J. Spiers, 2009: Coastal spreading of olivine to control
atmospheric CO2 concentrations: A critical analysis of viability. International
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 3(6), 757-767,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2009.07.001.
Haoqi, Q., W. Libo, and T. Weiqi, 2017: "Lock-in" effect of emission standard and
its impact on the choice of market based instruments. Energy Economics, 63,
41-50, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2017.01.005.
Harberger, A.C., 1984: Basic Needs versus Distributional Weights in Social CostBenefit Analysis. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 32(3), 455-
474, doi:10.1086/451400.
Harding, A. and J.B. Moreno-Cruz, 2016: Solar geoengineering economics: From
incredible to inevitable and half-way back. Earth's Future, 4(12), 569-577,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000462.
Hardoy, J. and L.S. Velasquez Barrero, 2014: Re-thinking "Biomanizales":
addressing climate change adaptation in Manizales, Colombia. Environment
and Urbanization, 26(1), 53-68.
Hardoy, J. and L.S. Velasquez Barrero, 2016: Manizales, Colombia. In: Cities on a
finite planet: Towards transformative responses to climate change [Bartlett,
S. and D. Satterthwaite (eds.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 274.
Harjanne, A., 2017: Servitizing climate science-Institutional analysis of climate
services discourse and its implications. Global Environmental Change, 46,
1-16, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.06.008.
Harris, Z.M., R. Spake, and G. Taylor, 2015: Land use change to bioenergy: A metaanalysis of soil carbon and GHG emissions. Biomass and Bioenergy, 82, 27-
39, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2015.05.008.
Harrison, D.P., 2013: A method for estimating the cost to sequester carbon dioxide
by delivering iron to the ocean. International Journal of Global Warming, 5(3),
231-254, doi:10.1504/ijgw.2013.055360.
Harrison, D.P., 2017: Global negative emissions capacity of ocean macronutrient
fertilization. Environmental Research Letters, 12(3),
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5ef5.
Hartley, P.R. and K.B. Medlock, 2013: The Valley of Death for New Energy
Technologies. The Energy Journal, 38(3), 1-61,
www.iaee.org/en/publications/ejarticle.aspx?id=2926.
Hartmann, J. and S. Kempe, 2008: What is the maximum potential for
CO2 sequestration by "stimulated" weathering on the global scale?
Naturwissenschaften, 95(12), 1159-1164, doi:10.1007/s00114-008-0434-4.
Hartmann, J. et al., 2013: Enhanced chemical weathering as a geoengineering
strategy to reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide, supply nutrients, and mitigate
ocean acidification: Enhanced weathering. Reviews of Geophysics, 51(2),
113-149, doi:10.1002/rog.20004.
Harvey, C.A. et al., 2014: Climate-Smart Landscapes: Opportunities and Challenges
for Integrating Adaptation and Mitigation in Tropical Agriculture. Conservation
Letters, 7(2), 77-90, doi:10.1111/conl.12066.
Harvey, L.D.D., 2008: Mitigating the atmospheric CO2 increase and ocean
acidification by adding limestone powder to upwelling regions. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Oceans, 113(C4), C04028, doi:10.1029/2007jc004373.
Hasanbeigi, A., M. Arens, and L. Price, 2014: Alternative emerging ironmaking
technologies for energy-efficiency and carbon dioxide emissions reduction: A
technical review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 33, 645-658,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.02.031.
Haselip, J., U.E. Hansen, D. Puig, S. Traerup, and S. Dhar, 2015: Governance, enabling
frameworks and policies for the transfer and diffusion of low carbon and
climate adaptation technologies in developing countries. Climatic Change,
131(3), 363-370, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1440-0.
Hauck, J., P. Kohler, D. Wolf-Gladrow, and C. Volker, 2016: Iron fertilisation and
century-scale effects of open ocean dissolution of olivine in a simulated
CO2 removal experiment. Environmental Research Letters, 11(2), 024007,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/2/024007.
Havet, A. et al., 2014: Review of livestock farmer adaptations to increase forages
in crop rotations in western France. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment,
190, 120-127, doi:10.1016/j.agee.2014.01.009.
Havlik, P. et al., 2014: Climate change mitigation through livestock system
transitions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(10),
3709-3714, doi:10.1073/pnas.1308044111.
Hayashi, A., F. Sano, Y. Nakagami, and K. Akimoto, 2018: Changes in terrestrial
water stress and contributions of major factors under temperature rise
constraint scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
1-27, doi:10.1007/s11027-018-9780-5.
Heard, B.P., B.W. Brook, T.M.L. Wigley, and C.J.A. Bradshaw, 2017: Burden of proof:
A comprehensive review of the feasibility of 100% renewable-electricity
systems. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 76, 1122-1133,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.03.114.
Heck, V., D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and A. Popp, 2018: Biomass-based negative emissions
difficult to reconcile with planetary boundaries. Nature Climate Change, 8(2),
151-155, doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0064-y.
Heckendorn, P. et al., 2009: The impact of geoengineering aerosols on stratospheric
temperature and ozone. Environmental Research Letters, 4(4), 045108,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/4/045108.
Heede, R., 2014: Tracing anthropogenic carbon dioxide and methane emissions
to fossil fuel and cement producers, 1854-2010. Climatic Change, 122(1),
229-241, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0986-y.
Heidrich, O. et al., 2016: National climate policies across Europe and their impacts
on cities strategies. Journal of Environmental Management, 168, 36-45,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.11.043.
Hekkert, M.P., R.A.A. Suurs, S.O. Negro, S. Kuhlmann, and R.E.H.M. Smits, 2007:
Functions of innovation systems: A new approach for analysing technological
change. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 74(4), 413-432,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2006.03.002.
Henly-Shepard, S., S.A. Gray, and L.J. Cox, 2015: The use of participatory modeling
to promote social learning and facilitate community disaster planning.
Environmental Science & Policy, 45, 109-122,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.10.004.
Henry, R.C. et al., 2018: Food supply and bioenergy production within the global
cropland planetary boundary. PLOS ONE, 13(3), e0194695,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0194695.
Henry, R.K., Z. Yongsheng, and D. Jun, 2006: Municipal solid waste management
challenges in developing countries - Kenyan case study. Waste Management,
26(1), 92-100, doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2005.03.007.
Henstra, D., 2016: The tools of climate adaptation policy: analysing instruments and
instrument selection. Climate Policy, 16(4), 496-521,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1015946.
Hering, J.G., D.A. Dzombak, S.A. Green, R.G. Luthy, and D. Swackhamer, 2014:
Engagement at the Science-Policy Interface. Environmental Science &
Technology, 48(19), 1031-11033,
doi:10.1021/es504225t.
Hermwille, L., 2016: Climate Change as a Transformation Challenge. A New Climate
Policy Paradigm? GAIA - Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society,
25(1), 19-22, doi:10.14512/gaia.25.1.6.
Hermwille, L., W. Obergassel, H.E. Ott, and C. Beuermann, 2017: UNFCCC before
and after Paris - what's necessary for an effective climate regime? Climate
Policy, 17(2), 150-170,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1115231.
Hernandez-Morcillo, M., P. Burgess, J. Mirck, A. Pantera, and T. Plieninger, 2018:
Scanning agroforestry-based solutions for climate change mitigation
and adaptation in Europe. Environmental Science & Policy, 80, 44-52,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.11.013.
Herrero, M. et al., 2015: Livestock and the Environment: What Have We Learned
in the Past Decade? Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 40(1),
177-202, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-031113-093503.
Herwehe, L. and C.A. Scott, 2018: Drought adaptation and development: small-

Chapter 4
scale irrigated agriculture in northeast Brazil. Climate and Development,
10(4), 337-346, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1301862.
Hess, J.S. and I. Kelman, 2017: Tourism Industry Financing of Climate Change
Adaptation: Exploring the Potential in Small Island Developing States. Climate,
Disaster and Development Journal, 2(2), 34-45,
doi:10.18783/cddj.v002.i02.a04.
Hesse, C., 2016: Decentralising climate finance to reach the most vulnerable.
International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London, UK,
4 pp.
Hetz, K., 2016: Contesting adaptation synergies: political realities in reconciling
climate change adaptation with urban development in Johannesburg, South
Africa. Regional Environmental Change, 16(4), 1171-1182,
doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0840-z.
Heutel, G., J. Moreno-Cruz, and S. Shayegh, 2018: Solar geoengineering,
uncertainty, and the price of carbon. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 87, 24-41, doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2017.11.002.
Hewitt, C., S. Mason, and D. Walland, 2012: The Global Framework for Climate
Services. Nature Climate Change, 2(12), 831-832, doi:10.1038/nclimate1745.
Heyen, D., T. Wiertz, and P.J. Irvine, 2015: Regional disparities in SRM impacts:
the challenge of diverging preferences. Climatic Change, 133(4), 557-563,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1526-8.
Hic, C., P. Pradhan, D. Rybski, and J.P. Kropp, 2016: Food Surplus and Its Climate
Burdens. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(8), 4269-4277,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05088.
Hill, J., E. Nelson, D. Tilman, S. Polasky, and D. Tiffany, 2006: Environmental,
economic, and energetic costs and benefits of biodiesel and ethanol biofuels.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(30), 11206-11210,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0604600103.
Hill Clarvis, M. and N.L. Engle, 2015: Adaptive capacity of water governance
arrangements: a comparative study of barriers and opportunities in Swiss and
US states. Regional Environmental Change, 15(3), 517-527,
doi:10.1007/s10113-013-0547-y.
Hirschberg, S. et al., 2016: Health effects of technologies for power generation:
Contributions from normal operation, severe accidents and terrorist threat.
Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 145, 373-387,
doi:10.1016/j.ress.2015.09.013.
Hirth, L. and J.C. Steckel, 2016: The role of capital costs in decarbonizing
the electricity sector. Environmental Research Letters, 11(11), 114010,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/11/114010.
Hiwasaki, L., E. Luna, Syamsidik, and J.A. Marcal, 2015: Local and indigenous
knowledge on climate-related hazards of coastal and small island communities
in Southeast Asia. Climatic Change, 128(1-2), 35-56,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1288-8.
Hof, A.F. et al., 2017: Global and regional abatement costs of Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) and of enhanced action to levels well below 2C and
1.5C. Environmental Science & Policy, 71, 30-40,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.02.008.
Hogarth, J.R., 2017: Evolutionary models of sustainable economic change in Brazil:
No-till agriculture, reduced deforestation and ethanol biofuels. Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions, 24, 130-141,
doi:10.1016/j.eist.2016.08.001.
Hoglund-Isaksson, L., 2012: Global anthropogenic methane emissions 2005-2030:
technical mitigation potentials and costs. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics,
12(19), 9079-9096, doi:10.5194/acp-12-9079-2012.
Hoglund-Isaksson, L. et al., 2017: Cost estimates of the Kigali Amendment to
phase-down hydrofluorocarbons. Environmental Science & Policy, 75, 138-
147, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.05.006.
Hogy, P. et al., 2009: Effects of elevated CO2 on grain yield and quality of wheat:
results from a 3-year free-air CO2 enrichment experiment. Plant Biology,
11(s1), 60-69, doi:10.1111/j.1438-8677.2009.00230.x.
Hohne, N., H. Fekete, M.G.J. den Elzen, A.F. Hof, and T. Kuramochi, 2017: Assessing
the ambition of post-2020 climate targets: a comprehensive framework.
Climate Policy, 1-16, doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1294046.
Holland, B., 2017: Procedural justice in local climate adaptation: political capabilities
and transformational change. Environmental Politics, 26(3), 391-412,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1287625.
Holland, R.A. et al., 2015: A synthesis of the ecosystem services impact of second
generation bioenergy crop production. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 46, 30-40, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.02.003.
Holmes, G. and D.W. Keith, 2012: An air-liquid contactor for large-scale capture of
CO2 from air. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,

415

4

Chapter 4

4

Physical and Engineering Sciences, 370(1974), 4380-403,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2012.0137.
Holmes, G. et al., 2013: Outdoor prototype results for direct atmospheric capture of
carbon dioxide. Energy Procedia, 37, 6079-6095,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2013.06.537.
Holscher, K., N. Frantzeskaki, and D. Loorbach, 2018: Steering transformations
under climate change: capacities for transformative climate governance and
the case of Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Regional Environmental Change,
1-15, doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1329-3.
Holz, C., S. Kartha, and T. Athanasiou, 2018: Fairly sharing 1.5: national fair shares
of a 1.5C-compliant global mitigation effort. International Environmental
Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 117-134,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9371-z.
Honegger, M., K. Sugathapala, and A. Michaelowa, 2013: Tackling climate change:
where can the generic framework be located? Carbon & Climate Law Review,
7(2), 125-135, doi:10.5167/uzh-86551.
Hong, N.B. and M. Yabe, 2017: Improvement in irrigation water use efficiency: a
strategy for climate change adaptation and sustainable development of
Vietnamese tea production. Environment, Development and Sustainability,
19(4), 1247-1263, doi:10.1007/s10668-016-9793-8.
Hook, M., J. Li, N. Oba, and S. Snowden, 2011: Descriptive and Predictive Growth
Curves in Energy System Analysis. Natural Resources Research, 20(2), 103-
116, doi:10.1007/s11053-011-9139-z.
Hornsey, M.J., E.A. Harris, P.G. Bain, and K.S. Fielding, 2016: Meta-analyses of
the determinants and outcomes of belief in climate change. Nature Climate
Change, 6(6), 622-626, doi:10.1038/nclimate2943.
Horton, J.B., 2011: Geoengineering and the Myth of Unilateralism: Pressures and
Prospects for International Cooperation. Stanford Journal of Law, Science &
Policy, IV, 56-69, doi:10.1017/cbo9781139161824.010.
Horton, J.B., D.W. Keith, and M. Honegger, 2016: Implications of the Paris Agreement
for Carbon Dioxide Removal and Solar Geoengineering. Harvard Project on
Climate Agreements, The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, 10 pp.
Horton, J.B. et al., 2018: Solar Geoengineering and Democracy. Global
Environmental Politics, 18(3), 5-24,
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00466.
Houghton, R.A., 2013: The emissions of carbon from deforestation and degradation
in the tropics: past trends and future potential. Carbon Management, 4(5),
539-546, doi:10.4155/cmt.13.41.
Houghton, R.A., B. Byers, and A.A. Nassikas, 2015: A role for tropical forests in
stabilizing atmospheric CO2. Nature Climate Change, 5(12), 1022-1023,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2869.
Hourcade, J.-C., P.-R. Shukla, and C. Cassen, 2015: Climate policy architecture for
the Cancun paradigm shift: building on the lessons from history. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 15(4), 353-367,
doi:10.1007/s10784-015-9301-x.
Hourcade, J.-C. et al., 2001: Global, Regional, and National Costs and Ancillary
Benefits of Mitigation. In: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation. Contribution of
Working Group III to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Metz, B., O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, and
L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 409-559.
House, K.Z., C.H. House, D.P. Schrag, and M.J. Aziz, 2007: Electrochemical
acceleration of chemical weathering as an energetically feasible approach
to mitigating anthropogenic climate change. Environmental Science &
Technology, 41(24), 8464-8470,
doi:10.1021/es0701816.
House, K.Z. et al., 2011: Economic and energetic analysis of capturing CO2 from
ambient air. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(51),
20428-20433, doi:10.1073/pnas.1012253108.
Hovi, J., D.F. Sprinz, H. Saelen, and A. Underdal, 2016: Climate change mitigation: a
role for climate clubs? Palgrave Communications, 2, 16020,
doi:10.1057/palcomms.2016.20.
Howes, M. et al., 2015: Towards networked governance: improving interagency
communication and collaboration for disaster risk management and climate
change adaptation in Australia. Journal of Environmental Planning and
Management, 58(5), 757-776,
doi:10.1080/09640568.2014.891974.
Hoy, M.B., 2016: Smart Buildings: An Introduction to the Library of the Future.
Medical Reference Services Quarterly, 35(3), 326-331,
doi:10.1080/02763869.2016.1189787.

416

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Hristov, A.N. et al., 2015: An inhibitor persistently decreased enteric methane
emission from dairy cows with no negative effect on milk production.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(34), 10663-10668,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1504124112.
HSRTF, 2013: Rebuild by Design Competition. Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force
(HSRTF). Retrieved from: www.hud.gov/sandyrebuilding/rebuildbydesign.
Hsu, A., A.J. Weinfurter, and K. Xu, 2017: Aligning subnational climate actions for
the new post-Paris climate regime. Climatic Change, 142(3-4), 419-432,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1957-5.
Hu, A., Y. Xu, C. Tebaldi, W.M. Washington, and V. Ramanathan, 2013: Mitigation of
short-lived climate pollutants slows sea-level rise. Nature Climate Change, 3,
730-734, doi:10.1038/nclimate1869.
Huang, W., W. Chen, and G. Anandarajah, 2017a: The role of technology diffusion
in a decarbonizing world to limit global warming to well below 2C: An
assessment with application of Global TIMES model. Applied Energy, 208,
291-301, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.10.040.
Huang, W., D. Ma, and W. Chen, 2017b: Connecting water and energy: Assessing
the impacts of carbon and water constraints on China's power sector. Applied
Energy, 185, 1497-1505, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.12.048.
Huang-Lachmann, J.-T. and J.C. Lovett, 2016: How cities prepare for climate change:
Comparing Hamburg and Rotterdam. Cities, 54, 36-44,
doi:10.1016/j.cities.2015.11.001.
Huebner, G.M. and D. Shipworth, 2017: All about size? - The potential of downsizing
in reducing energy demand. Applied Energy, 186, 226-233,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.02.066.
Hufty, M., 2011: Investigating policy processes: The Governance Analytical
Framework (GAF). In: Research for Sustainable Development: Foundations,
Experiences, and Perspectives [Wiesmann, U. and H. Hurni (eds.)]. Perspectives
of the Swiss National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) North-South
Vol. 6, Geographica Bernensia, Bern, Switzerland, pp. 403-424.
Hughes, A.D. et al., 2012: Does seaweed offer a solution for bioenergy with
biological carbon capture and storage? Greenhouse Gases: Science and
Technology, 2(6), 402-407, doi:10.1002/ghg.1319.
IAEA, 2017: Nuclear Technology Review 2017. GC(61)/INF/4, International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Vienna, Austria, 45 pp.
IAEA, 2018: Power Reactor Information System - Country Statistics: France.
Retrieved from:
www.iaea.org/pris/countrystatistics/countrydetails.aspx?current=fr.
Ickowitz, A., E. Sills, and C. de Sassi, 2017: Estimating Smallholder Opportunity
Costs of REDD+: A Pantropical Analysis from Households to Carbon and Back.
World Development, 95, 15-26, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.02.022.
Idem, R. et al., 2015: Practical experience in post-combustion CO2 capture using
reactive solvents in large pilot and demonstration plants. International Journal
of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40, 6-25, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.06.005.
IEA, 2014a: World Energy Investment Outlook Special Report. International Energy
Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 190 pp.
IEA, 2014b: World Energy Outlook 2014. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,
France, 748 pp.
IEA, 2016a: 20 Years of Carbon Capture and Storage - Accelerating Future
Deployment. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 115 pp.
IEA, 2016b: Solid State Lighting Annex. Task 7: Smart Lighting - New Features
Impacting Energy Consumption. First Status Report. Energy Efficient End-Use
Equipment (4E). International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 41 pp.
IEA, 2016c: World Energy Outlook 2016. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,
France, 684 pp.
IEA, 2017a: Digitalization & Energy. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,
France, 188 pp.
IEA, 2017b: Energy Access Outlook 2017. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,
France, 144 pp.
IEA, 2017c: Energy Technology Perspectives 2017: Catalysing Energy Technology
Transformations. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 443 pp.
IEA, 2017d: Getting Wind and Sun onto the Grid A Manual for Policy Makers.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 64 pp.
IEA, 2017e: The Future of Trucks: Implications for energy and the environment.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 161 pp.
IEA, 2017f: Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2017. Energy Technology Perspectives
2017 Excerpt. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 112 pp.
IEA, 2017g: World Energy Outlook 2017. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,
France, 748 pp.
IEA, 2018: Global EV Outlook 2018: Towards cross-modal electrification.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 141 pp.,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
doi:10.1787/9789264302365-en.
Iguma, H. and H. Kidoshi, 2015: Why Toyota can sell Mirai at 7 million Yen? (in
Japanese). Nikkan-Kogyo Press, Tokyo, Japan, 176 pp.
IIF, 2017: Global Debt Monitor. Institute of International Finance (IFI). Retrieved
from:
www.iif.com/publication/global-debt-monitor/global-debt-monitorapril-2018.
Iiyama, M. et al., 2017: Understanding patterns of tree adoption on farms in
semi-arid and sub-humid Ethiopia. Agroforestry Systems, 91(2), 271-293,
doi:10.1007/s10457-016-9926-y.
IMF, 2014: World Economic Outlook October 2014: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties.
International Monetary Fund (IMF), Washington DC, USA, 222 pp.
IMO, 1972: Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes
and Other Matter. International Maritime Organization (IMO), London, UK, 16 pp.
IMO, 1996: 1996 Protocol to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution
by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972. International Maritime
Organization (IMO), London, United Kingdom, 25 pp.
Inamara, A. and V. Thomas, 2017: Pacific climate change adaptation: The use of
participatory media to promote indigenous knowledge. Pacific Journalism
Review, 23(1), 113-132, doi:10.24135/pjr.v23i1.210.
Ingold, K. and M. Fischer, 2014: Drivers of collaboration to mitigate climate change:
An illustration of Swiss climate policy over 15 years. Global Environmental
Change, 24, 88-98, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.11.021.
Ingty, T., 2017: High mountain communities and climate change: adaptation,
traditional ecological knowledge, and institutions. Climatic Change, 145(1-
2), 41-55, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2080-3.
IPCC, 1995: Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate
Change Contribution of Working Group III to the IPCC Second Assessment
Report. [Bruce, J.P., H. Lee, and E.F. Haites (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 339 pp.
IPCC, 2001: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III
to the IPCC Third Assessment Report. [Metz, B., O. Davidson, R. Swart, and J.
Pan (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, 753 pp.
IPCC, 2005a: IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage.
Prepared by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. [Metz, B., O. Davidson, H.C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L.A. Meyer
(eds.)]. 442 pp.
IPCC, 2005b: Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. [Metz, B.,
O. Davidson, H.C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Prepared
by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, 442 pp.
IPCC, 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F.
Stocker, Q. Dahe, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K.
Plattner, S.K. Allen, and Others (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 594 pp.
IPCC, 2014a: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J.
Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1820 pp.
IPCC, 2014b: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution
of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E.
Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier,
B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C.
Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, 1454 pp.
IPCC, 2014c: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri, and L.A.
Meyer (eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva,
Switzerland, 169 pp.
IRENA, 2013: Smart Grids and Renewables: A Guide for Effective Deployment.
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 47 pp.
IRENA, 2015: Renewable energy options for shipping: Technology Brief.
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Bonn, Germany, 58 pp.

Chapter 4
IRENA, 2017a: Electricity storage and renewables: Costs and markets to 2030.
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 131 pp.
IRENA, 2017b: Renewable Energy and Jobs: Annual Review 2017. International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 24 pp.
IRENA, 2018: Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2017. International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 158 pp.
Irvine, P.J., A. Ridgwell, and D.J. Lunt, 2011: Climatic effects of surface albedo
geoengineering. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 116(D24),
D24112, doi:10.1029/2011jd016281.
Irvine, P.J., B. Kravitz, M.G. Lawrence, and H. Muri, 2016: An overview of the Earth
system science of solar geoengineering. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 7(6), 815-833, doi:10.1002/wcc.423.
Isayama, K. and N. Ono, 2015: Steps towards sustainable and resilient disaster
management in Japan: Lessons from Cuba. International Journal of Health
System and Disaster Management, 3(2), 54-60, www.ijhsdm.org/article.
asp?issn=2347-9019;year=2015;volume=3;issue=2;spage=54;epage=60;au
last=isayama;t=6.
International Social Science Council (ISSC) and United Nations Educational, Scientic
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2013: World Social Science Report 2013:
Changing Global Environments. ISSC and UNESCO, Paris, France, 612 pp.
ITF, 2015: Urban Mobility System Upgrade: How shared self-driving cars could change
city traffic. International Transport Forum. OECD Publishing, Paris, France, 34 pp.
Izrael, Y.A., E.M. Volodin, S. Kostrykin, A.P. Revokatova, and A.G. Ryaboshapko,
2014: The ability of stratospheric climate engineering in stabilizing global
mean temperatures and an assessment of possible side effects. Atmospheric
Science Letters, 15(2), 140-148, doi:10.1002/asl2.481.
Jabeen, H., 2014: Adapting the built environment: the role of gender in shaping
vulnerability and resilience to climate extremes in Dhaka. Environment &
Urbanization, 26(1), 147-165, doi:10.1177/0956247813517851.
Jaboyedoff, P., C.A. Roulet, V. Dorer, A. Weber, and A. Pfeiffer, 2004: Energy in
air-handling units - results of the AIRLESS European Project. Energy and
Buildings, 36(4), 391-399, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2004.01.047.
Jackson, L.S., J.A. Crook, and P.M. Forster, 2016: An intensified hydrological cycle
in the simulation of geoengineering by cirrus cloud thinning using ice crystal
fall speed changes. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 121(12),
6822-6840, doi:10.1002/2015jd024304.
Jackson, L.S. et al., 2015: Assessing the controllability of Arctic sea ice extent
by sulfate aerosol geoengineering. Geophysical Research Letters, 42(4),
doi:10.1002/2014gl062240.
Jackson, T. and P. Senker, 2011: Prosperity without growth: Economics for a finite
planet. Energy & Environment, 22(7), 1013-1016,
doi:10.1260/0958-305x.22.7.1013.
Jacobi, J., S. Rist, and M.A. Altieri, 2017: Incentives and disincentives for
diversified agroforestry systems from different actors' perspectives in Bolivia.
International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 15(4), 365-379,
doi:10.1080/14735903.2017.1332140.
Jacobson, M.Z. and J.E. Ten Hoeve, 2012: Effects of urban surfaces and white
roofs on global and regional climate. Journal of Climate, 25(3), 1028-1044,
doi:10.1175/jcli-d-11-00032.1.
Jacobson, M.Z., M.A. Delucchi, M.A. Cameron, B.A. Frew, and S. Polasky, 2015:
Low-cost solution to the grid reliability problem with 100% penetration
of intermittent wind, water, and solar for all purposes. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 15060-15065,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1510028112.
Jacobson, M.Z. et al., 2017: 100% Clean and Renewable Wind, Water, and Sunlight
All-Sector Energy Roadmaps for 139 Countries of the World. Joule, 1(1), 108-
121, doi:10.1016/j.joule.2017.07.005.
Jaeger, C.C., A. Haas, and K. Topfer, 2013: Sustainability, Finance, and a Proposal
from China. Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies, Potsdam, Germany,
31 pp., doi:10.2312/iass.2013.004.
Jagermeyr, J. et al., 2015: Water savings potentials of irrigation systems: global
simulation of processes and linkages. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences,
19(7), 3073-3091, doi:10.5194/hess-19-3073-2015.
Jaglin, S., 2014: Regulating Service Delivery in Southern Cities: Rethinking urban
heterogeneity. In: The Routledge Handbook on Cities of the Global South
[Parnell, S. and S. Oldfield (eds.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK, pp. 434-447,
doi:10.4324/9780203387832.ch37.
Jahandideh-Tehrani, M., O. Bozorg Haddad, and H.A. Loaiciga, 2014: Hydropower
Reservoir Management Under Climate Change: The Karoon Reservoir System.
Water Resources Management, 29(3), 749-770, doi:10.1007/s11269-014-0840-7.
Jaiswal, D. et al., 2017: Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an expandable green

417

4

Chapter 4

4

alternative to crude oil use. Nature Climate Change, 7(11), 788-792,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3410.
Jakob, M. and J. Hilaire, 2015: Climate science: Unburnable fossil-fuel reserves.
Nature, 517(7533), 150-152, doi:10.1038/517150a.
Jakob, M., C. Chen, S. Fuss, A. Marxen, and O. Edenhofer, 2015: Development
incentives for fossil fuel subsidy reform. Nature Climate Change, 5(8), 709-
712, doi:10.1038/nclimate2679.
Jakob, M. et al., 2016: Carbon Pricing Revenues Could Close Infrastructure Access
Gaps. World Development, 84, 254-265, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.03.001.
Jakovcevic, A. and L. Steg, 2013: Sustainable transportation in Argentina: Values,
beliefs, norms and car use reduction. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic
Psychology and Behaviour, 20, 70-79, doi:10.1016/j.trf.2013.05.005.
James, R., R. Washington, C.-F. Schleussner, J. Rogelj, and D. Conway, 2017:
Characterizing half-a-degree difference: a review of methods for identifying
regional climate responses to global warming targets. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 8(2), e457, doi:10.1002/wcc.457.
Janicke, M. and R. Quitzow, 2017: Multi-level Reinforcement in European Climate
and Energy Governance: Mobilizing economic interests at the sub-national
levels. Environmental Policy and Governance, 27(2), 122-136,
doi:10.1002/eet.1748.
Janif, S.Z. et al., 2016: Value of traditional oral narratives in building climate-change
resilience: insights from rural communities in Fiji. Ecology and Society, 21(2),
7, doi:10.5751/es-08100-210207.
Jansson, J., 2011: Consumer eco-innovation adoption: Assessing attitudinal factors
and perceived product characteristics. Business Strategy and the Environment,
20(3), 192-210, doi:10.1002/bse.690.
Jantke, K., J. Muller, N. Trapp, and B. Blanz, 2016: Is climate-smart conservation
feasible in Europe? Spatial relations of protected areas, soil carbon, and land
values. Environmental Science & Policy, 57, 40-49,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.11.013.
Jasanoff, S., 2007: Technologies of humility. Nature, 450(7166), 33-33,
doi:10.1038/450033a.
Jayachandran, S. et al., 2017: Cash for carbon: A randomized trial of payments for
ecosystem services to reduce deforestation. Science, 357(6348), 267-273,
doi:10.1126/science.aan0568.
Jenkins, K., B.K. Sovacool, and D. McCauley, 2018: Humanizing sociotechnical
transitions through energy justice: An ethical framework for global
transformative change. Energy Policy, 117, 66-74,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2018.02.036.
Jenkins, K., S. Surminski, J. Hall, and F. Crick, 2017: Assessing surface water flood
risk and management strategies under future climate change: Insights from
an Agent-Based Model. Science of The Total Environment, 595, 159-168,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.03.242.
Jennings, V., L. Larson, and J. Yun, 2016: Advancing Sustainability through Urban
Green Space: Cultural Ecosystem Services, Equity, and Social Determinants of
Health. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
13(2), 196, doi:10.3390/ijerph13020196.
Jensen, C.B. and J.J. Spoon, 2011: Testing the `Party Matters' Thesis: Explaining
Progress towards Kyoto Protocol Targets. Political Studies, 59(1), 99-115,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9248.2010.00852.x.
Jensen, N. and C. Barrett, 2017: Agricultural index insurance for development.
Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 39(2), 199-219,
doi:10.1093/aepp/ppw022.
Jeong, S. and Y.-Y. An, 2016: Climate change risk assessment method for electrical
facility. In: 2016 International Conference on Information and Communication
Technology Convergence, ICTC 2016, doi:10.1109/ictc.2016.7763464.
Jeuland, M., S.K. Pattanayak, and R. Bluffstone, 2015: The Economics of Household
Air Pollution. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 7(1), 81-108,
doi:10.1146/annurev-resource-100814-125048.
Ji, Z. and F. Sha, 2015: The challenges of the post-COP21 regime: interpreting CBDR
in the INDC context. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law
and Economics, 15, 421-430, doi:10.1007/s10784-015-9303-8.
Jiang, K., K. Tamura, and T. Hanaoka, 2017: Can we go beyond INDCs: Analysis of
a future mitigation possibility in China, Japan, EU and the US. Advances in
Climate Change Research, 8(2), 117-122,
doi:10.1016/j.accre.2017.05.005.
Jiang, Y. et al., 2016: Importance of soil thermal regime in terrestrial ecosystem
carbon dynamics in the circumpolar north. Global and Planetary Change, 142,
28-40, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2016.04.011.
Jiang, Z., T. Xiao, V.L. Kuznetsov, and P.P. Edwards, 2010: Turning carbon dioxide into
fuel. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical

418

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
and Engineering Sciences, 368(1923), 3343-3364,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0119.
Jimenez, R., 2017: Development Effects of Rural Electrification. Policy Brief No IDBPB-261, Infrastructure and Energy Sector - Energy Division, Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB), Washington DC, USA, 20 pp.
Jin, J., W. Wang, and X. Wang, 2016: Farmers' Risk Preferences and Agricultural
Weather Index Insurance Uptake in Rural China. International Journal of
Disaster Risk Science, 7(4), 366-373,
doi:10.1007/s13753-016-0108-3.
Johannessen, S.C. and R.W. Macdonald, 2016: Geoengineering with seagrasses:
is credit due where credit is given? Environmental Research Letters, 11(11),
113001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/11/113001.
Johnson, C. and J. Walker, 2016: Peak car ownership report: The Market Opportunity
of Electric Automated Mobility Services. Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI),
Colorado, USA, 30 pp.
Johnson, N. et al., 2015: The contributions of Community-Based monitoring and
traditional knowledge to Arctic observing networks: Reflections on the state
of the field. Arctic, 68(5), 1-13, doi:10.14430/arctic4447.
Jones, A. and J.M. Haywood, 2012: Sea-spray geoengineering in the HadGEM2ES earth-system model: Radiative impact and climate response. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 12(22), 10887-10898,
doi:10.5194/acp-12-10887-2012.
Jones, A., J. Haywood, and O. Boucher, 2011: A comparison of the climate impacts
of geoengineering by stratospheric SO2 injection and by brightening of
marine stratocumulus cloud. Atmospheric Science Letters, 12(2), 176-183,
doi:10.1002/asl.291.
Jones, A. et al., 2013: The impact of abrupt suspension of solar radiation
management (termination effect) in experiment G2 of the Geoengineering
Model Intercomparison Project (GeoMIP). Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 118(17), 9743-9752,
doi:10.1002/jgrd.50762.
Jones, A.C. et al., 2018: Regional climate impacts of stabilizing global warming at
1.5K using solar geoengineering. Earth's Future, 1-22,
doi:10.1002/2017ef000720.
Jones, A.D., K. Calvin, W.D. Collins, and J. Edmonds, 2015: Accounting for radiative
forcing from albedo change in future global land-use scenarios. Climatic
Change, 131(4), 691-703, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1411-5.
Jones, C.D. et al., 2016: Simulating the Earth system response to negative emissions.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), 095012,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095012.
Jones, I.S.F., 2014: The cost of carbon management using ocean nourishment.
International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management, 6(4),
391-400, doi:10.1108/ijccsm-11-2012-0063.
Jones, L., B. Harvey, and R. Godfrey-Wood, 2016: The changing role of NGOs in
supporting climate services. Building Resilience and Adaptation to Climate
Extremes and Disasters (BRACED), London, UK, 24 pp.
Jordan, A.J. et al., 2015: Emergence of polycentric climate governance and its future
prospects. Nature Climate Change, 5(11), 977-982,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2725.
Joyette, A.R.T., L.A. Nurse, and R.S. Pulwarty, 2015: Disaster risk insurance and
catastrophe models in risk-prone small Caribbean islands. Disasters, 39(3),
467-492, doi:10.1111/disa.12118.
Juhl, H.J., M.H.J. Fenger, and J. Thogersen, 2017: Will the Consistent Organic
Food Consumer Step Forward? An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Consumer
Research, 1-17, doi:10.1093/jcr/ucx052.
Juhola, S., E. Glaas, B.O. Linner, and T.S. Neset, 2016: Redefining maladaptation.
Environmental Science & Policy, 55, 135-140,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.09.014.
Kabir, E., K.-H. Kim, and J. Szulejko, 2017: Social Impacts of Solar Home Systems in
Rural Areas: A Case Study in Bangladesh. Energies, 10(10), 1615,
doi:10.3390/en10101615.
Kahan, D., 2010: Fixing the communications failure. Nature, 463(7279), 296-297,
doi:10.1038/463296a.
Kahneman, D., 2003: A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded
rationality. American Psychologist, 58(9), 697-720,
doi:10.1037/0003-066x.58.9.697.
Kaika, M., 2017: `Don't call me resilient again!' The New Urban Agenda as
immunology ... or ... what happens when communities refuse to be
vaccinated with `smart cities' and indicators. Environment & Urbanization,
29(1), 89-102, doi:10.1177/0956247816684763.
Kale, E., 2015: Problematic Uses and Practices of Farm Ponds in Maharashtra.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Economic and Political Weekly, 52(3), 7-8, www.epw.in/journal/2017/3/
commentary/problematic-uses-and-practices-farm-ponds-maharashtra.html.
Kammann, C. et al., 2017: Biochar as a tool to reduce the agricultural greenhousegas burden - knowns, unknowns and future research needs. Journal of
Environmental Engineering and Landscape Management, 25(2), 114-139,
doi:10.3846/16486897.2017.1319375.
Karcher, B., 2017: Cirrus Clouds and Their Response to Anthropogenic Activities.
Current Climate Change Reports, 3(1), 45-57,
doi:10.1007/s40641-017-0060-3.
Kardooni, R., S.B. Yusoff, and F.B. Kari, 2016: Renewable energy technology
acceptance in Peninsular Malaysia. Energy Policy, 88, 1-10,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2015.10.005.
Karki, J., E. Tsupari, and A. Arasto, 2013: CCS feasibility improvement in industrial
and municipal applications by heat utilization. Energy Procedia, 37, 2611-
2621, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2013.06.145.
Karlin, B., J.F. Zinger, and R. Ford, 2015: The effects of feedback on energy
conservation: A meta-analysis.. Psychological Bulletin, 141(6), 1205-1227,
doi:10.1037/a0039650.
Kashima, Y., A. Paladino, and E.A. Margetts, 2014: Environmentalist identity and
environmental striving. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 38, 64-75,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.12.014.
Kashimura, H. et al., 2017: Shortwave radiative forcing, rapid adjustment,
and feedback to the surface by sulfate geoengineering: Analysis of the
Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project G4 scenario. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 17(5), 3339-3356,
doi:10.5194/acp-17-3339-2017.
Kasser, T. and K.M. Sheldon, 2002: What Makes for a Merry Christmas? Journal of
Happiness Studies, 3(4), 313-329, doi:10.1023/a:1021516410457.
Kasser, T., S. Cohn, A.D. Kanner, and R.M. Ryan, 2007: Some Costs of American
Corporate Capitalism: A Psychological Exploration of Value and Goal Conflicts.
Psychological Inquiry, 18(1), 1-22,
doi:10.1080/10478400701386579.
Kastner, I. and P.C. Stern, 2015: Examining the decision-making processes behind
household energy investments: A review. Energy Research & Social Science,
10, 72-89, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.07.008.
Kates, R.W., W.R. Travis, and T.J. Wilbanks, 2012: Transformational adaptation when
incremental adaptations to climate change are insufficient. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 109(19), 7156-61,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1115521109.
Kato, T. and J. Ellis, 2016: Communicating Progress in National and Global Adaptation
to Climate Change. OECD/IEA Climate Change Expert Group Papers No. 47,
OECD Publishing, Paris, France, 47 pp., doi:10.1787/5jlww009v1hj-en.
Kauffman, S.A., 2002: Investigations. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 308 pp.
KCCA, 2016: Kampala Climate Change Action Plan. Kampala Capital City Authority,
Kampala, Uganda, 50 pp.
Keen, M., I. Parry, and J. Strand, 2013: Planes, ships and taxes: charging for
international aviation and maritime emissions. Economic Policy, 28(76),
701-749, doi:10.1111/1468-0327.12019.
Keim, M.E., 2008: Adaptation to Climate Change. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 35(5), 508-516, doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.022.
Keith, D.W. and P.J. Irvine, 2016: Solar geoengineering could substantially reduce
climate risks - a research hypothesis for the next decade. Earth's Future,
4(11), 549-559, doi:10.1002/2016ef000465.
Keith, D.W., M. Ha-Duong, and J.K. Stolaroff, 2006: Climate Strategy with CO2
Capture from the Air. Climatic Change, 74(1-3), 17-45,
doi:10.1007/s10584-005-9026-x.
Keith, D.W., G. Wagner, and C.L. Zabel, 2017: Solar geoengineering reduces
atmospheric carbon burden. Nature Climate Change, 7(9), 617-619,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3376.
Keller, D.P., E.Y. Feng, and A. Oschlies, 2014: Potential climate engineering
effectiveness and side effects during a high carbon dioxide-emission scenario.
Nature Communications, 5, 3304, doi:10.1038/ncomms4304.
Keller, D.P. et al., 2018: The Carbon Dioxide Removal Model Intercomparison Project
(CDRMIP): rationale and experimental protocol for CMIP6. Geoscientific
Model Development, 11(3), 1133-1160, doi:10.5194/gmd-11-1133-2018.
Kelleway, J.J. et al., 2017: Review of the ecosystem service implications of mangrove
encroachment into salt marshes. Global Change Biology, 23(10), 3967-3983,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13727.
Kelman, I., 2015: Difficult decisions: Migration from Small Island Developing
States under climate change. Earth's Future, 3(4), 133-142,
doi:10.1002/2014ef000278.

Chapter 4
Kelman, I., 2017: Linking disaster risk reduction, climate change, and the sustainable
development goals. Disaster Prevention and Management: An International
Journal, 26(3), 254-258, doi:10.1108/dpm-02-2017-0043.
Kelman, I., J.C. Gaillard, and J. Mercer, 2015: Climate Change's Role in Disaster Risk
Reduction's Future: Beyond Vulnerability and Resilience. International Journal
of Disaster Risk Science, 6(1), 21-27, doi:10.1007/s13753-015-0038-5.
Kemper, J., 2015: Biomass and carbon dioxide capture and storage: A review.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40, 401-430,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.06.012.
Kennedy, C., I.D. Stewart, M.I. Westphal, A. Facchini, and R. Mele, 2018: Keeping
global climate change within 1.5C through net negative electric cities.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 30, 18-25,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.02.009.
Kennedy, C.A. et al., 2015: Energy and material flows of megacities. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 112(19), 5985-5990,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1504315112.
Keohane, N., A. Petsonk, and A. Hanafi, 2017: Toward a club of carbon markets.
Climatic Change, 144(1), 81-95, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1506-z.
Keohane, R.O. and D.G. Victor, 2011: The Regime Complex for Climate Change.
Perspectives on Politics, 9(1), 7-23,
doi:10.1017/s1537592710004068.
Kern, F. and K.S. Rogge, 2016: The pace of governed energy transitions: Agency,
international dynamics and the global Paris agreement accelerating
decarbonisation processes? Energy Research & Social Science, 22, 13-17,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.08.016.
Kern, F., J. Gaede, J. Meadowcroft, and J. Watson, 2016: The political economy
of carbon capture and storage: An analysis of two demonstration projects.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 102, 250-260,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2015.09.010.
Kern, K. and G. Alber, 2009: Governing Climate Change in Cities: Modes of Urban
Climate Governance in Multi-level Systems. In: The international conference
on Competitive Cities and Climate Change, Milan, Italy. Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris, France, pp. 171-196.
Kerstholt, J., H. Duijnhoven, and D. Paton, 2017: Flooding in The Netherlands: How
people's interpretation of personal, social and institutional resources influence
flooding preparedness. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 24,
52-57, doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.05.013.
Keskitalo, E.C.H., H. Dannevig, G.K. Hovelsrud, J.J. West, and G. Swartling, 2011:
Adaptive capacity determinants in developed states: Examples from the
Nordic countries and Russia. Regional Environmental Change, 11(3), 579-
592, doi:10.1007/s10113-010-0182-9.
Kettle, N.P. et al., 2014: Integrating scientific and local knowledge to inform
risk-based management approaches for climate adaptation. Climate Risk
Management, 4, 17-31, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2014.07.001.
Khan, M.R., 2013: Toward a binding climate change adaptation regime: a proposed
framework. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 280 pp.
Kholod, N. and M. Evans, 2016: Reducing black carbon emissions from diesel
vehicles in Russia: An assessment and policy recommendations. Environmental
Science & Policy, 56, 1-8, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.10.017.
Kilpelainen, A. et al., 2017: Effects of Initial Age Structure of Managed Norway
Spruce Forest Area on Net Climate Impact of Using Forest Biomass for Energy.
BioEnergy Research, 10(2), 499-508, doi:10.1007/s12155-017-9821-z.
Kim, S. and W. Shin, 2017: Understanding American and Korean Students' Support
for Pro-environmental Tax Policy: The Application of the Value-Belief-Norm
Theory of Environmentalism. Environmental Communication, 11, 311-331,
doi:10.1080/17524032.2015.1088458.
Kimball, S. et al., 2015: Cost-effective ecological restoration. Restoration Ecology,
23(6), 800-810, doi:10.1111/rec.12261.
Kimura, S., 2016: When a Seawall Is Visible: Infrastructure and Obstruction in Posttsunami Reconstruction in Japan. Science as Culture, 25(1), 23-43,
doi:10.1080/09505431.2015.1081501.
King, S.D., 2011: Losing control: the emerging threats to Western prosperity. Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT, USA and London, UK, 304 pp.
Kinley, R., 2017: Climate change after Paris: from turning point to transformation.
Climate Policy, 17(1), 9-15, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1191009.
Kirk, E.J., 2017: Alternatives-Dealing with the perfect storm: Cuban disaster
management. Studies in Political Economy, 98(1), 93-103,
doi:10.1080/07078552.2017.1297047.
Kita, S.M., 2017: "Government Doesn't Have the Muscle": State, NGOs, Local
Politics, and Disaster Risk Governance in Malawi. Risk, Hazards & Crisis in
Public Policy, 8(3), 244-267, doi:10.1002/rhc3.12118.

419

4

Chapter 4

4

Kiunsi, R., 2013: The constraints on climate change adaptation in a city with a
large development deficit: the case of Dar es Salaam. Environment and
Urbanization, 25(2), 321-337, doi:10.1177/0956247813489617.
Kivimaa, P. and F. Kern, 2016: Creative destruction or mere niche support?
Innovation policy mixes for sustainability transitions. Research Policy, 45(1),
205-217, doi:10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.
Klepper, G. and W. Rickels, 2014: Climate Engineering: Economic Considerations
and Research Challenges. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
8(2), 270-289, doi:10.1093/reep/reu010.
Klimont, Z. et al., 2017: Global anthropogenic emissions of particulate matter
including black carbon. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 17(14), 8681-
8723, doi:10.5194/acp-17-8681-2017.
Kline, K.L. et al., 2017: Reconciling food security and bioenergy: priorities for action.
GCB Bioenergy, 9(3), 557-576, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12366.
Kloeckner, C.A., E. Matthies, and M. Hunecke, 2003: Operationalizing Habits and
Integrating Habits in Normative Decision-Making Models. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 33(2), 396-417.
Klotz, L., 2011: Cognitive biases in energy decisions during the planning, design,
and construction of commercial buildings in the United States: An analytical
framework and research needs. Energy Efficiency, 4(2), 271-284,
doi:10.1007/s12053-010-9089-z.
Knight, P.J., T. Prime, J.M. Brown, K. Morrissey, and A.J. Plater, 2015: Application
of flood risk modelling in a web-based geospatial decision support tool for
coastal adaptation to climate change. Natural Hazards and Earth System
Sciences, 15(7), 1457-1471, doi:10.5194/nhess-15-1457-2015.
Knoop, K. and S. Lechtenbohmer, 2017: The potential for energy efficiency in the EU
Member States - A comparison of studies. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 68, 1097-1105, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.05.090.
Knowlton, K. et al., 2014: Development and Implementation of South Asia's
First Heat-Health Action Plan in Ahmedabad (Gujarat, India). International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(4), 3473-3492,
doi:10.3390/ijerph110403473.
Koch, N., S. Fuss, G. Grosjean, and O. Edenhofer, 2014: Causes of the EU ETS price
drop: Recession, CDM, renewable policies or a bit of everything? - New
evidence. Energy Policy, 73, 676-685, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.06.024.
Koch, N., G. Grosjean, S. Fuss, and O. Edenhofer, 2016: Politics matters: Regulatory
events as catalysts for price formation under cap-and-trade. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 78, 121-139,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2016.03.004.
Koerth, J., A.T. Vafeidis, and J. Hinkel, 2017: Household-Level Coastal Adaptation
and Its Drivers: A Systematic Case Study Review. Risk Analysis, 37(4), 629-
646, doi:10.1111/risa.12663.
Koezjakov, A., D. Urge-Vorsatz, W. Crijns-Graus, and M. van den Broek, 2018:
The relationship between operational energy demand and embodied
energy in Dutch residential buildings. Energy and Buildings, 165, 233-245,
doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.01.036.
Kohler, P., J. Hartmann, and D.A. Wolf-Gladrow, 2010: Geoengineering potential
of artificially enhanced silicate weathering of olivine. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107(47), 20228-20233,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1000545107.
Kohler, P., J.F. Abrams, C. Volker, J. Hauck, and D.A. Wolf-Gladrow, 2013:
Geoengineering impact of open ocean dissolution of olivine on atmospheric
CO2, surface ocean pH and marine biology. Environmental Research Letters,
8(1), 014009, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/014009.
Kolstad, C. et al., 2014: Social, Economic and Ethical Concepts and Methods. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 207-282.
Komarnicki, P., 2016: Energy storage systems: power grid and energy market use cases.
Archives of Electrical Engineering, 65, 495-511, doi:10.1515/aee-2016-0036.
Kona, A., P. Bertoldi, F. Monforti-Ferrario, S. Rivas, and J.F. Dallemand, 2018:
Covenant of mayors signatories leading the way towards 1.5 degree global
warming pathway. Sustainable Cities and Society, 41, 568-575,
doi:10.1016/j.scs.2018.05.017.
Kooiman, J., 2003: Governing as governance. Sage, London, UK, 264 pp.,
doi:10.4135/9781446215012.
Koomey, J.G., H.S. Matthews, and E. Williams, 2013: Smart Everything: Will

420

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Intelligent Systems Reduce Resource Use? Annual Review of Environment and
Resources, 38(1), 311-343, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-021512-110549.
Koomey, J.G., N.E. Hultman, and A. Grubler, 2017: A reply to "Historical construction
costs of global nuclear power reactors". Energy Policy, 102, 640-643,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.03.052.
Koornneef, J., A. Ramirez, W. Turkenburg, and A. Faaij, 2012: The environmental
impact and risk assessment of CO2 capture, transport and storage - An
evaluation of the knowledge base. Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science, 38(1), 62-86, doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2011.05.002.
Kossoy, A. et al., 2015: State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2015 (September). The
World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 92 pp., doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0725-1.
Kosugi, T., 2013: Fail-safe solar radiation management geoengineering. Mitigation
and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 18(8), 1141-1166,
doi:10.1007/s11027-012-9414-2.
Kothari, U., 2014: Political discourses of climate change and migration: resettlement
policies in the Maldives. The Geographical Journal, 180(2), 130-140,
doi:10.1111/geoj.12032.
Kotilainen, K. and U.A. Saari, 2018: Policy Influence on Consumers' Evolution
into Prosumers - Empirical Findings from an Exploratory Survey in Europe.
Sustainability, 2018(10), 186, doi:10.3390/su10010186.
Kraucunas, I. et al., 2015: Investigating the nexus of climate, energy, water, and land
at decision-relevant scales: the Platform for Regional Integrated Modeling
and Analysis (PRIMA). Climatic Change, 129(3-4), 573-588,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1064-9.
Kravitz, B. et al., 2011: The Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project
(GeoMIP). Atmospheric Science Letters, 12(2), 162-167, doi:10.1002/asl.316.
Kravitz, B. et al., 2013: Sea spray geoengineering experiments in the geoengineering
model intercomparison project (GeoMIP): Experimental design and
preliminary results. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 118(19),
11175-11186, doi:10.1002/jgrd.50856.
Kraxner, F. et al., 2014: BECCS in South Korea - Analyzing the negative emissions
potential of bioenergy as a mitigation tool. Renewable Energy, 61, 102-108,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2012.09.064.
Kreidenweis, U. et al., 2016: Afforestation to mitigate climate change: impacts on
food prices under consideration of albedo effects. Environmental Research
Letters, 11(8), 085001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/085001.
Kreuz, S. and F. Musgens, 2017: The German Energiewende and its roll-out of
renewable energies: An economic perspective. Frontiers in Energy, 11(2),
126-134, doi:10.1007/s11708-017-0467-5.
Kriegler, E., O. Edenhofer, L. Reuster, G. Luderer, and D. Klein, 2013: Is atmospheric
carbon dioxide removal a game changer for climate change mitigation?
Climatic Change, 118(1), 45-57, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0681-4.
Kristjansson, J.E., H. Muri, and H. Schmidt, 2015: The hydrological cycle response
to cirrus cloud thinning. Geophysical Research Letters, 42(24), 10807-10815,
doi:10.1002/2015gl066795.
Krugman, P., 2009: The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008.
W.W. Norton & Company Inc, New York, NY, USA, 207 pp.
Kryvasheyeu, Y. et al., 2016: Rapid assessment of disaster damage using social
media activity. Science Advances, 2(3), e1500779-e1500779,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1500779.
Kull, D. et al., 2016: Building Resilience: World Bank Group Experience in Climate
and Disaster Resilient Development. In: Climate Change Adaptation
Strategies - An Upstream-downstream Perspective [Salzmann, N., C. Huggel,
S.U. Nussbaumer, and G. Ziervogel (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, Switzerland, pp. 255-270, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-40773-9_14.
Kumari Rigaud, K. et al., 2018: Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate
Migration. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 222 pp.
Kuramochi, T. et al., 2018: Ten key short-term sectoral benchmarks to limit warming
to 1.5C. Climate Policy, 18(3), 287-305,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1397495.
Kurdgelashvili, L., J. Li, C.-H. Shih, and B. Attia, 2016: Estimating technical potential
for rooftop photovoltaics in California, Arizona and New Jersey. Renewable
Energy, 95, 286-302, doi:10.1016/j.renene.2016.03.105.
Kuruppu, N. and D. Liverman, 2011: Mental preparation for climate adaptation:
The role of cognition and culture in enhancing adaptive capacity of water
management in Kiribati. Global Environmental Change, 21(2), 657-669,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.12.002.
Kuruppu, N. and R. Willie, 2015: Barriers to reducing climate enhanced disaster risks
in Least Developed Country-Small Islands through anticipatory adaptation.
Weather and Climate Extremes, 7, 72-83, doi:10.1016/j.wace.2014.06.001.
Kverndokk, S. and K.E. Rosendahl, 2007: Climate policies and learning by doing:

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Impacts and timing of technology subsidies. Resource and Energy Economics,
29(1), 58-82, doi:10.1016/j.reseneeco.2006.02.007.
La Rovere, E.L., C. Gesteira, C. Grottera, and W. William, 2017a: Pathways to a low
carbon economy in Brazil. In: Brazil in the Anthropocene: Conflicts between
predatory development and environmental policies [Issberner, L.-R. and P.
Lena (eds.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 243-266.
La Rovere, E.L., J.-C. Hourcade, S. Priyadarshi, E. Espagne, and B. Perrissin-Fabert,
2017b: Social Value of Mitigation Activities and forms of Carbon Pricing.
CIRED Working Paper No. 2017-60, CIRED, Paris, France, 8 pp.
Labanca, N. (ed.), 2017: Complex Systems and Social Practices in Energy Transitions:
Framing Energy Sustainability in the Time of Renewables. Springer Nature,
Cham, Switzerland, 337 pp.,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-33753-1.
Labbe, J., J.D. Ford, M. Araos, and M. Flynn, 2017: The government-led climate
change adaptation landscape in Nunavut, Canada. Environmental Reviews,
25(1), 12-25, doi:10.1139/er-2016-0032.
Lacasse, K., 2015: The Importance of Being Green. Environment and Behavior,
47(7), 754-781, doi:10.1177/0013916513520491.
Lacasse, K., 2016: Don't be satisfied, identify! Strengthening positive spillover
by connecting pro-environmental behaviors to an "environmentalist" label.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 48, 149-158,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2016.09.006.
Lachapelle, E., R. MacNeil, and M. Paterson, 2017: The political economy of
decarbonisation: from green energy `race' to green `division of labour'. New
Political Economy, 22(3), 311-327, doi:10.1080/13563467.2017.1240669.
Lackner, K.S. et al., 2012: The urgency of the development of CO2 capture from
ambient air. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(33),
13156-13162, doi:10.1073/pnas.1108765109.
Laderach, P. et al., 2017: Climate change adaptation of coffee production in space
and time. Climatic Change, 141(1), 47-62,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1788-9.
Lahn, B., 2018: In the light of equity and science: scientific expertise and climate
justice after Paris. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics, 18(1), 29-43, doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9375-8.
Lahn, B. and G. Sundqvist, 2017: Science as a "fixed point"? Quantification and
boundary objects in international climate politics. Environmental Science &
Policy, 67, 8-15, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.11.001.
Lam, N.S.-N., Y. Qiang, H. Arenas, P. Brito, and K.-B. Liu, 2015: Mapping and
assessing coastal resilience in the Caribbean region. Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, 42(4), 315-322,
doi:10.1080/15230406.2015.1040999.
Lamb, W.F. et al., 2014: Transitions in pathways of human development and carbon
emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 9(1), 014011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/1/014011.
Lamond, J.E., C.B. Rose, and C.A. Booth, 2015: Evidence for improved urban flood
resilience by sustainable drainage retrofit. Proceedings of the Institution of
Civil Engineers - Urban Design and Planning, 168(2), 101-111,
doi:10.1680/udap.13.00022.
Lampert, D.J., H. Cai, and A. Elgowainy, 2016: Wells to wheels: water consumption
for transportation fuels in the United States. Energy & Environmental Science,
9(3), 787-802, doi:10.1039/c5ee03254g.
Lampin, L.B.A., F. Nadaud, F. Grazi, and J.-C. Hourcade, 2013: Long-term fuel
demand: Not only a matter of fuel price. Energy Policy, 62, 780-787,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.021.
Larsen, J.N. et al., 2014: Polar Regions. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, and K.J. Mach
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 1567-1612.
Larsen, K. and U. Gunnarsson-Ostling, 2009: Climate change scenarios and
citizen-participation: Mitigation and adaptation perspectives in constructing
sustainable futures. Habitat International, 33(3), 260-266,
doi:10.1016/j.habitatint.2008.10.007.
Larson, W. and W. Zhao, 2017: Telework: Urban Form, Energy Consumption,
and Greenhouse Gas Implications. Economic Inquiry, 55(2), 714-735,
doi:10.1111/ecin.12399.
Larsson, L., E.C.H. Keskitalo, and J. Akermark, 2016: Climate Change Adaptation
and Vulnerability Planning within the Municipal and Regional System:
Examples from Northern Sweden. Journal of Northern Studies, 10(1), 67-90.
Lasco, R.D., R.J.P. Delfino, and M.L.O. Espaldon, 2014: Agroforestry systems: helping

Chapter 4
smallholders adapt to climate risks while mitigating climate change. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(6), 825-833,
doi:10.1002/wcc.301.
Lashley, J.G. and K. Warner, 2015: Evidence of demand for microinsurance for
coping and adaptation to weather extremes in the Caribbean. Climatic
Change, 133(1), 101-112, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0922-1.
Latham, J., B. Parkes, A. Gadian, and S. Salter, 2012: Weakening of hurricanes via
marine cloud brightening (MCB). Atmospheric Science Letters, 13(4), 231-
237, doi:10.1002/asl.402.
Latham, J., J. Kleypas, R. Hauser, B. Parkes, and A. Gadian, 2013: Can marine cloud
brightening reduce coral bleaching? Atmospheric Science Letters, 14(4),
214-219, doi:10.1002/asl2.442.
Laurance, W.F. and G.B. Williamson, 2001: Positive Feedbacks among Forest
Fragmentation, Drought, and Climate Change in the Amazon. Conservation
Biology, 15(6), 1529-1535, doi:10.1046/j.1523-1739.2001.01093.x.
Lauren, N., K.S. Fielding, L. Smith, and W.R. Louis, 2016: You did, so you can and you
will: Self-efficacy as a mediator of spillover from easy to more difficult proenvironmental behaviour. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 48, 191-199,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2016.10.004.
Laurice Jamero, M. et al., 2017: Small-island communities in the Philippines prefer
local measures to relocation in response to sea-level rise. Nature Climate
Change, 7, 581-586, doi:10.1038/nclimate3344.
Lauvset, S.K., J. Tjiputra, and H. Muri, 2017: Climate engineering and the ocean:
effects on biogeochemistry and primary production. Biogeosciences, 14(24),
5675-5691, doi:10.5194/bg-14-5675-2017.
Lawrence, M.G. and P.J. Crutzen, 2017: Was breaking the taboo on research on
climate engineering via albedo modification a moral hazard, or a moral
imperative? Earth's Future, 5(2), 136-143, doi:10.1002/2016ef000463.
Lazurko, A. and H.D. Venema, 2017: Financing High Performance Climate
Adaptation in Agriculture: Climate Bonds for Multi-Functional Water
Harvesting Infrastructure on the Canadian Prairies. Sustainability, 9(7), 1237,
doi:10.3390/su9071237.
Le Dang, H., E. Li, J. Bruwer, and I. Nuberg, 2014: Farmers' perceptions of climate
variability and barriers to adaptation: lessons learned from an exploratory
study in Vietnam. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
19(5), 531-548, doi:10.1007/s11027-012-9447-6.
Le Page, Y. et al., 2013: Sensitivity of climate mitigation strategies to
natural disturbances. Environmental Research Letters, 8(1), 015018,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/015018.
Leal Filho, W. et al., 2018: Implementing climate change research at universities:
Barriers, potential and actions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 170(1), 269-
277, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.105.
Leape, J., 2006: The London Congestion Charge. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
20(4), 157-176, doi:10.1257/jep.20.4.157.
Leck, H. and D. Roberts, 2015: What lies beneath: understanding the invisible
aspects of municipal climate change governance. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 13, 61-67, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.02.004.
Leck, H., D. Conway, M. Bradshaw, and J. Rees, 2015: Tracing the Water-Energy-
Food Nexus: Description, Theory and Practice. Geography Compass, 9(8),
445-460, doi:10.1111/gec3.12222.
Lecuyer, O. and P. Quirion, 2013: Can uncertainty justify overlapping policy
instruments to mitigate emissions? Ecological Economics, 93, 177-191,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2013.05.009.
Lee, T. and M. Painter, 2015: Comprehensive local climate policy: The role of urban
governance. Urban Climate, 14, 566-577,
doi:10.1016/j.uclim.2015.09.003.
Leeson, D., N. Mac Dowell, N. Shah, C. Petit, and P.S. Fennell, 2017: A Technoeconomic analysis and systematic review of carbon capture and storage
(CCS) applied to the iron and steel, cement, oil refining and pulp and paper
industries, as well as other high purity sources. International Journal of
Greenhouse Gas Control, 61, 71-84, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2017.03.020.
Lefevre, C.E. et al., 2015: Heat protection behaviors and positive affect about heat
during the 2013 heat wave in the United Kingdom. Social Science & Medicine,
128, 282-289, doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.01.029.
Lefevre, J., W. Wills, and J.-C. Hourcade, 2018: Combining low-carbon economic
development and oil exploration in Brazil? An energy-economy assessment.
Climate Policy, 1-10, doi:10.1080/14693062.2018.1431198.
Leijten, F.R.M. et al., 2014: Factors that influence consumers' acceptance of future
energy systems: the effects of adjustment type, production level, and price.
Energy Efficiency, 7(6), 973-985e, doi:10.1007/s12053-014-9271-9.
Lemos, M.C., 2015: Usable climate knowledge for adaptive and co-managed water

421

4

Chapter 4

4

governance. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 12, 48-52,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2014.09.005.
Lemos, M.C., Y.J. Lo, D.R. Nelson, H. Eakin, and A.M. Bedran-Martins, 2016: Linking
development to climate adaptation: Leveraging generic and specific capacities
to reduce vulnerability to drought in NE Brazil. Global Environmental Change,
39, 170-179, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.001.
Lempert, R.J. and D. Prosnitz, 2011: Governing geoengineering research: a political
and technical vulnerability analysis of potential near-term options. RAND
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, USA, 93 pp.
Lenferna, G.A., R.D. Russotto, A. Tan, S.M. Gardiner, and T.P. Ackerman, 2017:
Relevant climate response tests for stratospheric aerosol injection: A
combined ethical and scientific analysis. Earth's Future, 577-591,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000504.
Lenton, T.M., 2010: The potential for land-based biological CO2 removal to lower
future atmospheric CO2 concentration. Carbon Management, 1(1), 145-160,
doi:10.4155/cmt.10.12.
Lenton, T.M., 2014: The Global Potential for Carbon Dioxide Removal. In:
Geoengineering of the Climate System [Harrison, R.M. and R.E. Hester
(eds.)]. The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC), Cambridge, UK, pp. 52-79,
doi:10.1039/9781782621225-00052.
Lesnikowski, A.C., J.D. Ford, L. Berrang-Ford, M. Barrera, and J. Heymann, 2015:
How are we adapting to climate change? A global assessment. Mitigation and
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 20(2), 277-293,
doi:10.1007/s11027-013-9491-x.
Lesnikowski, A.C., J.D. Ford, R. Biesbroek, L. Berrang-Ford, and S.J. Heymann, 2016:
National-level progress on adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 6, 261-266,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2863.
Lesnikowski, A.C. et al., 2017: What does the Paris Agreement mean for adaptation?
Climate Policy, 17(7), 825-831,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1248889.
Levy, D.L. and D. Egan, 2003: A Neo-Gramscian Approach to Corporate Political
Strategy: Conflict and Accommodation in the Climate Change Negotiations.
Journal of Management Studies, 40(4), 803-829,
doi:10.1111/1467-6486.00361.
Lewandowski, M., 2016: Designing the Business Models for Circular
Economy - Towards the Conceptual Framework. Sustainability, 8(1), 43,
doi:10.3390/su8010043.
Li, F. et al., 2017: Urban ecological infrastructure: an integrated network for
ecosystem services and sustainable urban systems. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 163(S1), S12-S18, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.079.
Li, H., J. He, Z.P. Bharucha, R. Lal, and J. Pretty, 2016: Improving China's food and
environmental security with conservation agriculture. International Journal of
Agricultural Sustainability, 14(4), 377-391,
doi:10.1080/14735903.2016.1170330.
Li, J. and X. Wang, 2012: Energy and climate policy in China's twelfth five-year plan:
A paradigm shift. Energy Policy, 41, 519-528,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.11.012.
Li, L. and B.P.Y. Loo, 2017: Railway Development and Air Patronage in China, 19932012: Implications for Low-Carbon Transport. Journal of Regional Science,
57(3), 507-522, doi:10.1111/jors.12276.
Li, N., D. Ma, and W. Chen, 2017: Quantifying the impacts of decarbonisation in
China's cement sector: A perspective from an integrated assessment approach.
Applied Energy, 185, 1840-1848, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.12.112.
Lilford, R.J. et al., 2017: Improving the health and welfare of people who live in
slums. Lancet, 389(10068), 559-570, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(16)31848-7.
Lillemo, S., 2014: Measuring the effect of procrastination and environmental
awareness on households' energy-saving behaviours: An empirical approach.
Energy Policy, 66, 249-256, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.077.
Lim-Camacho, L. et al., 2015: Facing the wave of change: stakeholder perspectives
on climate adaptation for Australian seafood supply chains. Regional
Environmental Change, 15(4), 595-606, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0670-4.
Lin, A.C., 2013: Does Geoengineering Present a Moral Hazard? Ecology Law
Quarterly, 40, 673-712, doi:10.2307/24113611.
Lin, B.B. et al., 2017: How green is your garden?: Urban form and socio-demographic
factors influence yard vegetation, visitation, and ecosystem service benefits.
Landscape and Urban Planning, 157, 239-246,
doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2016.07.007.
Lin, C.S.K. et al., 2013: Food waste as a valuable resource for the production of
chemicals, materials and fuels. Current situation and global perspective.
Energy & Environmental Science, 6(2), 426-464, doi:10.1039/c2ee23440h.
Lindenberg, S. and L. Steg, 2013: What makes organizations in market democracies

422

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
adopt environmentally-friendly policies? In: Green Organizations: Driving
Change with I-O Psychology [Huffmann, A.H. and S.R. Klein (eds.)]. Routledge,
New York, NY, USA and Hove, UK, pp. 93-114.
Linder, M. and M. Williander, 2017: Circular Business Model Innovation: Inherent
Uncertainties. Business Strategy and the Environment, 26(2), 182-196,
doi:10.1002/bse.1906.
Lindoso, D.P. et al., 2014: Integrated assessment of smallholder farming's
vulnerability to drought in the Brazilian Semi-arid: a case study in Ceara.
Climatic Change, 127(1), 93-105, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1116-1.
Linnenluecke, M.K., A. Griffiths, and P.J. Mumby, 2015: Executives' engagement with
climate science and perceived need for business adaptation to climate change.
Climatic Change, 131(2), 321-333, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1387-1.
Linner, B.-O. and V. Wibeck, 2015: Dual high-stake emerging technologies: a review
of the climate engineering research literature. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 6(2), 255-268, doi:10.1002/wcc.333.
Linnerooth-Bayer, J. and S. Hochrainer-Stigler, 2015: Financial instruments for
disaster risk management and climate change adaptation. Climatic Change,
133(1), 85-100, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-1035-6.
Liu, W., W. Chen, and C. Peng, 2014: Assessing the effectiveness of green
infrastructures on urban flooding reduction: A community scale study.
Ecological Modelling, 291, 6-14,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2014.07.012.
Liu, W., Z. Yu, X. Xie, K. von Gadow, and C. Peng, 2018: A critical analysis of the
carbon neutrality assumption in life cycle assessment of forest bioenergy
systems. Environmental Reviews, 26(1), 93-101,
doi:10.1139/er-2017-0060.
Liu, X. et al., 2017: Microgrids for Enhancing the Power Grid Resilience in Extreme
Conditions. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 8(2), 589-597,
doi:10.1109/tsg.2016.2579999.
Lizarralde, G. et al., 2015: A systems approach to resilience in the built environment:
the case of Cuba. Disasters, 39(s1), s76-s95, doi:10.1111/disa.12109.
Lloyd, I.D. and M. Oppenheimer, 2014: On the Design of an International
Governance Framework for Geoengineering. Global Environmental Politics,
14(2), 45-63, doi:10.1162/glep_a_00228.
Loboda, T., 2014: Adaptation strategies to climate change in the Arctic: a global
patchwork of reactive community-scale initiatives. Environmental Research
Letters, 9(11), 7-10, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/11/111006.
Locatelli, B., V. Evans, A. Wardell, A. Andrade, and R. Vignola, 2011: Forests and
Climate Change in Latin America: Linking Adaptation and Mitigation. Forests,
2(4), 431-450, doi:10.3390/f2010431.
Locatelli, B. et al., 2015: Tropical reforestation and climate change: beyond carbon.
Restoration Ecology, 23(4), 337-343, doi:10.1111/rec.12209.
Lockley, A., 2012: Comment on "Review of Methane Mitigation Technologies with
Application to Rapid Release of Methane from the Arctic". Environmental
Science & Technology, 46(24), 13552-13553, doi:10.1021/es303074j.
Lockley, A. and D.M. Coffman, 2016: Distinguishing morale hazard from moral
hazard in geoengineering. Environmental Law Review, 18(3), 194-204,
doi:10.1177/1461452916659830.
Loffler, K. et al., 2017: Designing a model for the global energy system-GENeSYSMOD: An application of the Open-Source Energy Modeling System
(OSeMOSYS). Energies, 10(10), 1-29, doi:10.3390/en10101468.
Loftus, P., A. Cohen, J.C. Long, and J.D. Jenkins, 2014: A critical review of global
decarbonization scenarios: what do they tell us about feasibility? Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 6(1), 93-112,
doi:10.1002/wcc.324.
Lohmann, U. and B. Gasparini, 2017: A cirrus cloud climate dial? Science,
357(6348), 248-249, doi:10.1126/science.aan3325.
Lokhorst, A.M., C. Werner, H. Staats, E. van Dijk, and J.L. Gale, 2013: Commitment
and Behavior Change: A Meta-Analysis and Critical Review of CommitmentMaking Strategies in Environmental Research. Environment and Behavior,
45(1), 3-34, doi:10.1177/0013916511411477.
Loladze, I., 2014: Hidden shift of the ionome of plants exposed to elevated CO2
depletes minerals at the base of human nutrition. eLife, 2014(3), 1-29,
doi:10.7554/elife.02245.
Lomax, G., M. Workman, T. Lenton, and N. Shah, 2015: Reframing the policy
approach to greenhouse gas removal technologies. Energy Policy, 78, 125-
136, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.10.002.
Lombardi, M., P. Pazienza, and R. Rana, 2016: The EU environmental-energy policy
for urban areas: The Covenant of Mayors, the ELENA program and the role of
ESCos. Energy Policy, 93, 33-40,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.02.040.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Long, J. and J. Shepherd, 2014: The Strategic Value of Geoengineering Research.
In: Global Environmental Change [Freedman, B. (ed.)]. Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 757-770,
doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5784-4_24.
Loock, C.-, T. Staake, and F. Thiesse, 2013: Motivating Energy-Efficient Behavior
with Green IS: An Investigation of Goal Setting and the Role of Defaults. MIS
Quarterly, 37(4), 1313-1332, https://misq.org/motivating-energy-efficientbehavior-with-green-is-an-investigation-of-goal-setting-and-the-role-ofdefaults.html.
Lopez, P.Y. and S. Alvarez, 2016: Bioindicadores y conocimiento ancestral/tradicional
para el pronostico meteorologico en comunicades indigenas Maya - K'iche'
de Nahuala, Solola (in Spanish). Retrieved from: https://icc.org.gt/wp-content/
uploads/2017/08/poster-ancestral-2-ilovepdf-compressed.pdf.
Loring, P.A., S.C. Gerlach, and H.J. Penn, 2016: "Community work" in a climate
of adaptation: Responding to change in rural Alaska. Human Ecology, 44(1),
119-128, doi:10.1007/s10745-015-9800-y.
Lourenco, T.C., R. Swart, H. Goosen, and R. Street, 2016: The rise of demand-driven
climate services. Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 13-14,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2836.
Lovbrand, E., M. Hjerpe, and B.-O. Linner, 2017: Making climate governance global:
how UN climate summitry comes to matter in a complex climate regime.
Environmental Politics, 26(4), 1-20,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1319019.
Lovering, J.R., A. Yip, and T. Nordhaus, 2016: Historical construction costs of global
nuclear power reactors. Energy Policy, 91, 371-382,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.01.011.
Lovins, A.B., T. Palazzi, R. Laemel, and E. Goldfield, 2018: Relative deployment rates
of renewable and nuclear power: A cautionary tale of two metrics. Energy
Research & Social Science, 38, 188-192, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2018.01.005.
LTA, 2013: Land Transport Master Plan 2013. Land Transport Authority of Singapore
(LTA), Singapore, 55 pp.
LTA, 2015: Singapore Land Transport: Statistics In Brief 2014. Land Transport
Authority of Singapore (LTA), Singapore, 2 pp.
LTA, 2017: Annual Vehicle Statistics 2016: Motor vehicle population by vehicle
type. Land Transport Authority of Singapore (LTA), Singapore, 1 pp.
Lu, L., Z. Huang, G.H. Rau, and Z.J. Ren, 2015: Microbial Electrolytic Carbon
Capture for Carbon Negative and Energy Positive Wastewater Treatment.
Environmental Science & Technology, 49(13), 8193-8201,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b00875.
Luderer, G. et al., 2012: The economics of decarbonizing the energy system - results
and insights from the RECIPE model intercomparison. Climatic Change,
114(1), 9-37, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0105-x.
Luderer, G. et al., 2016: Deep decarbonisation towards 1.5C-2C stabilisation.
Policy findings from the ADVANCE project (first edition). The ADVANCE
Consortium, 42 pp.
Luderer, G. et al., 2018: Residual fossil CO2 emissions in 1.5-2C pathways. Nature
Climate Change, 8(7), 626-633,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0198-6.
Lupiek, A., M. Vaculikova, Manik, J. Hodkova, and J. Rika, 2015: Design
Strategies for Low Embodied Carbon and Low Embodied Energy Buildings:
Principles and Examples. Energy Procedia, 83, 147-156,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.12.205.
Lusiana, B., M. van Noordwijk, and G. Cadisch, 2012: Land sparing or sharing?
Exploring livestock fodder options in combination with land use zoning and
consequences for livelihoods and net carbon stocks using the FALLOW model.
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 159, 145-160,
doi:10.1016/j.agee.2012.07.006.
Lustick, I.S., D. Nettle, D.S. Wilson, H. Kokko, and B.A. Thayer, 2011: Institutional
Rigidity and Evolutionary Theory: Trapped on a Local Maximum. Cliodynamics:
The Journal of Theoretical and Mathematical History, 2(2), 1-20,
doi:10.21237/c7clio2211722.
Lutz, W. and R. Muttarak, 2017: Forecasting societies' adaptive capacities through
a demographic metabolism model. Nature Climate Change, 7(3), 177-184,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3222.
Lwasa, S., 2010: Adapting urban areas in Africa to climate change: the case of
Kampala. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 2(3), 166-171,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2010.06.009.
Lwasa, S., 2017: Options for reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the lowemitting city and metropolitan region of Kampala. Carbon Management, 8(3),
263-276, doi:10.1080/17583004.2017.1330592.
Lwasa, S. et al., 2014: Urban and peri-urban agriculture and forestry: Transcending

Chapter 4
poverty alleviation to climate change mitigation and adaptation. Urban
Climate, 7, 92-106, doi:10.1016/j.uclim.2013.10.007.
Lwasa, S. et al., 2015: A meta-analysis of urban and peri-urban agriculture and
forestry in mediating climate change. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 13, 68-73, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.02.003.
Ma, D., A. Hasanbeigi, L. Price, and W. Chen, 2015: Assessment of energy-saving
and emission reduction potentials in China's ammonia industry. Clean
Technologies and Environmental Policy, 17(6), 1633-1644,
doi:10.1007/s10098-014-0896-3.
Ma, Y., 2014: A Study on Carbon Financing Innovation of Financial Institutions in
China. International Journal of Business Administration, 5(103), 1923-4007,
doi:10.5430/ijba.v5n4p103.
Mac Dowell, N., P.S. Fennell, N. Shah, and G.C. Maitland, 2017: The role of CO2
capture and utilization in mitigating climate change. Nature Climate Change,
7(4), 243-249, doi:10.1038/nclimate3231.
MacDonald, A.E. et al., 2016: Future cost-competitive electricity systems and
their impact on US CO2 emissions. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 526-531,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2921.
MacDonald, J.P. et al., 2015: Protective factors for mental health and well-being in
a changing climate: Perspectives from Inuit youth in Nunatsiavut, Labrador.
Social Science & Medicine, 141, 133-141,
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.07.017.
Macedo, I.C., J.E.A. Seabra, and J.E.A.R. Silva, 2008: Green house gases emissions
in the production and use of ethanol from sugarcane in Brazil: The 2005/2006
averages and a prediction for 2020. Biomass and Bioenergy, 32(7), 582-595,
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2007.12.006.
MacKay, D.J.C., 2013: Could energy-intensive industries be powered by carbon-free
electricity? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 371(1986),
doi:10.1098/rsta.2011.0560.
Mackerron, G., 2014: Costs and economics of geoengineering. Climate
Geoengineering Governance Working Paper Series: 013, Climate
Geoengineering Governance (CCG), Oxford, UK, 28 pp.
Maclean, J., J. Tan, D. Tirpak, V. Sonntag-O'Brien, and E. Usher, 2008: Public Finance
Mechanisms to Mobilise Investment in Climate Change Mitigation. United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 40 pp.
MacMartin, D.G., K. Caldeira, and D.W. Keith, 2014: Solar geoengineering to limit
the rate of temperature change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 372(2031),
20140134-20140134, doi:10.1098/rsta.2014.0134.
MacMartin, D.G., K.L. Ricke, and D.W. Keith, 2018: Solar geoengineering as part
of an overall strategy for meeting the 1.5C Paris target. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 376(2119), 20160454,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0454.
Maggioni, V. et al., 2016: A Review of Merged High-Resolution Satellite Precipitation
Product Accuracy during the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) Era.
Journal of Hydrometeorology, 17(4), 1101-1117,
doi:10.1175/jhm-d-15-0190.1.
Maghari, B.M. and A.M. Ardekani, 2011: Genetically Modified Foods and Social
Concerns. Avicenna Journal of Medical Biotechnology, 3(3), 109-117,
www.ajmb.org/article?id=64.
Magnan, A., T. Ribera, and S. Treyer, 2015: National adaptation is also a global
concern. Working Papers N04/15, Institut du Developpement Durable et des
Relations Internationales (IDDRI), Paris, France, 16 pp.
Magnan, A.K., 2016: Metrics needed to track adaptation. Nature, 530(7589),
160-160, doi:10.1038/530160d.
Magnan, A.K. and T. Ribera, 2016: Global adaptation after Paris. Science,
352(6291), 1280-1282, doi:10.1126/science.aaf5002.
Magnan, A.K. et al., 2016: Addressing the risk of maladaptation to climate change.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(5), 646-665,
doi:10.1002/wcc.409.
Magni, G., 2017: Indigenous knowledge and implications for the sustainable
development agenda. European Journal of Education, 52(4), 437-447,
doi:10.1111/ejed.12238.
Mahlkow, N. and J. Donner, 2017: From Planning to Implementation? The Role
of Climate Change Adaptation Plans to Tackle Heat Stress: A Case Study of
Berlin, Germany. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 37(4), 385-
396, doi:10.1177/0739456x16664787.
Mahoo, H. et al., 2013: Seasonal weather forecasting: integration of indigenous
and scientific knowledge. In: Innovation in smallholder farming in Africa:

423

4

Chapter 4

4

recent advances and recommendations. Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Agricultural Innovation Systems in Africa (AISA), Nairobi, Kenya,
29-31 May 2013 [Triomphe, B., A. Waters-Bayer, L. Klerkx, M. Schut, B. Cullen,
G. Kamau, and E. Borgne (eds.)]. French Agricultural Research Centre for
International Development (CIRAD), Montpellier, France, 137-142 pp.
Mahoo, H. et al., 2015: Integrating indigenous knowledge with scientific seasonal
forecasts for climate risk management in Lushoto district in Tanzania. CCAFS
Working Paper no. 103, CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change,
Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), Copenhagen, Denmark, 32 pp.
Majzoobi, A. and A. Khodaei, 2017: Application of microgrids in providing ancillary
services to the utility grid. Energy, 123, 555-563,
doi:10.1016/j.energy.2017.01.113.
Maki, A., R.J. Burns, L. Ha, and A.J. Rothman, 2016: Paying people to protect the
environment: A meta-analysis of financial incentive interventions to promote
proenvironmental behaviors. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 47, 242-
255, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2016.07.006.
Malmodin, J., D. Lunden, A. Moberg, G. Andersson, and M. Nilsson, 2014: Life Cycle
Assessment of ICT Carbon Footprint and Operational Electricity Use from the
Operator, National, and Subscriber Perspective in Sweden. Journal of Industrial
Ecology, 18(6), 829-845, doi:10.1111/jiec.12145.
Manning, D.A. and P. Renforth, 2013: Passive sequestration of atmospheric CO2
through coupled plant-mineral reactions in urban soils. Environmental Science
& Technology, 47(1), 135-141, doi:10.1021/es301250j.
Mannke, F., 2011: Key themes of local adaptation to climate change: results from
mapping community-based initiatives in Africa. In: Experiences of Climate
Change Adaptation in Africa [Walter Leal Filho (ed.)]. Springer, Berlin and
Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 17-32,
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22315-0_2.
Manville, M., D.A. King, and M.J. Smart, 2017: The Driving Downturn: A Preliminary
Assessment. Journal of the American Planning Association, 83(1), 42-55,
doi:10.1080/01944363.2016.1247653.
Maor, M., J. Tosun, and A. Jordan, 2017: Proportionate and disproportionate policy
responses to climate change: core concepts and empirical applications.
Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 1-13,
doi:10.1080/1523908x.2017.1281730.
Mapfumo, P., F. Mtambanengwe, and R. Chikowo, 2016: Building on indigenous
knowledge to strengthen the capacity of smallholder farming communities
to adapt to climate change and variability in southern Africa. Climate and
Development, 8(1), 72-82, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.998604.
Marechal, K., 2010: Not irrational but habitual: The importance of "behavioural
lock-in" in energy consumption. Ecological Economics, 69(5), 1104-1114,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.12.004.
Marengo, J.A. and J.C. Espinoza, 2016: Extreme seasonal droughts and floods in
Amazonia: causes, trends and impacts. International Journal of Climatology,
36(3), 1033-1050, doi:10.1002/joc.4420.
Marengo, J.A. et al., 2013: Recent Extremes of Drought and Flooding in Amazonia:
Vulnerabilities and Human Adaptation. American Journal of Climate Change,
02(02), 87-96, doi:10.4236/ajcc.2013.22009.
Margerum, R.D. and C.J. Robinson, 2015: Collaborative partnerships and
the challenges for sustainable water management. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 12, 53-58,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2014.09.003.
Maru, Y.T., M. Stafford Smith, A. Sparrow, P.F. Pinho, and O.P. Dube, 2014: A linked
vulnerability and resilience framework for adaptation pathways in remote
disadvantaged communities. Global Environmental Change, 28, 337-350,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.007.
Massey, E. and D. Huitema, 2016: The emergence of climate change adaptation as
a new field of public policy in Europe. Regional Environmental Change, 16(2),
553-564, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0771-8.
Massey, E., R. Biesbroek, D. Huitema, and A. Jordan, 2014: Climate policy
innovation: The adoption and diffusion of adaptation policies across Europe.
Global Environmental Change, 29, 434-443,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.09.002.
Matear, R.J., 2004: Enhancement of oceanic uptake of anthropogenic CO2 by
macronutrient fertilization. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans,
109(C4), C04001, doi:10.1029/2000jc000321.
Mathioudakis, V., P.W. Gerbens-Leenes, T.H. Van der Meer, and A.Y. Hoekstra, 2017:
The water footprint of second-generation bioenergy: A comparison of biomass
feedstocks and conversion techniques. Journal of Cleaner Production, 148,
571-582, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.02.032.
Mathy, S., P. Criqui, K. Knoop, M. Fischedick, and S. Samadi, 2016: Uncertainty

424

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
management and the dynamic adjustment of deep decarbonization pathways.
Climate Policy, 16(sup1), S47-S62,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1179618.
Mavhura, E., A. Collins, and P.P. Bongo, 2017: Flood vulnerability and relocation
readiness in Zimbabwe. Disaster Prevention and Management: An
International Journal, 26(1), 41-54,
doi:10.1108/dpm-05-2016-0101.
Mazzucato, M., 2013: The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private
Sector Myths. Anthem Press, London, UK and New York, NY, USA, 237 pp.
Mazzucato, M., 2018: Mission-Oriented Research & Innovation in the European
Union: A problem-solving approach to fuel innovation-led growth. European
Commission, Brussels, Belgium, 36 pp., doi:10.2777/36546.
Mazzucato, M. and G. Semieniuk, 2017: Public financing of innovation: new
questions. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 33(1), 24-48,
doi:10.1093/oxrep/grw036.
Mbow, C., P. Smith, D. Skole, L. Duguma, and M. Bustamante, 2014: Achieving
mitigation and adaptation to climate change through sustainable agroforestry
practices in Africa. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 6(1),
8-14, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.09.002.
McCarl, B.A., C. Peacocke, R. Chrisman, C.-C. Kung, and R.D. Sands, 2009: Economics
of Biochar Production, Utilization and Greenhouse Gas Offsets. In: Biochar for
Environmental Management: Science and Technology. Routledge, London,
UK, pp. 341-358.
McClellan, J., D.W. Keith, and J. Apt, 2012: Cost analysis of stratospheric albedo
modification delivery systems. Environmental Research Letters, 7(3), 034019,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/7/3/034019.
McCormick, K. and T. Kaberger, 2007: Key barriers for bioenergy in Europe:
Economic conditions, know-how and institutional capacity, and supply chain
co-ordination. Biomass and Bioenergy, 31(7), 443-452,
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2007.01.008.
McCright, A.M. and R.E. Dunlap, 2011: Cool dudes: The denial of climate change
among conservative white males in the United States. Global Environmental
Change, 21(4), 1163-1172, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.06.003.
McCright, A.M., R.E. Dunlap, and C. Xiao, 2013: Perceived scientific agreement
and support for government action on climate change in the USA. Climatic
Change, 119, 511-518, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0704-9.
Mccubbin, S.G., T. Pearce, J.D. Ford, and B. Smit, 2017: Social-ecological change and
implications for food security in Funafuti, Tuvalu. Ecology and Society, 22(1),
53-65, doi:10.5751/es-09129-220153.
McCusker, K.E., K.C. Armour, C.M. Bitz, and D.S. Battisti, 2014: Rapid and extensive
warming following cessation of solar radiation management. Environmental
Research Letters, 9(2), 024005,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/2/024005.
McGlade, C. and P. Ekins, 2015: The geographical distribution of fossil fuels
unused when limiting global warming to 2C. Nature, 517(7533), 187-190,
doi:10.1038/nature14016.
McGlashan, N., N. Shah, B. Caldecott, and M. Workman, 2012: High-level technoeconomic assessment of negative emissions technologies. Process Safety and
Environmental Protection, 90(6), 501-510,
doi:10.1016/j.psep.2012.10.004.
McGranahan, G., D. Schensul, and G. Singh, 2016: Inclusive urbanization: Can the
2030 Agenda be delivered without it? Environment and Urbanization, 28(1),
13-34, doi:10.1177/0956247815627522.
McKay, B., S. Sauer, B. Richardson, and R. Herre, 2016: The political economy of
sugarcane flexing: initial insights from Brazil, Southern Africa and Cambodia.
The Journal of Peasant Studies, 43(1), 195-223,
doi:10.1080/03066150.2014.992016.
McKinnon, C., 2018: Sleepwalking into lock-in? Avoiding wrongs to future people
in the governance of solar radiation management research. Environmental
Politics, 1-19, doi:10.1080/09644016.2018.1450344.
McLaren, D., 2012: A comparative global assessment of potential negative
emissions technologies. Process Safety and Environmental Protection, 90(6),
489-500, doi:10.1016/j.psep.2012.10.005.
McLaren, D., 2016: Mitigation deterrence and the "moral hazard" of solar radiation
management. Earth's Future, 4(12), 596-602,
doi:10.1002/2016ef000445.
McMillen, H.L. et al., 2014: Small islands, valuable insights: Systems of customary
resource use and resilience to climate change in the Pacific. Ecology and
Society, 19(4), 44, doi:10.5751/es-06937-190444.
McNamara, K.E. and S.S. Prasad, 2014: Coping with extreme weather: Communities
in Fiji and Vanuatu share their experiences and knowledge. Climatic Change,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
123(2), 121-132, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-1047-2.
McPhearson, T. et al., 2016: Scientists must have a say in the future of cities. Nature,
538(7624), 165-166, doi:10.1038/538165a.
Group of Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs): 2016: Joint Report on Multilateral
Development Banks' Climate Finance. Inter-American Development Bank,
Inter-American Investment Corporation, African Development Bank, Asian
Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
European Investment Bank, The World Bank, 45 pp.,
doi:10.18235/0000806.
Measham, T.G. et al., 2011: Adapting to climate change through local municipal
planning: barriers and challenges. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for
Global Change, 16(8), 889-909, doi:10.1007/s11027-011-9301-2.
Medek, D.E., J. Schwartz, and S.S. Myers, 2017: Estimated Effects of Future
Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations on Protein Intake and the Risk of Protein
Deficiency by Country and Region. Environmental Health Perspectives,
125(8), 1-8, doi:10.1289/ehp41.
Mehta, L. et al., 2014: The politics of IWRM in Southern Africa. International Journal
of Water Resources Development, 30(3), 528-542,
doi:10.1080/07900627.2014.916200.
Meijer, S.S., D. Catacutan, O.C. Ajayi, G.W. Sileshi, and M. Nieuwenhuis, 2015: The
role of knowledge, attitudes and perceptions in the uptake of agricultural and
agroforestry innovations among smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa.
International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 13(1), 40-54,
doi:10.1080/14735903.2014.912493.
Mejean, A., F. Lecocq, and Y. Mulugetta, 2015: Equity, burden sharing and
development pathways: reframing international climate negotiations.
International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 15(4),
387-402, doi:10.1007/s10784-015-9302-9.
Melde, S., F. Laczko, and F. Gemenne, 2017: Making mobility work for adaptation
to environmental changes: Results from the MECLEP global research.
International Organization for Migration (IOM), Geneva, Switzerland, 122 pp.
Melica, G. et al., 2018: Multilevel governance of sustainable energy policies: The
role of regions and provinces to support the participation of small local
authorities in the Covenant of Mayors. Sustainable Cities and Society, 39,
729-739, doi:10.1016/j.scs.2018.01.013.
Melvin, A.M. et al., 2017: Climate change damages to Alaska public infrastructure
and the economics of proactive adaptation. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(2), E122-E131, doi:10.1073/pnas.1611056113.
Mercado, L.M. et al., 2009: Impact of changes in diffuse radiation on the global
land carbon sink. Nature, 458(7241), 1014-1017,
doi:10.1038/nature07949.
Mercer, D.E., 2004: Adoption of agroforestry innovations in the tropics: A review.
Agroforestry Systems, 61-62(1-3), 311-328,
doi:10.1023/b:agfo.0000029007.85754.70.
Mercure, J.-F. et al., 2018: Macroeconomic impact of stranded fossil fuel assets.
Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 588-593, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0182-1.
Merk, C., G. Ponitzsch, and K. Rehdanz, 2016: Knowledge about aerosol injection
does not reduce individual mitigation efforts. Environmental Research Letters,
11(5), 054009, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/054009.
Merk, C., G. Ponitzsch, C. Kniebes, K. Rehdanz, and U. Schmidt, 2015: Exploring
public perceptions of stratospheric sulfate injection. Climatic Change, 130(2),
299-312, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1317-7.
Merrey, D.J., 2009: African Models for Transnational River Basin Organisations in
Africa: An Unexplored Dimension. Water Alternatives, 2(2), 183-204, www.
water-alternatives.org/index.php/alldoc/volume2/v2issue2/50-a2-2-2/file.
Methmann, C. and A. Oels, 2015: From `fearing' to `empowering' climate refugees:
Governing climate-induced migration in the name of resilience. Security
Dialogue, 46(1), 51-68, doi:10.1177/0967010614552548.
Meze-Hausken, E., 2004: Contrasting climate variability and meteorological
drought with perceived drought and climate change in northern Ethiopia.
Climate Research, 27, 19-31, www.jstor.org/stable/24868730.
Mguni, P., L. Herslund, and M.B. Jensen, 2016: Sustainable urban drainage
systems: examining the potential for green infrastructure-based stormwater
management for Sub-Saharan cities. Natural Hazards, 82(S2), 241-257,
doi:10.1007/s11069-016-2309-x.
Michaelowa, A., 2013: The politics of climate change in Germany: ambition versus
lobby power. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 4(4), 315-320,
doi:10.1002/wcc.224.
Michaelowa, A., M. Allen, and F. Sha, 2018: Policy instruments for limiting global
temperature rise to 1.5C - can humanity rise to the challenge? Climate
Policy, 18(3), 275-286, doi:10.1080/14693062.2018.1426977.

Chapter 4
Michaelowa, K. and A. Michaelowa, 2017: Transnational Climate Governance
Initiatives: Designed for Effective Climate Change Mitigation? International
Interactions, 43(1), 129-155, doi:10.1080/03050629.2017.1256110.
Midden, C. and J. Ham, 2012: Persuasive technology to promote pro-environmental
behaviour. In: Environmental Psychology: An Introduction [Steg, L., A.E. Berg,
and J.I.M.E. de Groot (eds.)]. John Wiley & Sons, Oxford, UK, pp. 243-254.
Middlemiss, L., 2011: The effects of community-based action for sustainability on
participants' lifestyles. Local Environment, 16(3), 265-280,
doi:10.1080/13549839.2011.566850.
Mikunda, T. et al., 2014: Designing policy for deployment of CCS in industry. Climate
Policy, 14(5), 665-676, doi:10.1080/14693062.2014.905441.
Miles, D., 1993: Testing for Short Termism in the UK Stock Market. The Economic
Journal, 103(421), 1379-1396, doi:10.2307/2234472.
Milinski, M., D. Semmann, H.-J. Krambeck, and J. Marotzke, 2006: Stabilizing the
Earth's climate is not a losing game: Supporting evidence from public goods
experiments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(11),
3994-3998, doi:10.1073/pnas.0504902103.
Millard-Ball, A. and L. Schipper, 2011: Are We Reaching Peak Travel? Trends in
Passenger Transport in Eight Industrialized Countries. Transport Reviews,
31(3), 357-378, doi:10.1080/01441647.2010.518291.
Mills, M.P., 2015: Shale 2.0: Technology and the Coming Big-Data Revolution in
America's Shale Oil Fields. Energy Policy & The Environment Report No. 16
May 2015, Center for Energy Policy and the Environment (CEPE), Manhattan
Institute, New York, NY, USA, 17 pp.
Milner, A.M. et al., 2017: Glacier shrinkage driving global changes in downstream
systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(37), 9770-
9778, doi:10.1073/pnas.1619807114.
Mimura, N. et al., 2014: Adaptation Planning and Implementation. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, and M.D. Mastrandrea (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
pp. 869-898.
Minville, M., F. Brissette, S. Krau, and R. Leconte, 2009: Adaptation to climate
change in the management of a Canadian water-resources system exploited
for hydropower. Water Resources Management, 23(14), 2965-2986,
doi:10.1007/s11269-009-9418-1.
Minx, J., W.F. Lamb, M.W. Callaghan, L. Bornmann, and S. Fuss, 2017: Fast growing
research on negative emissions. Environmental Research Letters, 12(3),
035007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5ee5.
Minx, J.C. et al., 2018: Negative emissions - Part 1: Research landscape and
synthesis. Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf9b.
Mir-Artigues, P. and P. del Rio, 2014: Combining tariffs, investment subsidies and
soft loans in a renewable electricity deployment policy. Energy Policy, 69,
430-442, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.01.040.
Mistry, J. and A. Berardi, 2016: Bridging indigenous and scientific knowledge.
Science, 352(6291), 1274-1275, doi:10.1126/science.aaf1160.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2017: Half a degree additional warming, prognosis and projected
impacts (HAPPI): background and experimental design. Geoscientific Model
Development, 10(2), 571-583, doi:10.5194/gmd-10-571-2017.
Mitchell, R., 2013: Agreement on the Establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
Commission. South African Department of Foreign Affairs, Office of the Chief
State Law Adviser (IL), Treaty and Information Management Section.
Mitlin, D., 2005: Understanding chronic poverty in urban areas. International
Planning Studies, 10(1), 3-19,
doi:10.1080/13563470500159220.
Mitlin, D. and D. Satterthwaite, 2013: Urban Poverty in the Global South: Scale and
Nature. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 368 pp.
Mittal, S., H. Dai, and P.R. Shukla, 2016: Low carbon urban transport scenarios for
China and India: A comparative assessment. Transportation Research Part D:
Transport and Environment, 44, 266-276,
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2015.04.002.
Moffatt, S., 2014: Resilience and competing temporalities in cities. Building
Research & Information, 42(2), 202-220,
doi:10.1080/09613218.2014.869894.
Mollersten, K., J. Yan, and J. R. Moreira, 2003: Potential market niches for biomass
energy with CO2 capture and storage-Opportunities for energy supply
with negative CO2 emissions. Biomass and Bioenergy, 25(3), 273-285,
doi:10.1016/s0961-9534(03)00013-8.

425

4

Chapter 4

4

Monstadt, J. and A. Wolff, 2015: Energy transition or incremental change? Green
policy agendas and the adaptability of the urban energy regime in Los
Angeles. Energy Policy, 78, 213-224, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.10.022.
Montserrat, F. et al., 2017: Olivine Dissolution in Seawater: Implications for CO2
Sequestration through Enhanced Weathering in Coastal Environments.
Environmental Science & Technology, 51(7), 3960-3972,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b05942.
Montzka, S.A., E.J. Dlugokencky, and J.H. Butler, 2011: Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gases
and Climate Change. Nature, 476, 43-50, doi:10.1038/nature10322.
Mooij, R.A., 2000: Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend. Emerald
Group Publishing Ltd, Bingley, UK, 292 pp.
Moore, J.C., S. Jevrejeva, and A. Grinsted, 2010: Efficacy of geoengineering to limit
21st century sea-level rise. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
107(36), 15699-15703, doi:10.1073/pnas.1008153107.
Moreno-Cruz, J.B. and D.W. Keith, 2013: Climate policy under uncertainty: a case for
solar geoengineering. Climatic Change, 121(3), 431-444,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0487-4.
Morita, K. and K. Matsumoto, 2015: Financing Adaptation to Climate Change in
Developing Countries. In: Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation [Leal
Filho, W. (ed.)]. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 983-1005,
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38670-1_22.
Moriyama, R. et al., 2016: The cost of stratospheric climate engineering revisited.
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1-22,
doi:10.1007/s11027-016-9723-y.
Morrow, D.R., 2014: Starting a flood to stop a fire? Some moral constraints on solar
radiation management. Ethics, Policy & Environment, 17(2), 123-138,
doi:10.1080/21550085.2014.926056.
Mortreux, C. and J. Barnett, 2009: Climate change, migration and adaptation
in Funafuti, Tuvalu. Global Environmental Change, 19(1), 105-112,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.09.006.
Moser, S.C., 2014: Communicating adaptation to climate change: The art and
science of public engagement when climate change comes home. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 337-358,
doi:10.1002/wcc.276.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2013: Hell and High Water: Practice-Relevant Adaptation Science.
Science, 342(6159), 696-698, doi:10.1126/science.1239569.
Mota-Babiloni, A., P. Makhnatch, and R. Khodabandeh, 2017: Recent investigations
in HFCs substitution with lower GWP synthetic alternatives: Focus on
energetic performance and environmental impact. International Journal of
Refrigeration, 82, 288-301, doi:10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2017.06.026.
Mouratiadou, I. et al., 2016: The impact of climate change mitigation on water
demand for energy and food: An integrated analysis based on the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways. Environmental Science & Policy, 64, 48-58,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.06.007.
Mousavi, B. and M. Blesl, 2018: Analysis of the Relative Roles of Supply-Side and
Demand-Side Measures in Tackling the Global 1.5C Target. In: Limiting
Global Warming to Well Below 2C: Energy System Modelling and Policy
Development [Giannakidis, G., K. Karlsson, M. Labriet, and B. Gallachoir
(eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 67-83,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-74424-7_5.
Muench, S., S. Thuss, and E. Guenther, 2014: What hampers energy system
transformations? The case of smart grids. Energy Policy, 73, 80-92,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.05.051.
Mullaney, J., T. Lucke, and S.J. Trueman, 2015: A review of benefits and challenges
in growing street trees in paved urban environments. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 134, 157-166, doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.10.013.
Mulville, M., K. Jones, G. Huebner, and J. Powell-Greig, 2017: Energy-saving
occupant behaviours in offices: change strategies. Building Research &
Information, 45(8), 861-874, doi:10.1080/09613218.2016.1212299.
Munck, J., J.G. Rozema, and L.A. Frye-levine, 2014: Institutional inertia and climate
change: a review of the new institutionalist literature. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 5, 639-648,
doi:10.1002/wcc.292.
Mundaca, L., 2007: Transaction costs of Tradable White Certificate schemes: The
Energy Efficiency Commitment as case study. Energy Policy, 35, 4340-4354,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2007.02.029.
Mundaca, L. and A. Markandya, 2016: Assessing regional progress towards a
`Green Energy Economy'. Applied Energy, 179, 1372-1394,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.10.098.
Murphy, A.G., J. Hartell, V. Cardenas, and J.R. Skees, 2012: Risk Management
Instruments for Food Price Volatility and Weather Risk in Latin America and

426

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
the Caribbean: The Use of Risk Management Instruments. Discussion Paper,
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), Washington DC, USA, 110 pp.
Murrant, D., A. Quinn, and L. Chapman, 2015: The water-energy nexus: Future water
resource availability and its implications on UK thermal power generation.
Water and Environment Journal, 29(3), 307-319,
doi:10.1111/wej.12126.
Murthy, I.K., 2013: Carbon Sequestration Potential of Agroforestry Systems in India.
Journal of Earth Science & Climatic Change, 04(01), 1-7,
doi:10.4172/2157-7617.1000131.
Musall, F.D. and O. Kuik, 2011: Local acceptance of renewable energy-A case study
from southeast Germany. Energy Policy, 39(6), 3252-3260,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.03.017.
Mushtaq, S., 2016: Economic and policy implications of relocation of agricultural
production systems under changing climate: Example of Australian rice
industry. Land Use Policy, 52, 277-286, doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2015.12.029.
Mushtaq, S., 2018: Managing climate risks through transformational adaptation:
Economic and policy implications for key production regions in Australia.
Climate Risk Management, 19, 48-60, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2017.12.001.
Mycoo, M. and M.G. Donovan, 2017: A Blue Urban Agenda: Adapting to Climate
Change in the Coastal Cities of Caribbean and Pacific Small Island Developing
States. Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), Washington DC, USA, 215
pp., doi:10.18235/0000690.
Myers, C.D., T. Ritter, and A. Rockway, 2017: Community Deliberation to Build
Local Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation: The Rural Climate Dialogues
Program. In: Climate Change Adaptation in North America: Fostering
Resilience and the Regional Capacity to Adapt [Leal Filho, W. and J.M. Keenan
(eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Swizterland, pp. 9-26,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-53742-9_2.
Myers, T.A., E.W. Maibach, C. Roser-Renouf, K. Akerlof, and A.A. Leiserowitz, 2012:
The relationship between personal experience and belief in the reality of global
warming. Nature Climate Change, 3, 343-347, doi:10.1038/nclimate1754.
Myhre, G. et al., 2013: Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 659-740.
Nabernegg, S. et al., 2017: The Deployment of Low Carbon Technologies in Energy
Intensive Industries: A Macroeconomic Analysis for Europe, China and India.
Energies, 10(3), 360, doi:10.3390/en10030360.
Nadai, A. and O. Labussiere, 2017: Landscape commons, following wind power
fault lines. The case of Seine-et-Marne (France). Energy Policy, 109, 807-816,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.06.049.
Nagele, F., T. Kasper, and B. Girod, 2017: Turning up the heat on obsolete
thermostats: A simulation-based comparison of intelligent control approaches
for residential heating systems. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
75, 1254-1268, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.112.
Nair, S., B. George, H.M. Malano, M. Arora, and B. Nawarathna, 2014: Water-
energy-greenhouse gas nexus of urban water systems: Review of concepts,
state-of-art and methods. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 89, 1-10,
doi:10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.05.007.
Nakashima, D.J., K. Galloway McLean, H.D. Thulstrup, A. Ramos Castillo, and J.T.
Rubis, 2012: Weathering Uncertainty: Traditional Knowledge for Climate
Change Assessment and Adaptation. UNESCO, Paris, France and UNU, Darwin,
Australia, 120 pp.
Nakhooda, S. and C. Watson, 2016: Adaptation finance and the infrastructure
agenda. Overseas Development Institute (ODI), London, UK, 40 pp.
Nalau, J., B.L. Preston, and M.C. Maloney, 2015: Is adaptation a local responsibility?
Environmental Science & Policy, 48, 89-98, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.12.011.
Napp, T.A., A. Gambhir, T.P. Hills, N. Florin, and P.S. Fennell, 2014: A review of the
technologies, economics and policy instruments for decarbonising energyintensive manufacturing industries. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 30, 616-640, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.10.036.
Napp, T.A. et al., 2017: Exploring the Feasibility of Low-Carbon Scenarios Using
Historical Energy Transitions Analysis. Energies, 10(1), 116,
doi:10.3390/en10010116.
Natcher, D.C. et al., 2007: Notions of time and sentience: Methodological
considerations for Arctic climate change research. Arctic Anthropology, 44(2),
113-126, doi:10.1353/arc.2011.0099.
NCE, 2016: The Sustainable Infrastructure Imperative: Financing for Better Grown
and Development. The 2016 New Climate Economy Report, New Climate

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Economy (NCE), Washington DC and London, UK, 152 pp.
NEC, 2011: Second National Communication to the UNFCCC. National Environment
Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, Thimphu, Bhutan, 160 pp.
NEC, 2015: Communication of INDC of the Kingdom of Bhutan. National
Environment Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, 8 pp.
Nemet, G.F., 2014: Solar Photovoltaics: Multiple Drivers of Technological
Improvement. In: Energy Technology Innovation [Grubler, A. and C. Wilson
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 206-218, doi:10.1017/cbo9781139150880.020.
Nemet, G.F., M. Jakob, J.C. Steckel, and O. Edenhofer, 2017: Addressing policy
credibility problems for low-carbon investment. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 47-57, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.004.
Nemet, G.F. et al., 2018: Negative emissions - Part 3: Innovation and upscaling.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(6), 063003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabff4.
Newell, P. and M. Paterson, 1998: A Climate For Business: Global Warming, the
State and Capital. Review of International Political Economy, 5, 679-703,
www.jstor.org/stable/4177292.
Newell, R.G. and W.A. Pizer, 2003: Regulating stock externalities under uncertainty.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 45(2), 416-432,
doi:10.1016/s0095-0696(02)00016-5.
Newham, M. and B. Conradie, 2013: A Critical Review of South Africa's Carbon
Tax Policy Paper: Recommendations for the Implementation of an Offset
Mechanism. CSSR Working Paper, Centre for Social Science Research,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 23 pp.
Newman, P., 2017: Decoupling Economic Growth from Fossil Fuels. Modern
Economy, 8(6), 791-805, doi:10.4236/me.2017.86055.
Newman, P. and J. Kenworthy, 2011: `Peak Car Use': Understanding the Demise of
Automobile Dependence. World Transport Policy and Practice, 17.2, 31-42,
http://worldtransportjournal.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/wtpp17.2.pdf.
Newman, P. and J.R. Kenworthy, 2015: The End of Automobile Dependence: How
Cities are Moving Beyond Car-based Planning. Island Press, Washington DC,
USA, 320 pp., doi:10.5822/978-1-61091-613-4.
Newman, P., L. Kosonen, and J. Kenworthy, 2016: Theory of urban fabrics:
planning the walking, transit/public transport and automobile/motor car
cities for reduced car dependency. Town Planning Review, 87(4), 429-458,
doi:10.3828/tpr.2016.28.
Newman, P., T. Beatley, and H. Boyer, 2017: Resilient Cities: Overcoming Fossil Fuel
Dependence (Second edition). Island Press, Washington DC, USA, 264 pp.
Ng, A.K.Y., J. Andrews, D. Babb, Y. Lin, and A. Becker, 2018: Implications of climate
change for shipping: Opening the Arctic seas. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 9(2), e507, doi:10.1002/wcc.507
Ngendakumana, S. et al., 2017: Implementing REDD+: learning from
forest conservation policy and social safeguards frameworks
in Cameroon. International Forestry Review, 19(2), 209-223,
doi:10.1505/146554817821255187.
Nguyen, T.T.T., P.J. Bowman, M. Haile-Mariam, J.E. Pryce, and B.J. Hayes, 2016:
Genomic selection for tolerance to heat stress in Australian dairy cattle.
Journal of Dairy Science, 99(4), 2849-2862,
doi:10.3168/jds.2015-9685.
Nicholson, S., 2013: The Promises and Perils of Geoengineering. In: State of the
World 2013: Is Sustainability Still Possible? [Worldwatch Institute (ed.)]. Island
Press/Center for Resource Economics, Washington DC, USA, pp. 317-331.
Nicholson, S., S. Jinnah, and A. Gillespie, 2018: Solar radiation management: a
proposal for immediate polycentric governance. Climate Policy, 18(3), 322-
334, doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1400944.
Nicolson, M., G. Huebner, and D. Shipworth, 2017: Are consumers willing to switch
to smart time of use electricity tariffs? The importance of loss-aversion and
electric vehicle ownership. Energy Research & Social Science, 23, 82-96,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.12.001.
Niemeier, U. and C. Timmreck, 2015: What is the limit of climate engineering by
stratospheric injection of SO2? Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 15(16),
9129-9141, doi:10.5194/acp-15-9129-2015.
Nierop, S.C.A., 2014: Envisioning resilient electrical infrastructure: A policy
framework for incorporating future climate change into electricity sector
planning. Environmental Science & Policy, 40, 78-84,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.04.011.
Nieto, J., Carpintero, and L.J. Miguel, 2018: Less than 2C? An EconomicEnvironmental Evaluation of the Paris Agreement. Ecological Economics, 146,
69-84, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.10.007.
Nightingale, A.J., 2017: Power and politics in climate change adaptation efforts:

Chapter 4
Struggles over authority and recognition in the context of political instability.
Geoforum, 84, 11-20, doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2017.05.011.
Nijland, H. and J. Meerkerk, 2017: Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions Mobility and environmental impacts of car sharing in the
Netherlands. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 23, 84-91,
doi:10.1016/j.eist.2017.02.001.
Nikiforos, M. and G. Zezza, 2017: Stock-flow Consistent Macroeconomic Models: A
Survey. LEI Working Paper No. 891, Levy Economics Institute, Annandale-onHudson, NY, USA, 71 pp.
Nissinen, A. et al., 2015: Combinations of policy instruments to decrease the
climate impacts of housing, passenger transport and food in Finland. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 107, 455-466,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.08.095.
NITI Aayog and RMI, 2017: India Leaps Ahead: Transformative Mobility Solutions
for All. National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) and Rocky
Mountain Institute (RMI), New Delhi and Colorado, 134 pp.
Nitschke, M., A. Krackowizer, L.A. Hansen, P. Bi, and R.G. Tucker, 2017: Heat
Health Messages: A Randomized Controlled Trial of a Preventative Messages
Tool in the Older Population of South Australia. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(9), 992,
doi:10.3390/ijerph14090992.
Nitschke, M. et al., 2016: Evaluation of a heat warning system in Adelaide, South
Australia, using case-series analysis. BMJ open, 6(7), e012125,
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012125.
Noble, I. et al., 2014: Adaptation needs and options. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O.
Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 659-708.
Nolan, J.M., P.W. Schultz, R.B. Cialdini, N.J. Goldstein, and V. Griskevicius, 2008:
Normative Social Influence is Underdetected. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 34(7), 913-923, doi:10.1177/0146167208316691.
Noppers, E.H., K. Keizer, J.W. Bolderdijk, and L. Steg, 2014: The adoption of
sustainable innovations: Driven by symbolic and environmental motives.
Global Environmental Change, 25, 52-62,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.01.012.
Nordhaus, W., 2015: Climate clubs: Overcoming free-riding in international climate
policy. American Economic Review, 105(4), 1339-1370,
doi:10.1257/aer.15000001.
North, D.C., 1990: Institutions, institutional change and economic performance.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, 152 pp.
Nowak, D.J., D.E. Crane, and J.C. Stevens, 2006: Air pollution removal by urban trees
and shrubs in the United States. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 4(3-4),
115-123, doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2006.01.007.
NPCC, 2015: Building the Knowledge Base for Climate Resiliency: New York City
Panel on Climate Change 2015 Report. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1336(1), 1-150, doi:10.1111/nyas.12625
NRC, 2015a: Climate Intervention: Carbon Dioxide Removal and Reliable
Sequestration. National Research Council (NRC). The National Academies
Press, Washington DC, USA, 154 pp., doi:10.17226/18805.
NRC, 2015b: Climate Intervention: Reflecting Sunlight to Cool Earth. National
Research Council (NRC). The National Academies Press, Washington DC, USA,
260 pp., doi:10.17226/18988.
NRC, 2015c: Governance of Research and Other Sociopolitical Considerations. In:
Climate Intervention: Reflecting Sunlight to Cool Earth. National Research
Council (NRC). The National Academies Press, Washington DC, USA, pp. 149-
175, doi:10.17226/18988.
Nunn, P.D., J. Runman, M. Falanruw, and R. Kumar, 2017: Culturally grounded
responses to coastal change on islands in the Federated States of Micronesia,
northwest Pacific Ocean. Regional Environmental Change, 17(4), 959-971,
doi:10.1007/s10113-016-0950-2.
Nurse, L.A. et al., 2014: Small islands. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E.
Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel,
A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge

427

4

Chapter 4

4

University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp.
1613-1654.
Nyagwambo, N.L., E. Chonguica, D. Cox, and F. Monggae, 2008: Local Governments
and IWRM in the SADC Region. Institute of Water and Sanitation Development
(IWSD), Harare, Zimbabwe, 58 pp.
Nyantakyi-Frimpong, H. and R. Bezner-Kerr, 2015: The relative importance of
climate change in the context of multiple stressors in semi-arid Ghana. Global
Environmental Change, 32, 40-56,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.03.003.
NYC Parks, 2010: Designing the Edge: Creating a Living Urban Shore at Harlem
River Park. NYC Department of Parks & Recreation, Metropolitan Waterfront
Alliance, Harlem River Park Task Force, NY Department of State Division of
Coastal Resources, New York, NY, USA, 52 pp.
Nyholm, E., M. Odenberger, and F. Johnsson, 2017: An economic assessment of
distributed solar PV generation in Sweden from a consumer perspective - The
impact of demand response. Renewable Energy, 108, 169-178,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2017.02.050.
Nykvist, B. and M. Nilsson, 2015: Rapidly falling costs of battery packs for electric
vehicles. Nature Climate Change, 5(4), 329-332.
Nyong, A., F. Adesina, and B. Osman Elasha, 2007: The value of indigenous
knowledge in climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies in the
African Sahel. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 12(5),
787-797, doi:10.1007/s11027-007-9099-0.
O'Hare, P., I. White, and A. Connelly, 2016: Insurance as maladaptation: Resilience
and the `business as usual' paradox. Environment and Planning C: Government
and Policy, 34(6), 1175-1193, doi:10.1177/0263774x15602022.
O'Leary, J.K. et al., 2017: The Resilience of Marine Ecosystems to Climatic
Disturbances. BioScience, 67(3), 208-220, doi:10.1093/biosci/biw161.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2015: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 169-180, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: IPCC reasons for concern regarding climate change risks.
Nature Climate Change, 7(1), 28-37, doi:10.1038/nclimate3179.
O'Neill, S. and S. Nicholson-Cole, 2009: "Fear Won't Do It" Visual and
Iconic Representations. Science Communication, 30(3), 355-379,
doi:10.1177/1075547008329201.
O'Neill, S.J., M. Boykoff, S. Niemeyer, and S.A. Day, 2013: On the use of imagery
for climate change engagement. Global Environmental Change, 23, 413-421,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.11.006.
Obergassel, W. et al., 2016: Phoenix from the Ashes: An Analysis of the Paris
Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
- Part II. Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy, Wuppertal,
Germany, 10 pp.
Ockwell, D. and R. Byrne, 2016: Improving technology transfer through national
systems of innovation: climate relevant innovation-system builders (CRIBs).
Climate Policy, 16(7), 836-854, doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1052958.
Ockwell, D., A. Sagar, and H. de Coninck, 2015: Collaborative research and
development (R&D) for climate technology transfer and uptake in developing
countries: towards a needs driven approach. Climatic Change, 131(3), 401-
415, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1123-2.
OECD, 2015a: Aligning Policies for a Low-carbon Economy. OECD Publishing, Paris,
France, 240 pp., doi:10.1787/9789264233294-en.
OECD, 2015b: Climate Finance in 2013-14 and the USD 100 billion goal: A Report
by the OECD in Collaboration with Climate Policy Initiative. Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris, France, 64 pp.
OECD, 2016: 2020 Projections of Climate Finance Towards the USD 100 Billion
Goal: Technical Note. OECD Publishing, Paris, France, 40 pp.
OECD, 2017a: Investing in Climate, Investing in Growth. Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD). OECD Publishing, Paris, France, 314
pp., doi:10.1787/9789264273528-1-en.
OECD, 2017b: Mobilising Bond Markets for a Low-Carbon Transition. Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Publishing, Paris, 132
pp., doi:10.1787/9789264272323-en.
OECD, 2017c: The Next Production Revolution: Implications for Governments and
Business. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Publishing, Paris, France, 444 pp., doi:10.1787/9789264271036-en.
OECD/FAO, 2017: OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2017-2026. Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Publishing, Paris, France,
150 pp., doi:10.1787/agr_outlook-2017-en.
Ogunbode, C.A., Y. Liu, and N. Tausch, 2017: The moderating role of political
affiliation in the link between flooding experience and preparedness to

428

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
reduce energy use. Climatic Change, 145(3-4), 445-458,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2089-7.
Ohndorf, M., J. Blasch, and R. Schubert, 2015: Emission budget approaches for
burden sharing: some thoughts from an environmental economics point of
view. Climatic Change, 133(3), 385-395,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1442-y.
Olander, F. and J. Thogersen, 2014: Informing Versus Nudging in Environmental
Policy. Journal of Consumer Policy, 37(3), 341-356,
doi:10.1007/s10603-014-9256-2.
Oldenbroek, V., L.A. Verhoef, and A.J.M. van Wijk, 2017: Fuel cell electric vehicle as
a power plant: Fully renewable integrated transport and energy system design
and analysis for smart city areas. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy,
42(12), 8166-8196, doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.01.155.
Oliver, T.H. and M.D. Morecroft, 2014: Interactions between climate change and
land use change on biodiversity: attribution problems, risks, and opportunities.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 317-335,
doi:10.1002/wcc.271.
OneNYC Team, 2015: One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City. Office of
the Mayor of New York City, New York, NY, USA, 354 pp.
Opio, C. et al., 2013: Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains - A
global life cycle assessment. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 191 pp.
ORR, 2018: Climate Resiliency Design Guidelines. NYC Mayor's Office of Recovery
& Resiliency (ORR), New York, NY, USA, 56 pp.
Osbaldiston, R. and J.P. Schott, 2012: Environmental Sustainability and Behavioral
Science: Meta-Analysis of Proenvironmental Behavior Experiments.
Environment and Behavior, 44(2), 257-299, doi:10.1177/0013916511402673.
Osei, P.D., 2007: Policy responses, institutional networks management and
post-Hurricane Ivan reconstruction in Jamaica. Disaster Prevention and
Management: An International Journal, 16(2), 217-234,
doi:10.1108/09653560710739540.
Ostrom, E., 2009: A general framework for analyzing sustainability of socialecological systems. Science, 325(5939), 419-422,
doi:10.1126/science.1172133.
Ostrom, E. and J. Walker (eds.), 2005: Trust and Reciprocity: Interdisciplinary
Lessons for Experimental Research. Russell Sage Foundation, New York, NY,
USA, 424 pp.
Ostrom, E., J. Burger, C.B. Field, R.B. Norgaard, and D. Policansky, 1999: Revisiting
the Commons: Local Lessons, Global Challenges. Science, 284(5412), 278-
282, doi:10.1126/science.284.5412.278.
Oteros-Rozas, E. et al., 2015: Participatory scenario planning in place-based socialecological research: insights and experiences from 23 case studies. Ecology
and Society, 20(4), 32, doi:10.5751/es-07985-200432.
Ouyang, M. and L. Duenas-Osorio, 2014: Multi-dimensional hurricane resilience
assessment of electric power systems. Structural Safety, 48, 15-24,
doi:10.1016/j.strusafe.2014.01.001.
Overmars, K.P. et al., 2014: Estimating the opportunity costs of reducing carbon
dioxide emissions via avoided deforestation, using integrated assessment
modelling. Land Use Policy, 41, 45-60, doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.04.015.
Owen, R., 2014: Solar Radiation Management and the Governance of Hubris. In:
Geoengineering of the Climate System [Harrison, R.M. and R.E. Hester (eds.)]. The
Royal Society of Chemistry, pp. 212-248, doi:10.1039/9781782621225-00212.
Pablo-Romero, M.P., A. Sanchez-Braza, J. Salvador-Ponce, and N. Sanchez-Labrador,
2017: An overview of feed-in tariffs, premiums and tenders to promote
electricity from biogas in the EU-28. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 73, 1366-1379, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.132.
Pahl, S., J. Goodhew, C. Boomsma, and S.R.J. Sheppard, 2016: The Role of Energy
Visualization in Addressing Energy Use : Insights from the eViz Project.
Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 92, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00092.
PAHO/WHO, 2016: Strategy for Technical Cooperation with the United Kingdom
Overseas Territories (UKOTs) in the Caribbean 2016-2022. Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO) and World Health Organization (WHO) Regional
office for the Americas, Washington DC, USA, 57 pp.
Pan, X., M. Elzen, N. Hohne, F. Teng, and L. Wang, 2017: Exploring fair and ambitious
mitigation contributions under the Paris Agreement goals. Environmental
Science & Policy, 74, 49-56, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.04.020.
Panagopoulos, T., J.A. Gonzalez Duque, and M. Bostenaru Dan, 2016: Urban
planning with respect to environmental quality and human well-being.
Environmental Pollution, 208, 137-144, doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2015.07.038.
Pant, L.P., B. Adhikari, and K.K. Bhattarai, 2015: Adaptive transition for
transformations to sustainability in developing countries. Current Opinion in

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Environmental Sustainability, 14, 206-212, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.07.006.
Panteli, M. and P. Mancarella, 2015: Influence of extreme weather and climate
change on the resilience of power systems: Impacts and possible mitigation
strategies. Electric Power Systems Research, 127, 259-270,
doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2015.06.012.
Panteli, M., D.N. Trakas, P. Mancarella, and N.D. Hatziargyriou, 2016: Boosting the
Power Grid Resilience to Extreme Weather Events Using Defensive Islanding.
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 7(6), 2913-2922,
doi:10.1109/tsg.2016.2535228.
Papargyropoulou, E., R. Lozano, J. K. Steinberger, N. Wright, and Z. Ujang, 2014: The
food waste hierarchy as a framework for the management of food surplus and
food waste. Journal of Cleaner Production, 76, 106-115,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.04.020.
Parag, Y. and B.K. Sovacool, 2016: Electricity market design for the prosumer era.
Nature Energy, 1(4), 16032, doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.32.
Paraiso, M.L.S. and N. Gouveia, 2015: Health risks due to pre-harvesting sugarcane
burning in Sao Paulo State, Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Epidemiologia, 18(3),
691-701, doi:10.1590/1980-5497201500030014.
Pardo, P. et al., 2014: A review on high temperature thermochemical heat
energy storage. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 32, 591-610,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.12.014.
Parikh, K.S. and J.K. Parikh, 2016: Realizing potential savings of energy and
emissions from efficient household appliances in India. Energy Policy, 97,
102-111, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.07.005.
Parker, A., 2014: Governing solar geoengineering research as it leaves the
laboratory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 372(2031), 20140173-20140173,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2014.0173.
Parker, A. and P.J. Irvine, 2018: The Risk of Termination Shock From Solar
Geoengineering. Earth's Future, 6(2), 1-12, doi:10.1002/2017ef000735.
Parkes, B., A. Challinor, and K. Nicklin, 2015: Crop failure rates in a geoengineered
climate: impact of climate change and marine cloud brightening.
Environmental Research Letters, 10(8), 084003,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084003.
Parkhill, K., N. Pidgeon, A. Corner, and N. Vaughan, 2013: Deliberation and
Responsible Innovation: A Geoengineering Case Study. In: Responsible
Innovation [Owen, R., J. Bessant, and M. Heintz (eds.)]. John Wiley & Sons Ltd,
Chichester, UK, pp. 219-239, doi:10.1002/9781118551424.ch12.
Parkinson, S.C. and N. Djilali, 2015: Robust response to hydro-climatic change
in electricity generation planning. Climatic Change, 130(4), 475-489,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1359-5.
Parnell, S., 2015: Fostering Transformative Climate Adaptation and Mitigation in
the African City: Opportunities and Constraints of Urban Planning. In: Urban
Vulnerability and Climate Change in Africa: A Multidisciplinary Approach.
Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 349-367,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-03982-4_11.
Parry, I.W.H., D. Evans, and W.E. Oates, 2014: Are energy efficiency standards
justified? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 67(2),
104-125, doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2013.11.003.
Parson, E.A., 2017: Starting the Dialogue on Climate Engineering Governance:
A World Commission. Fixing Climate Governance Series Policy Brief No. 8,
Centre for International Governance Innovation, Waterloo, ON, Canada, 8 pp.
Pasimeni, M.R. et al., 2014: Scales, strategies and actions for effective
energy planning: A review. Energy Policy, 65, 165-174, doi:10.1016/j.
enpol.2013.10.027.
Pasquini, L., G. Ziervogel, R.M. Cowling, and C. Shearing, 2015: What enables local
governments to mainstream climate change adaptation? Lessons learned
from two municipal case studies in the Western Cape, South Africa. Climate
and Development, 7(1), 60-70, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.886994.
Patel, R., G. Walker, M. Bhatt, and V. Pathak, 2017: The Demand for Disaster
Microinsurance for Small Businesses in Urban Slums: The Results of Surveys in
Three Indian Cities. PLOS Currents Disasters.
Patt, A., 2017: Beyond the tragedy of the commons: Reframing effective climate
change governance. Energy Research & Social Science, 34, 1-3,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.023.
Patt, A.G. and D. Schroter, 2008: Perceptions of climate risk in Mozambique:
Implications for the success of adaptation strategies. Global Environmental
Change, 18(3), 458-467, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.04.002.
Pattanayak, S.K., D.E. Mercer, E. Sills, and J.C. Yang, 2003: Taking stock of
agroforestry adoption studies. Agroforestry Systems, 57(3), 173-186,
doi:10.1023/a:1024809108210.

Chapter 4
Patterson, J.J. et al., 2018: Political feasibility of 1.5 C societal transformations: the
role of social justice. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 1-9,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.11.002.
Paul, K.I. et al., 2016: Managing reforestation to sequester carbon, increase
biodiversity potential and minimize loss of agricultural land. Land Use Policy,
51, 135-149, doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2015.10.027.
Pauw, W.P., R.J.T. Klein, P. Vellinga, and F. Biermann, 2016a: Private finance for
adaptation: do private realities meet public ambitions? Climatic Change,
134(4), 489-503, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1539-3.
Pauw, W.P. et al., 2016b: NDC Explorer. German Development Institute/Deutsches
Institut fur Entwicklungspolitik (DIE), African Centre for Technology Studies
(ACTS), Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI). Retrieved from:
https://klimalog.die-gdi.de/ndc.
Pauw, W.P. et al., 2018: Beyond headline mitigation numbers: we need more
transparent and comparable NDCs to achieve the Paris Agreement on climate
change. Climatic Change, 147(1-2), 23-29, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2122-x.
Peake, S. and P. Ekins, 2017: Exploring the financial and investment implications of
the Paris Agreement. Climate Policy, 17(7), 832-852,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1258633.
Pearce, T.C.L., 2018: Incorporating Indigenous Knowledge in Research. In: Routledge
Handbook of Environmental Migration and Displacement [McLeman, R. and F.
Gemenne (eds.)]. Taylor & Francis Group, New York and London, pp. 125-134.
Pearce, T.C.L., J.D. Ford, A.C. Willox, and B. Smit, 2015: Inuit Traditional Ecological
Knowledge (TEK), Subsistence Hunting and Adaptation to Climate Change in
the Canadian Arctic. Arctic, 68(2), 233-245,
www.jstor.org/stable/43871322.
Pearce, T.C.L., R. Currenti, A. Mateiwai, and B. Doran, 2017: Adaptation to climate
change and freshwater resources in Vusama village, Viti Levu, Fiji. Regional
Environmental Change, 1-10, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1222-5.
Pellegrino, M., M. Simonetti, and G. Chiesa, 2016: Reducing thermal discomfort
and energy consumption of Indian residential buildings: Model validation by
in-field measurements and simulation of low-cost interventions. Energy and
Buildings, 113, 145-158, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.12.015.
Pelletier, L.G., K.M. Tuson, I. Green-Demers, K. Noels, and A.M. Beaton, 1998:
Why Are You Doing Things for the Environment? The Motivation Toward the
Environment Scale (MTES). Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28(5), 437-
468, doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1998.tb01714.x.
Pelling, M., K. O'Brien, and D. Matyas, 2015: Adaptation and transformation.
Climatic Change, 133(1), 113-127, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1303-0.
Pelling, M. et al., 2018: Africa's urban adaptation transition under a 1.5 climate.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 10-15,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.11.005.
Peng, J. et al., 2016: Markedly enhanced absorption and direct radiative forcing of
black carbon under polluted urban environments. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(16), 4266-4271,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1602310113.
Perlaviciute, G. and L. Steg, 2014: Contextual and psychological factors shaping
evaluations and acceptability of energy alternatives: Integrated review and
research agenda. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 35, 361-381,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.04.003.
Perrels, A., T. Frei, F. Espejo, L. Jamin, and A. Thomalla, 2013: Socio-economic
benefits of weather and climate services in Europe. Advances in Science and
Research, 10(1), 65-70, doi:10.5194/asr-10-65-2013.
Perrier, Q., 2016: A robust nuclear strategy for France. Association des Economistes
de l'Energie (FAEE), 29 pp.
Persson, U.M., 2015: The impact of biofuel demand on agricultural commodity
prices: a systematic review. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and
Environment, 4(5), 410-428, doi:10.1002/wene.155.
Perugini, L. et al., 2017: Biophysical effects on temperature and precipitation
due to land cover change. Environmental Research Letters, 12(5), 053002,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa6b3f.
Peters, A.M., E. van der Werff, and L. Steg, 2018: Beyond purchasing: Electric vehicle
adoption motivation and consistent sustainable energy behaviour in the
Netherlands. Energy Research & Social Science, 39, 234-247,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.10.008.
Peters, G.P. and O. Geden, 2017: Catalysing a political shift from low to negative
carbon. Nature Climate Change, 7(9), 619-621, doi:10.1038/nclimate3369.
Peters, G.P. et al., 2017: Key indicators to track current progress and future ambition
of the Paris Agreement. Nature Climate Change, 7(2), 118-122,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3202.
Pfeiffer, A., R. Millar, C. Hepburn, and E. Beinhocker, 2016: The `2C capital stock'

429

4

Chapter 4

4

for electricity generation: Committed cumulative carbon emissions from the
electricity generation sector and the transition to a green economy. Applied
Energy, 179, 1395-1408, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.02.093.
Pfeiffer, L. and C.-Y.C. Lin, 2014: Does efficient irrigation technology lead to reduced
groundwater extraction? Empirical evidence. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 67(2), 189-208,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2013.12.002.
Philibert, C., 2017: Renewable Energy for Industry - From green energy to green
materials and fuels. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 72 pp.
Pichert, D. and K. Katsikopoulos, 2008: Green defaults: Information presentation
and pro-environmental behaviour. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
28(1), 63-73, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.09.004.
Pichler, A. and E. Striessnig, 2013: Differential Vulnerability to Hurricanes in Cuba,
Haiti, and the Dominican Republic: The Contribution of Education. Ecology
and Society, 18(3), 31, doi:10.5751/es-05774-180331.
Pichler, M., A. Schaffartzik, H. Haberl, and C. Gorg, 2017: Drivers of society-nature
relations in the Anthropocene and their implications for sustainability
transformations. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 26-27,
32-36, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.01.017.
Pickering, N.K. et al., 2015: Animal board invited review: genetic possibilities to
reduce enteric methane emissions from ruminants. Animal, 9(09), 1431-
1440, doi:10.1017/s1751731115000968.
Pielke, R.A., 2009: An idealized assessment of the economics of air capture of
carbon dioxide in mitigation policy. Environmental Science & Policy, 12(3),
216-225, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2009.01.002.
Pierpaoli, E., G. Carli, E. Pignatti, and M. Canavari, 2013: Drivers of Precision
Agriculture Technologies Adoption: A Literature Review. Procedia Technology,
8, 61-69, doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2013.11.010.
Pierrehumbert, R.T., 2014: Short-Lived Climate Pollution. Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences, 42, 341-79, doi:10.1146/annurev-earth-060313-054843.
Piketty, T., 2014: Capital in the Twenty-first Century. The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 696 pp.
Pindyck, R.S., 2017: The Use and Misuse of Models for Climate Policy. Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 11(1), 100-114,
doi:10.1093/reep/rew012.
Pinho, P.F., J.A. Marengo, and M.S. Smith, 2015: Complex socio-ecological dynamics
driven by extreme events in the Amazon. Regional Environmental Change,
15(4), 643-655, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0659-z.
Pinho, P.F. et al., 2014: Ecosystem protection and poverty alleviation in the tropics:
Perspective from a historical evolution of policy-making in the Brazilian
Amazon. Ecosystem Services, 8, 97-109, doi:10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.03.002.
Pisano, I. and M. Lubell, 2017: Environmental Behavior in Cross-National
Perspective: A Multilevel Analysis of 30 Countries. Environment and Behavior,
49(1), 31-58, doi:10.1177/0013916515600494.
Pitari, G. et al., 2014: Stratospheric ozone response to sulfate geoengineering:
Results from the Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project (GeoMIP).
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 119(5), 2629-2653,
doi:10.1002/2013jd020566.
Pittelkow, C.M. et al., 2014: Productivity limits and potentials of the principles of
conservation agriculture. Nature, 517(7534), 365-368,
doi:10.1038/nature13809.
Pittman, J., D. Armitage, S. Alexander, D. Campbell, and M. Alleyne, 2015: Governance
fit for climate change in a Caribbean coastal-marine context. Marine Policy,
51, 486-498, doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2014.08.009.
Pittock, J., H. Bjornlund, R. Stirzaker, and A. van Rooyen, 2017: Communal irrigation
systems in South-Eastern Africa: findings on productivity and profitability.
International Journal of Water Resources Development, 33(5), 839-847,
doi:10.1080/07900627.2017.1324768.
Pizer, W.A., 2002: Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global climate
change. Journal of Public Economics, 85(3), 409-434,
doi:10.1016/s0047-2727(01)00118-9.
Place, F. et al., 2012: Improved Policies for Facilitating the Adoption of Agroforestry.
In: Agroforestry for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services - Science and Practice
[Kaonga, M. (ed.)]. IntechOpen, London, UK, pp. 113-128, doi:10.5772/34524.
PlaNYC, 2013: A Stronger, More Resilient New York. PlaNYC, New York, NY, USA,
438 pp.
Platinga, A. and B. Scholtens, 2016: The Financial Impact of Divestment from Fossil
Fuels. SOM Research Reports; no. 16005-EEF, SOM research school, University
of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 47 pp.
Plazzotta, M., R. Seferian, H. Douville, B. Kravitz, and J. Tjiputra, 2018: Land
Surface Cooling Induced by Sulfate Geoengineering Constrained by Major

430

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Volcanic Eruptions. Geophysical Research Letters, 45(11), 5663-5671,
doi:10.1029/2018gl077583.
Plevin, R.J., M. O'Hare, A.D. Jones, M.S. Torn, and H.K. Gibbs, 2010: Greenhouse
Gas Emissions from Biofuels' Indirect Land Use Change Are Uncertain but
May Be Much Greater than Previously Estimated. Environmental Science &
Technology, 44(21), 8015-8021, doi:10.1021/es101946t.
Poeplau, C. and A. Don, 2015: Carbon sequestration in agricultural soils via
cultivation of cover crops - A meta-analysis. Agriculture, Ecosystems &
Environment, 200, 33-41, doi:10.1016/j.agee.2014.10.024.
Poff, N.L.R. et al., 2016: Sustainable water management under future uncertainty
with eco-engineering decision scaling. Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 25-34,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2765.
Pollak, M., B. Meyer, and E. Wilson, 2011: Reducing greenhouse gas emissions:
Lessons from state climate action plans. Energy Policy, 39(9), 5429-5439,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.05.020.
Pollitt, H. and J.-F. Mercure, 2017: The role of money and the financial sector in
energy-economy models used for assessing climate and energy policy.
Climate Policy, 1-14, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1277685.
Pollitt, H., 2018: Policies for limiting climate change to well below 2C. (in press).
Poortinga, W., L. Steg, and C. Vlek, 2002: Environmental Risk Concern and
Preferences for Energy-Saving Measures. Environment and Behavior, 34(4),
455-478, doi:10.1177/00116502034004003.
Poortinga, W., L. Steg, C. Vlek, and G. Wiersma, 2003: Household preferences for
energy-saving measures: A conjoint analysis. Journal of Economic Psychology,
24(1), 49-64, doi:10.1016/s0167-4870(02)00154-x.
Popp, A. et al., 2014a: Land-use protection for climate change mitigation. Nature
Climate Change, 4(12), 1095-1098, doi:10.1038/nclimate2444.
Popp, A. et al., 2014b: Land-use transition for bioenergy and climate stabilization:
model comparison of drivers, impacts and interactions with other land use
based mitigation options. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 495-509,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0926-x.
Pradhan, A., C. Chan, P.K. Roul, J. Halbrendt, and B. Sipes, 2018: Potential of
conservation agriculture (CA) for climate change adaptation and food security
under rainfed uplands of India: A transdisciplinary approach. Agricultural
Systems, 163, 27-35, doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.002.
Preston, B.L., J. Mustelin, and M.C. Maloney, 2013: Climate adaptation heuristics
and the science/policy divide. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global
Change, 20(3), 467-497, doi:10.1007/s11027-013-9503-x.
Preston, B.L., L. Rickards, H. Funfgeld, and R.J. Keenan, 2015: Toward reflexive
climate adaptation research. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
14, 127-135, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.05.002.
Preston, C.J., 2013: Ethics and geoengineering: reviewing the moral issues
raised by solar radiation management and carbon dioxide removal. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 4(1), 23-37, doi:10.1002/wcc.198.
Preston, C.J. (ed.), 2016: Climate Justice and Geoengineering: Ethics and Policy in
the Atmospheric Anthropocene. Rowman & Littlefield International, Lanham,
MD, USA, 234 pp.
Pretty, J. and Z.P. Bharucha, 2014: Sustainable intensification in agricultural
systems. Annals of Botany, 114(8), 1571-1596, doi:10.1093/aob/mcu205.
Pretzsch, H. et al., 2017: Climate change accelerates growth of urban trees in
metropolises worldwide. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 15403,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-14831-w.
Pritchard, C., A. Yang, P. Holmes, and M. Wilkinson, 2015: Thermodynamics,
economics and systems thinking: What role for air capture of CO2? Process
Safety and Environmental Protection, 94, 188-195,
doi:10.1016/j.psep.2014.06.011.
Pritoni, M., A.K. Meier, C. Aragon, D. Perry, and T. Peffer, 2015: Energy efficiency and
the misuse of programmable thermostats: The effectiveness of crowdsourcing
for understanding household behavior. Energy Research & Social Science, 8,
190-197, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.06.002.
Proost, S. and D. Van Regemorter, 1995: The double dividend and the role of
inequality aversion and macroeconomic regimes. International Tax and Public
Finance, 2(2), 207-219, doi:10.1007/bf00877497.
Pueyo, A. and R. Hanna, 2015: What level of electricity access is required to enable
and sustain poverty reduction? Annex 1 Literature review. Practical Action
Consulting, Bourton-on-Dunsmore, UK, 65 pp.
Puppim de Oliveira, J.A. et al., 2013: Promoting win-win situations in climate
change mitigation, local environmental quality and development in
Asian cities through co-benefits. Journal of Cleaner Production, 58, 1-6,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.08.011.
Pyorala, P. et al., 2014: Effects of Management on Economic Profitability of Forest

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Biomass Production and Carbon Neutrality of Bioenergy Use in Norway
Spruce Stands Under the Changing Climate. Bioenergy Research, 7(1), 279-
294, doi:10.1007/s12155-013-9372-x.
Qazi, S. and W. Young Jr., 2014: Disaster relief management and resilience using
photovoltaic energy. In: 2014 International Conference on Collaboration
Technologies and Systems (CTS). IEEE, pp. 628-632,
doi:10.1109/cts.2014.6867637.
Qin, Z., J.B. Dunn, H. Kwon, S. Mueller, and M.M. Wander, 2016: Soil carbon
sequestration and land use change associated with biofuel production:
empirical evidence. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 66-80, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12237.
Quaas, M.F., J. Quaas, W. Rickels, and O. Boucher, 2017: Are there reasons
against open-ended research into solar radiation management? A model
of intergenerational decision-making under uncertainty. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 84, 1-17,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2017.02.002.
Quandt, A., H. Neufeldt, and J.T. McCabe, 2017: The role of agroforestry in building
livelihood resilience to floods and drought in semiarid Kenya. Ecology and
Society, 22(3), 10, doi:10.5751/es-09461-220310.
Quitzow, R., 2015: Assessing policy strategies for the promotion of environmental
technologies: A review of India's National Solar Mission. Research Policy,
44(1), 233-243, doi:10.1016/j.respol.2014.09.003.
Rabitz, F., 2016: Going rogue? Scenarios for unilateral geoengineering. Futures, 84,
98-107, doi:10.1016/j.futures.2016.11.001.
Radhakrishnan, M., A. Pathirana, R.M. Ashley, B. Gersonius, and C. Zevenbergen,
2018: Flexible adaptation planning for water sensitive cities. Cities, 78, 87-
95, doi:10.1016/j.cities.2018.01.022.
Rai, V., D.C. Reeves, and R. Margolis, 2016: Overcoming barriers and uncertainties
in the adoption of residential solar PV. Renewable Energy, 89, 498-505,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2015.11.080.
Rajamani, L., 2016: Ambition and Differentiation in the 2015 Paris Agreement:
Interpretative Possibilities and Underlying Politics. International and
Comparative Law Quarterly, 65(02), 493-514,
doi:10.1017/s0020589316000130.
Rajan, R.G., 2011: Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World
Economy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 280 pp.
Rakatama, A., R. Pandit, C. Ma, and S. Iftekhar, 2017: The costs and benefits of
REDD+: A review of the literature. Forest Policy and Economics, 75, 103-111,
doi:10.1016/j.forpol.2016.08.006.
Ramachandran, S., V. Ramaswamy, G.L. Stenchikov, and A. Robock, 2000: Radiative
impact of the Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption: Lower stratospheric
response. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 105(D19), 24409-
24429, doi:10.1029/2000jd900355.
Ramage, M.H. et al., 2017: The wood from the trees: The use of timber in
construction. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 68, 333-359,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.107.
Ramankutty, N. et al., 2018: Trends in Global Agricultural Land Use: Implications
for Environmental Health and Food Security. Annual Review of Plant Biology,
69(1), 789-815, doi:10.1146/annurev-arplant-042817-040256.
Ran, F.A. et al., 2013: Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nature
Protocols, 8(11), 2281-2308, doi:10.1038/nprot.2013.143.
Rand, J. and B. Hoen, 2017: Thirty years of North American wind energy acceptance
research: What have we learned? Energy Research & Social Science, 29, 135-
148, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.019.
Ranganathan, J. et al., 2016: Shifting Diets for a Sustainable Food Future. Installment
11 of Creating a Sustainable Food Future, World Resources Institute (WRI),
Washington DC, USA, 90 pp.
Ranjan, M. and H.J. Herzog, 2011: Feasibility of air capture. Energy Procedia, 4,
2869-2876, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2011.02.193.
Rasul, G. and B. Sharma, 2016: The nexus approach to water-energy-food security:
an option for adaptation to climate change. Climate Policy, 16(6), 682-702,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1029865.
Rathore, D., A.-S. Nizami, A. Singh, and D. Pant, 2016: Key issues in estimating
energy and greenhouse gas savings of biofuels: challenges and perspectives.
Biofuel Research Journal, 3(2), 380-393, doi:10.18331/brj2016.3.2.3.
Rau, G.H., 2008: Electrochemical splitting of calcium carbonate to increase solution
alkalinity: implications for mitigation of carbon dioxide and ocean acidity.
Environmental Science & Technology, 42(23), 8935-8940,
doi:10.1021/es800366q.
Rau, G.H., 2011: CO2 Mitigation via Capture and Chemical Conversion in Seawater.
Environmental Science & Technology, 45(3), 1088-1092,
doi:10.1021/es102671x.

Chapter 4
Rau, G.H. and K. Caldeira, 1999: Enhanced carbonate dissolution: a means of
sequestering waste CO2 as ocean bicarbonate. Energy Conversion and
Management, 40(17), 1803-1813, doi:10.1016/s0196-8904(99)00071-0.
Rau, G.H. et al., 2013: Direct electrolytic dissolution of silicate minerals for air CO2
mitigation and carbon-negative H2 production. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110(25), 10095-100,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222358110.
Ray, A., L. Hughes, D.M. Konisky, and C. Kaylor, 2017: Extreme weather exposure
and support for climate change adaptation. Global Environmental Change,
46, 104-113, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.07.002.
RCI, 2008: Rotterdam Climate Proof: The Rotterdam Challenge on Water and
Climate Adaptation. Rotterdam Climate Initiative (RCI), Rotterdam, The
Netherlands, 11 pp.
RCI, 2013: Rotterdam Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. Rotterdam Climate
Initiative (RCI), Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 70 pp.
RCI, 2017: Rotterdam Climate Intitiative. Rotterdam Climate Initiative (RCI).
Retrieved from: www.rotterdamclimateinitiative.nl.
Reckien, D., J. Flacke, M. Olazabal, and O. Heidrich, 2015: The Influence of Drivers
and Barriers on Urban Adaptation and Mitigation Plans - An Empirical
Analysis of European Cities. PLOS ONE, 10(8), e0135597,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0135597.
Reckien, D. et al., 2014: Climate change response in Europe: what's the reality?
Analysis of adaptation and mitigation plans from 200 urban areas in 11
countries. Climatic Change, 122(1), 331-340,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0989-8.
Reckien, D. et al., 2017: Climate change, equity and the Sustainable Development
Goals: an urban perspective. Environment & Urbanization, 29(1), 159-182,
doi:10.1177/0956247816677778.
Refsgaard, K. and K. Magnussen, 2009: Household behaviour and attitudes with
respect to recycling food waste - experiences from focus groups. Journal of
Environmental Management, 90(2), 760-771,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.01.018.
Rehmatulla, N. and T. Smith, 2015: Barriers to energy efficiency in shipping: A
triangulated approach to investigate the principal agent problem. Energy
Policy, 84, 44-57, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2015.04.019.
Reid, H., 2016: Ecosystem- and community-based adaptation: learning from
community-based natural resource management. Climate and Development,
8(1), 4-9, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1034233.
Reid, H. et al., 2009: Community-based adaptation to climate change: An overview.
Participatory Learning and Action, 60, 11-38,
http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/g02608.pdf.
REN21, 2017: Renewables 2017 Global Status Report. Renewable Energy Policy
Network for the 21st Century, Paris, France, 302 pp.
Renforth, P., 2012: The potential of enhanced weathering in the UK. International
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 10, 229-243,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2012.06.011.
Renforth, P. and G. Henderson, 2017: Assessing ocean alkalinity for
carbon sequestration. Reviews of Geophysics, 55(3), 636-674,
doi:10.1002/2016rg000533.
Repo, A., J.-P. Tuovinen, and J. Liski, 2015: Can we produce carbon and climate
neutral forest bioenergy? GCB Bioenergy, 7(2), 253-262,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12134.
Revi, A., 2016: Afterwards: Habitat III and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Urbanisation, 1(2), x-xiv, doi:10.1177/2455747116682899.
Revi, A., 2017: Re-imagining the United Nations' Response to a Twenty-firstcentury Urban World. Urbanisation, 2(2), 1-7,
doi:10.1177/2455747117740438.
Revi, A. et al., 2014a: Towards transformative adaptation in cities: the
IPCC's Fifth Assessment. Environment and Urbanization, 26(1), 11-28,
doi:10.1177/0956247814523539.
Revi, A. et al., 2014b: Urban Areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 535-612.
Rey Benayas, J.M. et al., 2009: Enhancement of biodiversity and ecosystem services
by ecological restoration: a meta-analysis. Science, 325(5944), 1121-4,
doi:10.1126/science.1172460.

431

4

Chapter 4

4

Reynolds, J.L., 2015: An Economic Analysis of Liability and Compensation for Harm
from Large-Scale Field Research in Solar Climate Engineering. Climate Law,
5(2-4), 182-209, doi:10.1163/18786561-00504004.
Reynolds, J.L., J.L. Contreras, and J.D. Sarnoff, 2018: Intellectual property policies for
solar geoengineering. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 9(2),
1-7, doi:10.1002/wcc.512.
Reynolds, T.W., A. Bostrom, D. Read, and M.G. Morgan, 2010: Now What Do People
Know About Global Climate Change? Survey Studies of Educated Laypeople.
Risk Analysis, 30(10), 1520-1538,
doi:10.1111/j.1539-6924.2010.01448.x.
RGoB, 2012: The Report of the High-Level Meeting on Wellbeing and Happiness:
Defining a New Economic Paradigm. Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB).
The Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Bhutan to the United Nations, New
York, NY, USA and Office of the Prime Minister, Thimphu, Bhutan, 166 pp.
RGoB, 2013: Eleventh Five Year Plan Volume I: Main Document. Gross National
Happiness Commission. Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB), Thimphu,
Bhutan, 399 pp.
RGoB, 2016: Economic Development Policy. Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB),
Thimphu, Bhutan, 49 pp.
Riahi, K. et al., 2015: Locked into Copenhagen pledges - Implications of shortterm emission targets for the cost and feasibility of long-term climate goals.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 90(Part A), 8-23,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.016.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy,
land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 153-168, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Ribeiro, H., 2008: Sugar cane burning in Brazil: respiratory health effects (in
Spanish). Revista de Saude Publica, 42(2), 1-6,
doi:10.1590/s0034-89102008005000009.
Rickards, L. and S.M. Howden, 2012: Transformational adaptation: agriculture and
climate change. Crop and Pasture Science, 63(3), 240-250,
doi:10.1071/cp11172.
Ricke, K.L., J.B. Moreno-Cruz, and K. Caldeira, 2013: Strategic incentives for climate
geoengineering coalitions to exclude broad participation. Environmental
Research Letters, 8(1), 014021, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/014021.
Ricke, K.L., J.B. Moreno-Cruz, J. Schewe, A. Levermann, and K. Caldeira, 2015: Policy
thresholds in mitigation. Nature Geoscience, 9(1), 5-6,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2607.
Ringel, M., 2017: Energy efficiency policy governance in a multi-level administration
structure - evidence from Germany. Energy Efficiency, 10(3), 753-776,
doi:10.1007/s12053-016-9484-1.
Rinkevich, B., 2014: Rebuilding coral reefs: does active reef restoration lead to
sustainable reefs? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 7, 28-36,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.11.018.
Rippke, U. et al., 2016: Timescales of transformational climate change adaptation
in sub-Saharan African agriculture. Nature Climate Change, 6(6), 605-609,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2947.
Ritzenhofen, I. and S. Spinler, 2016: Optimal design of feed-in-tariffs to stimulate
renewable energy investments under regulatory uncertainty - A real options
analysis. Energy Economics, 53, 76-89,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2014.12.008.
Rivas, S. et al., 2015: The Covenant of Mayors: In-depth Analysis of Sustainable
Energy Action Plans. EUR 27526 EN, Joint Research Centre of the European
Commission, 170 pp., doi:10.2790/182945.
Roberts, D., 2016: The New Climate Calculus: 1.5C = Paris Agreement, Cities, Local
Government, Science and Champions (PLSC2). Urbanisation, 1(2), 71-78,
doi:10.1177/2455747116672474.
Roberts, J.T. and B. Parks, 2006: A climate of injustice: Global inequality, northsouth politics, and climate policy. MIT Press, 424 pp.
Roberts, J.T. and R. Weikmans, 2017: Postface: fragmentation, failing trust and
enduring tensions over what counts as climate finance. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 17(1), 129-137,
doi:10.1007/s10784-016-9347-4.
Roberts, J.T. et al., 2017: How Will We Pay for Loss and Damage? Ethics, Policy &
Environment, 20(2), 208-226, doi:10.1080/21550085.2017.1342963.
Robertson, J.L. and J. Barling (eds.), 2015: The Psychology of Green Organizations.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 408 pp.
Robinson et al., 2014: How deep is deep enough? Ocean iron fertilization and
carbon sequestration in the Southern Ocean. Geophysical Research Letters,
41(7), 2489-2495, doi:10.1002/2013gl058799.
Robinson, S.-A., 2017: Climate change adaptation trends in small island developing

432

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
states. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 22(4), 669-
691, doi:10.1007/s11027-015-9693-5.
Robinson, S.-A. and M. Dornan, 2017: International financing for climate change
adaptation in small island developing states. Regional Environmental Change,
17(4), 1103-1115, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1085-1.
Robiou du Pont, Y. et al., 2017: Equitable mitigation to achieve the Paris Agreement
goals. Nature Climate Change, 7(1), 38-43, doi:10.1038/nclimate3186.
Robledo-Abad, C. et al., 2017: Bioenergy production and sustainable development:
science base for policymaking remains limited. GCB Bioenergy, 9(3), 541-
556, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12338.
Robock, A., 2012: Is Geoengineering Research Ethical? Sicherheit und Frieden
(S+F)/Security and Peace, 30(4), 226-229, www.jstor.org/stable/24233207.
Robock, A., L. Oman, and G.L. Stenchikov, 2008: Regional climate responses to
geoengineering with tropical and Arctic SO2 injections. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres, 113(D16), D16101, doi:10.1029/2008jd010050.
Robock, A., A. Marquardt, B. Kravitz, and G. Stenchikov, 2009: Benefits, risks, and
costs of stratospheric geoengineering. Geophysical Research Letters, 36(19),
L19703, doi:10.1029/2009gl039209.
Rochedo, P.R.R. et al., 2016: Carbon capture potential and costs in Brazil. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 131, 280-295, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.05.033.
Rockstrom, J. et al., 2017: A roadmap for rapid decarbonization. Science,
355(6331), 1269-1271, doi:10.1126/science.aah3443.
Rode, P. et al., 2014: Accessibility in Cities: Transport and Urban Form. NCE
Cities - Paper 03, LSE Cities, London School of Economics and Political
Science (LSE), London, UK, 61 pp.
Rodriguez, H., 2015: Risk and Trust in Institutions That Regulate Strategic
Technological Innovations: Challenges for a Socially Legitimate Risk Analysis.
In: New Perspectives on Technology, Values, and Ethics [Gonzalez, W. (ed.)].
Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 147-166,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21870-0_8.
Roe, M.J., 1996: Strong Managers, Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American
Corporate Finance. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 342 pp.
Roelfsema, M., M. Harmsen, J.J.G. Olivier, A.F. Hof, and D.P. van Vuuren, 2018:
Integrated assessment of international climate mitigation commitments
outside the UNFCCC. Global Environmental Change, 48, 67-75,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.11.001.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2014: Disentangling the effects of CO2 and short-lived climate
forcer mitigation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(46),
16325-16330, doi:10.1073/pnas.1415631111.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2016: Paris Agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep
warming well below 2C. Nature, 534(7609), 631-639,
doi:10.1038/nature18307.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2017: Understanding the origin of Paris Agreement emission
uncertainties. Nature Communications, 8, 15748,
doi:10.1038/ncomms15748.
Rogers, D. and V. Tsirkunov, 2010: Costs and Benefits of Early Warning Systems.
The World Bank and The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNISDR), 16 pp.
Rogge, K.S., F. Kern, and M. Howlett, 2017: Conceptual and empirical advances
in analysing policy mixes for energy transitions. Energy Research & Social
Science, 33, 1-10, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.025.
Roh, S., 2017: Big Data Analysis of Public Acceptance of Nuclear Power in Korea.
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 49(4), 850-854,
doi:10.1016/j.net.2016.12.015.
Romero-Lankao, P., S. Hughes, A. Rosas-Huerta, R. Borquez, and D.M. Gnatz,
2013: Institutional capacity for climate change responses: An examination of
construction and pathways in Mexico City and Santiago. Environment and
Planning C: Government and Policy, 31(5), 785-805, doi:10.1068/c12173.
Romero-Lankao, P. et al., 2018: Governance and policy. In: Climate Change and Cities:
Second Assessment Report of the Urban Climate Change Research Network
[Rosenzweig, C., W. Solecki, P. Romero-Lankao, S. Mehrotra, S. Dhakal, and S.
Ali Ibrahim (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 585-606, doi:10.1017/9781316563878.023.
Roos, E. et al., 2017: Protein futures for Western Europe: potential land use and
climate impacts in 2050. Regional Environmental Change, 17(2), 367-377,
doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1013-4.
Roques, F.A., D.M. Newbery, and W.J. Nuttall, 2008: Fuel mix diversification
incentives in liberalized electricity markets: A Mean--Variance Portfolio theory
approach. Energy Economics, 30(4), 1831-1849,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2007.11.008.
Rosa, E.A. and T. Dietz, 2012: Human drivers of national greenhouse-gas emissions.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Nature Climate Change, 2, 581-586, doi:10.1038/nclimate1506.
Rose, A., 2016: Capturing the co-benefits of disaster risk management on the
private sector side. Policy Research Working Paper No. 7634, World Bank,
Washington DC, USA, 33 pp.
Rose, S.K., R. Richels, G. Blanford, and T. Rutherford, 2017: The Paris Agreement and
next steps in limiting global warming. Climatic Change, 142(1-2), 255-270,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1935-y.
Rosenbloom, D., 2017: Pathways: An emerging concept for the theory and
governance of low-carbon transitions. Global Environmental Change, 43,
37-50, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.011.
Rosenow, J., F. Kern, and K. Rogge, 2017: The need for comprehensive and well
targeted instrument mixes to stimulate energy transitions: The case of energy
efficiency policy. Energy Research & Social Science, 33, 95-104,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.013.
Rosenzweig, C. and W. Solecki, 2014: Hurricane Sandy and adaptation pathways in
New York: Lessons from a first-responder city. Global Environmental Change,
28, 395-408, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.003.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2015: ARC3.2 Summary for city leaders. Urban Climate
Change Research Network. Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, 28 pp.
Roser, D., C. Huggel, M. Ohndorf, and I. Wallimann-Helmer, 2015: Advancing the
interdisciplinary dialogue on climate justice. Climatic Change, 133(3), 349-
359, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1556-2.
Ross, M.L., 2015: What Have We Learned about the Resource Curse? Annual Review of
Political Science, 18(1), 239-259, doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-052213-040359.
Rothman, D.S., P. Romero-Lankao, V.J. Schweizer, and B.A. Bee, 2014: Challenges to
adaptation: a fundamental concept for the shared socio-economic pathways
and beyond. Climatic Change, 122(3), 495-507,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0907-0.
Roudier, P., A. Alhassane, C. Baron, S. Louvet, and B. Sultan, 2016: Assessing
the benefits of weather and seasonal forecasts to millet growers in Niger.
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 223, 168-180,
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2016.04.010.
Rozenberg, J., S. Hallegatte, B. Perrissin-Fabert, and J.-C. Hourcade, 2013: Funding
low-carbon investments in the absence of a carbon tax. Climate Policy, 13(1),
134-141, doi:10.1080/14693062.2012.691222.
Rubin, E.S., J.E. Davison, and H.J. Herzog, 2015: The cost of CO2 capture and storage.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 40, 378-400,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2015.05.018.
Ruepert, A. et al., 2016: Environmental considerations in the organizational
context: A pathway to pro-environmental behaviour at work. Energy Research
& Social Science, 17, 59-70, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.04.004.
Ruparathna, R., K. Hewage, and R. Sadiq, 2016: Improving the energy efficiency of
the existing building stock: A critical review of commercial and institutional
buildings. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 53, 1032-1045,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.09.084.
Russell, L.M. et al., 2012: Ecosystem impacts of geoengineering: A review for
developing a science plan. Ambio, 41(4), 350-369,
doi:10.1007/s13280-012-0258-5.
Ryaboshapko, A.G. and A.P. Revokatova, 2015: Technical Capabilities for Creating
an Aerosol Layer In the Stratosphere for Climate Stabilization Purpose (in
Russian). Problems of Environmental monitoring and Ecosystem modeling,
T 26(2), 115-127.
Saelen, H. and S. Kallbekken, 2011: A choice experiment on fuel taxation
and earmarking in Norway. Ecological Economics, 70(11), 2181-2190,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.06.024.
Safarzyska, K. and J.C.J.M. van den Bergh, 2017: Financial stability at risk
due to investing rapidly in renewable energy. Energy Policy, 108, 12-20,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.05.042.
Salon, D., M.G. Boarnet, S. Handy, S. Spears, and G. Tal, 2012: How do local actions
affect VMT? A critical review of the empirical evidence. Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 17(7), 495-508,
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2012.05.006.
Salter, S., G. Sortino, and J. Latham, 2008: Sea-going hardware for the cloud albedo
method of reversing global warming. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 366(1882),
3989-4006, doi:10.1098/rsta.2008.0136.
Salvo, A., J. Brito, P. Artaxo, and F.M. Geiger, 2017: Reduced ultrafine particle levels
in Sao Paulo's atmosphere during shifts from gasoline to ethanol use. Nature
Communications, 8(1), 77, doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00041-5.
Samset, B.H. et al., 2018: Climate Impacts From a Removal of Anthropogenic
Aerosol Emissions. Geophysical Research Letters, 45(2), 1020-1029,

Chapter 4
doi:10.1002/2017gl076079.
Sanchez, D.L. and V. Sivaram, 2017: Saving innovative climate and energy research:
Four recommendations for Mission Innovation. Energy Research & Social
Science, 29, 123-126, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.022.
Sand, M. et al., 2015: Response of Arctic temperature to changes in emissions
of short-lived climate forcers. Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 286-289,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2880.
Sanderson, B.M., B.C. O'Neill, and C. Tebaldi, 2016: What would it take to achieve
the Paris temperature targets? Geophysical Research Letters, 43(13), 7133-
7142, doi:10.1002/2016gl069563.
Sandler, T., 2017: Collective action and geoengineering. The Review of International
Organizations, 1-21, doi:10.1007/s11558-017-9282-3.
Sands, R., 2018: U.S. Carbon Tax Scenarios and Bioenergy. Climate Change
Economics (CCE), 9(1), 1-12,
doi:10.1142/s2010007818400109.
Sanesi, G., G. Colangelo, R. Lafortezza, E. Calvo, and C. Davies, 2017: Urban green
infrastructure and urban forests: a case study of the Metropolitan Area of
Milan. Landscape Research, 42(2), 164-175,
doi:10.1080/01426397.2016.1173658.
Sanna, A., M. Dri, M.R. Hall, and M. Maroto-Valer, 2012: Waste materials for carbon
capture and storage by mineralisation (CCSM) - A UK perspective. Applied
Energy, 99, 545-554, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.06.049.
Santangeli, A. et al., 2016: Global change synergies and trade-offs between
renewable energy and biodiversity. GCB Bioenergy, 8(5), 941-951,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12299.
Santos, G., 2008: The London experience. In: Pricing in Road Transport: A MultiDisciplinary Perspective [Verhoef, E., M. Bliemer, L. Steg, and B. van Wee
(eds.)]. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK, pp. 273-292.
Sanz-Perez, E.S., C.R. Murdock, S.A. Didas, and C.W. Jones, 2016: Direct Capture
of CO2 from Ambient Air. Chemical Reviews, 116(19), 11840-11876,
doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00173.
Sarmiento, H. and C. Tilly, 2018: Governance Lessons from Urban Informality.
Politics and Governance, 6(1), 199-202,
doi:10.17645/pag.v6i1.1169.
Sarmiento, J.L. and J.C. Orr, 1991: Three-dimensional simulations of the impact of
Southern Ocean nutrient depletion on atmospheric CO2 and ocean chemistry.
Limnology and Oceanography, 36(8), 1928-1950,
doi:10.4319/lo.1991.36.8.1928.
Sartor, O., 2013: Carbon Leakage in the Primary Aluminium Sector: What Evidence
after 6.5 Years of the EU ETS? Working Paper No. 2012-12, CDC Climat
Research, 24 pp.
Satterthwaite, D. and S. Bartlett, 2017: Editorial: The full spectrum of risk in
urban centres: changing perceptions, changing priorities. Environment and
Urbanization, 29(1), 3-14, doi:10.1177/0956247817691921.
Satterthwaite, D., D. Archer, S. Colenbrander, D. Dodman, and J. Hardoy, 2018:
Responding to climate change in cities and in their informal settlements and
economies. International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED)
and IIED-America Latina, 61 pp.
Saunders, M.I. et al., 2014: Interdependency of tropical marine ecosystems
in response to climate change. Nature Climate Change, 4(8), 724-729,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2274.
Savo, V. et al., 2016: Observations of climate change among subsistence-oriented
communities around the world. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 462-473,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2958.
Schaeffer, R. et al., 2012: Energy sector vulnerability to climate change: A review.
Energy, 38(1), 1-12, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2011.11.056.
Schaeffer, S.M. and P.A. Nakata, 2015: CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing and
gene replacement in plants: Transitioning from lab to field. Plant Science, 240,
130-142, doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2015.09.011.
Schafer, S. et al., 2013: Field tests of solar climate engineering. Nature Climate
Change, 3, 766, doi:10.1038/nclimate1987.
Scheben, A., Y. Yuan, and D. Edwards, 2016: Advances in genomics for adapting
crops to climate change. Current Plant Biology, 6, 2-10,
doi:10.1016/j.cpb.2016.09.001.
Scheer, D. and O. Renn, 2014: Public Perception of geoengineering and its
consequences for public debate. Climatic Change, 125(3-4), 305-318,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1177-1.
Schelling, T.C., 1991: Economic responses to global warming: prospects for
cooperative approaches. In: Global Warming, Economic Policy Responses
[Dornbusch, R. and J.M. Poterba (eds.)]. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Schiller, P.L. and J.R. Kenworthy, 2018: An Introduction to Sustainable

433

4

Chapter 4

4

Transportation: Policy, Planning and Implementation (Second edition).
Routledge, London, UK, 442 pp., doi:10.4324/9781315644486.
Schimmelpfennig, D. and R. Ebel, 2016: Sequential Adoption and Cost
Savings from Precision Agriculture. Journal of Agricultural and Resource
Economics,
41(1),
97-115,
www.waeaonline.org/userfiles/file/
jarejanuary20166schimmelpfennigpp97-115.pdf.
Schlenker, W. and M.J. Roberts, 2009: Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
damages to US crop yields under climate change. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106(37), 15594-15598,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0906865106.
Schleussner, C.-F. et al., 2016: Differential climate impacts for policy-relevant limits
to global warming: the case of 1.5C and 2C. Earth System Dynamics, 7(2),
327-351, doi:10.5194/esd-7-327-2016.
Schmale, J., D. Shindell, E. von Schneidemesser, I. Chabay, and M. Lawrence, 2014:
Clean up our skies. Nature, 515, 335-337,
doi:10.1038/515335a.
Schmeier, S., 2014: International River Basin Organizations Lost in Translation?
Transboundary River Basin Governance Between Science and Policy. In: The
Global Water System in the Anthropocene. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, pp. 369-383, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07548-8_24.
Schmitt, M.T., L.B. Aknin, J. Axsen, and R.L. Shwom, 2018: Unpacking the
Relationships Between Pro-environmental Behavior, Life Satisfaction,
and Perceived Ecological Threat. Ecological Economics, 143, 130-140,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.07.007.
Schneider, M. et al., 2017: The World Nuclear Industry Status Report 2017. Mycle
Schneider Consulting, Paris, France, 267 pp.
Schoenefeld, J.J., M. Hilden, and A.J. Jordan, 2016: The challenges of monitoring
national climate policy: learning lessons from the EU. Climate Policy, 1-11,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1248887.
Schoenmaker, D. and R. van Tilburg, 2016: Financial risks and opportunities in
the time of climate change. Bruegel Policy Brief 2016/02, Bruegel, Brussels,
Belgium, 8 pp.
Schroeder, R. and K. Schroeder, 2014: Happy Environments: Bhutan, Interdependence
and the West. Sustainability, 6(6), 3521-3533,
doi:10.3390/su6063521.
Schuiling, R.D. and P. Krijgsman, 2006: Enhanced Weathering: An Effective and
Cheap Tool to Sequester CO2. Climatic Change, 74(1), 349-354,
doi:10.1007/s10584-005-3485-y.
Schuiling, R.D. and P.L. de Boer, 2010: Coastal spreading of olivine to control
atmospheric CO2 concentrations: A critical analysis of viability. Comment:
Nature and laboratory models are different. International Journal of
Greenhouse Gas Control, 4(5), 855-856,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2010.04.012.
Schuitema, G. and L. Steg, 2008: The role of revenue use in the acceptability of
transport pricing policies. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology
and Behaviour, 11(3), 221-231, doi:10.1016/j.trf.2007.11.003.
Schuitema, G., L. Steg, and S. Forward, 2010a: Explaining differences in acceptability
before and acceptance after the implementation of a congestion charge in
Stockholm. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 44(2), 99-
109, doi:10.1016/j.tra.2009.11.005.
Schuitema, G., L. Steg, and J.A. Rothengatter, 2010b: The acceptability, personal
outcome expectations, and expected effects of transport pricing policies.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(4), 587-593,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.05.002.
Schuitema, G., L. Steg, and M. van Kruining, 2011: When Are Transport Pricing
Policies Fair and Acceptable? Social Justice Research, 24(1), 66-84,
doi:10.1007/s11211-011-0124-9.
Schuler, M.L., O. Mantegazza, and A.P.M. Weber, 2016: Engineering C4
photosynthesis into C3 chassis in the synthetic biology age. The Plant Journal,
87(1), 51-65, doi:10.1111/tpj.13155.
Schulze, E.-D., C. Korner, B.E. Law, H. Haberl, and S. Luyssaert, 2012: Large-scale
bioenergy from additional harvest of forest biomass is neither sustainable nor
greenhouse gas neutral. GCB Bioenergy, 4(6), 611-616,
doi:10.1111/j.1757-1707.2012.01169.x.
Schwan, S. and X. Yu, 2017: Social protection as a strategy to address climateinduced migration. International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and
Management, IJCCSM-01-2017-0019, doi:10.1108/ijccsm-01-2017-0019.
Schwartz, D., W. Bruine de Bruin, B. Fischhoff, and L. Lave, 2015: Advertising energy
saving programs: The potential environmental cost of emphasizing monetary
savings. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 21(2), 158-166,
doi:10.1037/xap0000042.

434

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Scott, C.A., M. Kurian, and J.L. Wescoat, 2015: The Water-Energy-Food Nexus:
Enhancing Adaptive Capacity to Complex Global Challenges. In: Governing
the Nexus [Kurian, M. and R. Ardakanian (eds.)]. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 15-38,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05747-7_2.
Scott, M.J. et al., 2015: Calculating impacts of energy standards on energy demand
in U.S. buildings with uncertainty in an integrated assessment model. Energy,
90, 1682-1694, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2015.06.127.
Scott, V. and O. Geden, 2018: The challenge of carbon dioxide removal for EU
policy-making. Nature Energy, 1-3, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0124-1.
Scott, V., R.S. Haszeldine, S.F.B. Tett, and A. Oschlies, 2015: Fossil fuels in a trillion
tonne world. Nature Climate Change, 5(5), 419-423,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2578.
Scovronick, N., C. Dora, E. Fletcher, A. Haines, and D. Shindell, 2015: Reduce shortlived climate pollutants for multiple benefits. The Lancet, 386(10006), e28-
e31, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(15)61043-1.
SDSN, 2013: The Urban Opportunity: Enabling Transformative and Sustainable
Development. Background Paper for the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons
on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Sustainable Development Solutions
Network (SDSN) Thematic Group on Sustainable Cities, 47 pp.
Searchinger, T.D., T. Beringer, and A. Strong, 2017: Does the world have low-carbon
bioenergy potential from the dedicated use of land? Energy Policy, 110, 434-
446, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.08.016.
Searchinger, T.D. et al., 2008: Use of U.S. Croplands for Biofuels Increases
Greenhouse Gases Through Emissions from Land-Use Change. Science,
319(5867), 1238-1240, doi:10.1126/science.1151861.
Seba, T., 2014: Clean Disruption of Energy and Transportation: How Silicon Valley
Will Make Oil, Nuclear, Natural Gas, Coal, Electric Utilities and Conventional
Cars Obsolete by 2030. Clean Planet Ventures, Silicon Valley, CA, USA, 290 pp.
Seidl, R. et al., 2017: Forest disturbances under climate change. Nature Climate
Change, 7, 395-402, doi:10.1038/nclimate3303.
Seigo, S.L.O., S. Dohle, and M. Siegrist, 2014: Public perception of carbon capture
and storage (CCS): A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 38,
848-863, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.017.
Sejersen, F., 2015: Rethinking Greenland and the Arctic in the Era of Climate
Change: New Northern Horizons. Routledge, London, UK, 248 pp.,
doi:10.4324/9781315728308.
Semprini, G., R. Gulli, and A. Ferrante, 2017: Deep regeneration vs shallow
renovation to achieve nearly Zero Energy in existing buildings. Energy and
Buildings, 156, 327-342, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.09.044.
Sen, B., M. Noori, and O. Tatari, 2017: Will Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE)
Standard help? Modeling CAFE's impact on market share of electric vehicles.
Energy Policy, 109, 279-287, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.07.008.
Sendzimir, J., C.P. Reija, and P. Magnuszewski, 2011: Rebuilding Resilience in the
Sahel. Ecology and Society, 16(3), 1-29,
doi:10.5751/es-04198-160301.
Seneviratne, S.I. et al., 2018: Land radiative management as contributor to regionalscale climate adaptation and mitigation. Nature Geoscience, 11(2), 88-96,
doi:10.1038/s41561-017-0057-5.
Serrao-Neumann, S., F. Crick, B. Harman, G. Schuch, and D.L. Choy, 2015: Maximising
synergies between disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation:
Potential enablers for improved planning outcomes. Environmental Science &
Policy, 50, 46-61, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.01.017.
Sewando, P.T., K.D. Mutabazi, and N.Y.S. Mdoe, 2016: Vulnerability of agro-pastoral
farmers to climate risks in northern and central Tanzania. Development
Studies Research, 3(1), 11-24,
doi:10.1080/21665095.2016.1238311.
Seyfang, G. and A. Haxeltine, 2012: Growing grassroots innovations: Exploring
the role of community-based initiatives in governing sustainable energy
transitions. Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space, 30(3), 381-400,
doi:10.1068/c10222.
Shaffer, L.J., 2014: Making Sense of Local Climate Change in Rural Tanzania
Through Knowledge Co-Production. Journal of Ethnobiology, 34(3), 315-334,
doi:10.2993/0278-0771-34.3.315.
Shah, N., M. Wei, V. Letschert, and A. Phadke, 2015: Benefits of Leapfrogging to
Superefficiency and Low Global Warming Potential Refrigerants in Room Air
Conditioning. LBNL-1003671, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBL),
Berkeley, CA, USA, 39 pp.
Shang, Y. et al., 2018: China's energy-water nexus: Assessing water conservation
synergies of the total coal consumption cap strategy until 2050. Applied
Energy, 210, 643-660, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.008.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Shapiro, S., 2016: The realpolitik of building codes: overcoming practical limitations
to climate resilience. Building Research & Information, 44(5-6), 490-506,
doi:10.1080/09613218.2016.1156957.
Sharadin, N., 2018: Rational Coherence in Environmental Policy: Paris, Montreal,
and Kigali. Ethics, Policy & Environment, 21(1), 4-8,
doi:10.1080/21550085.2018.1447885.
Sharma, R., 2018: Financing Indian Urban Rail through Land Development: Case
Studies and Implications for the Accelerated Reduction in Oil Associated with
1.5C. Urban Planning, 3(2), 21-34,
doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1158.
Shaw, C., S. Hales, P. Howden-Chapman, and R. Edwards, 2014: Health co-benefits
of climate change mitigation policies in the transport sector. Nature Climate
Change, 4(6), 427-433, doi:10.1038/nclimate2247.
Shayegh, S., D.L. Sanchez, and K. Caldeira, 2017: Evaluating relative benefits of
different types of R&D for clean energy technologies. Energy Policy, 107,
532-538, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.05.029.
Sheeran, K., 2006: Who Should Abate Carbon Emissions? A Note. Environmental
and Resource Economics, 35(2), 89-98,
doi:10.1007/s10640-006-9007-1.
Sherman, M., J. Ford, A. Llanos-Cuentas, and M.J. Valdivia, 2016: Food system
vulnerability amidst the extreme 2010--2011 flooding in the Peruvian
Amazon: a case study from the Ucayali region. Food Security, 8(3), 551-570,
doi:10.1007/s12571-016-0583-9.
Shi, L. et al., 2016: Roadmap towards justice in urban climate adaptation research.
Nature Climate Change, 6(2), 131-137, doi:10.1038/nclimate2841.
Shindell, D., J.S. Fuglestvedt, and W.J. Collins, 2017a: The Social Cost of Methane:
Theory and Applications. Faraday Discussions, doi:10.1039/c7fd00009j.
Shindell, D. et al., 2012: Simultaneously Mitigating Near-Term Climate Change and
Improving Human Health and Food Security. Science, 335(6065), 183-189,
doi:10.1126/science.1210026.
Shindell, D. et al., 2017b: A climate policy pathway for near- and long-term benefits.
Science, 356(6337), 493-494, doi:10.1126/science.aak9521.
Shine, T. and G. Campillo, 2016: The Role of Development Finance in Climate Action
Post-2015. OECD Development Co-operation Working Papers No. 31, OECD
Publishing, Paris, France, 38 pp.
Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny, 1990: Equilibrium Short Horizons of Investors and
Firms. The American Economic Review, 80(2), 148-153,
www.jstor.org/stable/2006560.
Shrivastava, P. and S. Persson, 2018: Silent transformation to 1.5C-with China's
encumbered leading. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31,
130-136, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.02.014.
Shue, H., 2018: Mitigation gambles: uncertainty, urgency and the last gamble
possible. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20170105,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0105.
Shukla, P.R., 2005: Aligning Justice and Efficiency in the Global Climate Change
Regime: A Developing Country Perspective. Advances in the Economics of
Environmental Resources, 5, 121-144,
doi:10.1016/s1569-3740(05)05006-6.
Shukla, P.R., J.-C. Hourcade, E. La Rovere, E. Espagne, and B. Perrissin-Fabert,
2017: Revisiting the Carbon Pricing Challenge after COP21 and COP22.
CIRED Working Papers No. 2017-59, Centre International de Recherche sur
l'Environnement et le Developpement (CIRED), Paris, France, 8 pp.
Sida, T.S., F. Baudron, H. Kim, and K.E. Giller, 2018: Climate-smart agroforestry:
Faidherbia albida trees buffer wheat against climatic extremes in the Central
Rift Valley of Ethiopia. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 248, 339-347,
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2017.10.013.
Siders, A.R., 2017: A role for strategies in urban climate change adaptation
planning: Lessons from London. Regional Environmental Change, 17(6),
1801-1810, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1153-1.
Siegmeier, J. et al., 2018: The fiscal benefits of stringent climate change mitigation:
an overview. Climate Policy, 18(3), 352-367,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1400943.
SIFMA, 2017: 2017 Fact book. Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association
(SIFMA), New York, NY, USA, 96 pp.
Sikka, A.K., A. Islam, and K.V. Rao, 2018: Climate-Smart Land and Water
Management for Sustainable Agriculture. Irrigation and Drainage, 67(1),
72-81, doi:10.1002/ird.2162.
Simon, A.J., N.B. Kaahaaina, S. Julio Friedmann, and R.D. Aines, 2011: Systems
analysis and cost estimates for large scale capture of carbon dioxide from air.
Energy Procedia, 4, 2893-2900,

Chapter 4
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2011.02.196.
Simon, D. and H. Leck, 2015: Understanding climate adaptation and transformation
challenges in African cities. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
13, 109-116, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.03.003.
Simone, A.M. and E.A. Pieterse, 2017: New urban worlds: inhabiting dissonant
times. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK and Malden, MA, USA, 192 pp.
Sims, R. et al., 2014: Transport. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. PichsMadruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadne, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S.
Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T.
Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 599-670.
Singh, C., P. Dorward, and H. Osbahr, 2016a: Developing a holistic approach to the
analysis of farmer decision-making: Implications for adaptation policy and
practice in developing countries. Land Use Policy, 59, 329-343,
doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.06.041.
Singh, C., P. Urquhart, and E. Kituyi, 2016b: From pilots to systems: Barriers and
enablers to scaling up the use of climate information services in smallholder
farming communities. CARIAA Working Paper no. 3, Collaborative Adaptation
Research Initiative in Africa and Asia, International Development Research
Centre, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 56 pp.
Singh, C. et al., 2017: The utility of weather and climate information for adaptation
decision-making: current uses and future prospects in Africa and India.
Climate and Development, 1-17, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1318744.
Sinha, A., L.A. Darunte, C.W. Jones, M.J. Realff, and Y. Kawajiri, 2017: Systems Design
and Economic Analysis of Direct Air Capture of CO2 through Temperature
Vacuum Swing Adsorption Using MIL-101(Cr)-PEI-800 and mmen-Mg2
(dobpdc) MOF Adsorbents. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research,
56(3), 750-764, doi:10.1021/acs.iecr.6b03887.
Sirkis, A. et al., 2015: Moving the trillions: a debate on positive pricing of mitigation
actions. Brasil no Clima, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 157 pp.
Sivakumar, M.V.K., C. Collins, A. Jay, and J. Hansen, 2014: Regional priorities for
strengthening climate services for farmers in Africa and South Asia. CCAFS
Working Paper no. 71, CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change,
Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), Copenhagen, Denmark, 36 pp.
Sjoberg, L. and B.-M. Drottz-Sjoberg, 2001: Fairness, risk and risk tolerance in the
siting of a nuclear waste repository. Journal of Risk Research, 4(1), 75-101,
doi:10.1080/136698701456040.
Skougaard Kaspersen, P., N. Hoegh Ravn, K. Arnbjerg-Nielsen, H. Madsen, and M.
Drews, 2015: Influence of urban land cover changes and climate change for
the exposure of European cities to flooding during high-intensity precipitation.
Proceedings of the International Association of Hydrological Sciences, 370,
21-27, doi:10.5194/piahs-370-21-2015.
Skuce, P.J., E.R. Morgan, J. van Dijk, and M. Mitchell, 2013: Animal health aspects
of adaptation to climate change: beating the heat and parasites in a warming
Europe. Animal, 7(s2), 333-345,
doi:10.1017/s175173111300075x.
Slade, R., A. Bauen, and R. Gross, 2014: Global bioenergy resources. Nature Climate
Change, 4(2), 99-105, doi:10.1038/nclimate2097.
Slee, B., 2015: Is there a case for community-based equity participation in Scottish
on-shore wind energy production? Gaps in evidence and research needs.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 41, 540-549,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.08.064.
Sleenhoff, S., E. Cuppen, and P. Osseweijer, 2015: Unravelling emotional viewpoints
on a bio-based economy using Q methodology. Public Understanding of
Science, 24(7), 858-877, doi:10.1177/0963662513517071.
Smith, C.J. et al., 2017: Impacts of stratospheric sulfate geoengineering on global
solar photovoltaic and concentrating solar power resource. Journal of Applied
Meteorology and Climatology, JAMC-D-16-0298.1,
doi:10.1175/jamc-d-16-0298.1.
Smith, H. and P. Jenkins, 2015: Trans-disciplinary research and strategic urban
expansion planning in a context of weak institutional capacity: Case study of
Huambo, Angola. Habitat International, 46, 244-251,
doi:10.1016/j.habitatint.2014.10.006.
Smith, H., E. Kruger, J. Knot, and J. Blignaut, 2017: Conservation Agriculture in South
Africa: Lessons from Case Studies. In: Conservation Agriculture for Africa:
Building Resilient Farming Systems in a Changing Climate [Kassam, A.H.,
S. Mkomwa, and T. Friedrich (eds.)]. Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences
International (CABI), Wallingford, UK, pp. 214-245.
Smith, H.A. and K. Sharp, 2012: Indigenous climate knowledges. Wiley

435

4

Chapter 4

4

Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 3(5), 467-476,
doi:10.1002/wcc.185.
Smith, J.B., J.M. Vogel, and J.E. Cromwell III, 2009: An architecture for government
action on adaptation to climate change. An editorial comment. Climatic
Change, 95(1-2), 53-61, doi:10.1007/s10584-009-9623-1.
Smith, K.R. et al., 2014: Human health: impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits.
In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field,
C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, and T.E. Bilir
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 709-754.
Smith, L.J. and M.S. Torn, 2013: Ecological limits to terrestrial biological carbon
dioxide removal. Climatic Change, 118(1), 89-103,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0682-3.
Smith, P., 2016: Soil carbon sequestration and biochar as negative emission
technologies. Global Change Biology, 22(3), 1315-1324,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13178.
Smith, P., R.S. Haszeldine, and S.M. Smith, 2016a: Preliminary assessment of the
potential for, and limitations to, terrestrial negative emission technologies
in the UK. Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts, 18(11), 1400-1405,
doi:10.1039/c6em00386a.
Smith, P. et al., 2014: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU). In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp.
811-922.
Smith, P. et al., 2016b: Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions.
Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 42-50, doi:10.1038/nclimate2870.
Smith, S.J. and A. Mizrahi, 2013: Near-term climate mitigation by short-lived forcers.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(35), 14202-14206,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1308470110.
Smith, S.J. and P.J. Rasch, 2013: The long-term policy context for solar radiation
management. Climatic Change, 121(3), 487-497,
doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0577-3.
Smucker, T.A. et al., 2015: Differentiated livelihoods, local institutions, and the
adaptation imperative: Assessing climate change adaptation policy in
Tanzania. Geoforum, 59, 39-50, doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2014.11.018.
Snow, J.T. et al., 2016: A New Vision for Weather and Climate Services in Africa.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), New York, NY, USA, 137 pp.
Soares-Filho, B. et al., 2010: Role of Brazilian Amazon protected areas in climate
change mitigation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
107(24), 10821-10826, doi:10.1073/pnas.0913048107.
Soccol, C.R. et al., 2010: Bioethanol from lignocelluloses: Status and perspectives in
Brazil. Bioresource Technology, 101(13), 4820-4825,
doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2009.11.067.
Socolow, R. et al., 2011: D
 irect air capture of CO2 with chemicals: A technology
assessment for the APS Panel on Public Affairs. American Physical Society
(APS), 91 pp.
Soderlund, J. and P. Newman, 2015: Biophilic architecture: a review of the rationale
and outcomes. AIMS Environmental Science, 2(4), 950-969,
doi:10.3934/environsci.2015.4.950.
Sohlberg, J., 2017: The Effect of Elite Polarization: A Comparative Perspective on
How Party Elites Influence Attitudes and Behavior on Climate Change in the
European Union. Sustainability, 9(1), 1-13, doi:10.3390/su9010039.
Solecki, W., K.C. Seto, and P.J. Marcotullio, 2013: It's Time for an Urbanization
Science. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 55(1),
12-17, doi:10.1080/00139157.2013.748387.
Solecki, W., M. Pelling, and M. Garschagen, 2017: Transitions between risk
management regimes in cities. Ecology And Society, 22(2), 38,
doi:10.5751/es-09102-220238.
Solecki, W. et al., 2018: City transformations in a 1.5C warmer world. Nature
Climate Change, 8(3), 177-181,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0101-5.
Somanathan, E. et al., 2014: National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.

436

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1141-1205.
Sorrell, S., J. Dimitropoulos, and M. Sommerville, 2009: Empirical estimates of
the direct rebound effect: A review. Energy Policy, 37(4), 1356-1371,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2008.11.026.
Sovacool, B.K., 2016: How long will it take? Conceptualizing the temporal dynamics
of energy transitions. Energy Research & Social Science, 13, 202-215,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.12.020.
Sovacool, B.K., B.-O. Linner, and M.E. Goodsite, 2015: The political economy of
climate adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 5(7), 616-618,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2665.
Sovacool, B.K., B.-O. Linner, and R.J.T. Klein, 2017: Climate change adaptation
and the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF): Qualitative insights from
policy implementation in the Asia-Pacific. Climatic Change, 140(2), 209-226,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1839-2.
Spence, A., W. Poortinga, C. Butler, and N.F. Pidgeon, 2011: Perceptions of climate
change and willingness to save energy related to flood experience. Nature
Climate Change, 1(1), 46-49,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1059.
Spencer, B. et al., 2017: Case studies in co-benefits approaches to climate
change mitigation and adaptation. Journal of Environmental Planning and
Management, 60(4), 647-667,
doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168287.
Spencer, T., R. Pierfederici, and others, 2015: Beyond the numbers: understanding the
transformation induced by INDCs. Study N05/15, Institut du Developpement
Durable et des Relations Internationales (IDDRI) - MILES Project Consortium,
Paris, France, 80 pp.
Springmann, M., H.C.J. Godfray, M. Rayner, and P. Scarborough, 2016: Analysis
and valuation of the health and climate change cobenefits of dietary change.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(15), 4146-4151,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1523119113.
Stadelmann, M., 2017: Mind the gap? Critically reviewing the energy efficiency
gap with empirical evidence. Energy Research & Social Science, 27, 117-128,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2017.03.006.
Stavins, R.N., 1988: Project 88 - Harnessing Market Forces to Protect Our
Environment. A Public Policy Study sponsored by Senator Timothy E. Wirth,
Colorado, and Senator John Heinz, Pennsylvania, Washington DC, USA, 86 pp.
Stavins, R.N. et al., 2014: International Cooperation: Agreements & Instruments. In:
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S.
Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann,
J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1001 - 1081.
Steenhof, P. and E. Sparling, 2011: The Role of Codes, Standards, and Related
Instruments in Facilitating Adaptation to Climate Change. In: Climate
Change Adaptation in Developed Nations: From Theory to Practice [Ford, J.D.
and L. Berrang-Ford (eds.)]. Advances in Global Change Research, Springer,
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 243-254,
doi:10.1007/978-94-007-0567-8_17.
Steg, L., 2016: Values, Norms, and Intrinsic Motivation to Act Proenvironmentally.
Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 41(1), 277-292,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-085947.
Steg, L. and C. Vlek, 2009: Encouraging pro-environmental behaviour: An integrative
review and research agenda. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 29(3),
309-317, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2008.10.004.
Steg, L. and J. de Groot, 2010: Explaining prosocial intentions: Testing causal
relationships in the norm activation model. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 49(4), 725-743, doi:10.1348/014466609x477745.
Steg, L., L. Dreijerink, and W. Abrahamse, 2005: Factors influencing the acceptability
of energy policies: A test of VBN theory. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
25(4), 415-425, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2005.08.003.
Steg, L., L. Dreijerink, and W. Abrahamse, 2006: Why are Energy Policies
Acceptable and Effective? Environment and Behavior, 38(1), 92-111,
doi:10.1177/0013916505278519.
Steg, L., G. Perlaviciute, and E. van der Werff, 2015: Understanding the human
dimensions of a sustainable energy transition. Frontiers in Psychology, 6,
1-17, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00805.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Steg, L., R. Shwom, and T. Dietz, 2018: What Drives Energy Consumers?: Engaging
People in a Sustainable Energy Transition. IEEE Power and Energy Magazine,
16(1), 20-28, doi:10.1109/mpe.2017.2762379.
Steinhoff, D.F., A.J. Monaghan, and M.P. Clark, 2014: Projected impact of twentyfirst century ENSO changes on rainfall over Central America and northwest
South America from CMIP5 AOGCMs. Climate Dynamics, 44(5-6), 1329-
1349, doi:10.1007/s00382-014-2196-3.
Sterling, E.J. et al., 2017: Biocultural approaches to well-being and sustainability
indicators across scales. Nature Ecology & Evolution, 1(12), 1798-1806,
doi:10.1038/s41559-017-0349-6.
Sterman, J.D., L. Siegel, and J.N. Rooney-Varga, 2018: Does replacing coal with
wood lower CO2 emissions? Dynamic lifecycle analysis of wood bioenergy.
Environmental Research Letters, 13(1), 015007,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa512.
Stern, N., 2013: The Structure of Economic Modeling of the Potential Impacts of
Climate Change: Grafting Gross Underestimation of Risk onto Already Narrow
Science Models. Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3), 838-859,
doi:10.1257/jel.51.3.838.
Stern, N., 2015: Economic development, climate and values: making policy.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 282(1812),
doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.0820.
Stern, P.C., 2011: Design principles for global commons: Natural resources and
emerging technologies. International Journal of the Commons, 5(2), 213-232,
doi:10.18352/ijc.305.
Stern, P.C., 2014: Individual and household interactions with energy systems:
Toward integrated understanding. Energy Research & Social Science, 1, 41-
48, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2014.03.003.
Stern, P.C. and G.T. Gardner, 1981: Psychological research and energy policy.
American Psychologist, 36(4), 329-342,
doi:10.1037/0003-066x.36.4.329.
Stern, P.C. et al., 2016a: consumption by households and organizations. Nature
Energy, 1, 16043, doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.43.
Stern, P.C. et al., 2016b: Opportunities and insights for reducing fossil fuel
consumption by households and organizations. Nature Energy, 1(5), 16043,
doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.43.
Stevanovi, M. et al., 2017: Mitigation Strategies for Greenhouse Gas Emissions
from Agriculture and Land-Use Change: Consequences for Food Prices.
Environmental Science & Technology, 51(1), 365-374,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b04291.
Stevenson, H. and J.S. Dryzek, 2014: Democratizing Global Climate Governance.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, 256 pp., doi:10.1017/cbo9781139208628.
Stevenson, M. et al., 2016: Land use, transport, and population health: estimating
the health benefits of compact cities. The Lancet, 388(10062), 2925-2935,
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(16)30067-8.
Stiglitz, J.E., 2002: Globalization and its Discontents. W.W. Norton & Company,
New York, NY, USA, 304 pp.
Stiglitz, J.E. et al., 2017: Report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices.
Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, 68 pp.
Stjern, C.W. et al., 2017: Rapid Adjustments Cause Weak Surface Temperature
Response to Increased Black Carbon Concentrations. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 122(21), 11,411-462,481,
doi:10.1002/2017jd027326.
Stohl, A. et al., 2015: Evaluating the climate and air quality impacts of short-lived
pollutants. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 15(18), 10529-10566,
doi:10.5194/acp-15-10529-2015.
Stolaroff, J.K. et al., 2012: Review of methane mitigation technologies with
application to rapid release of methane from the Arctic. Environmental
Science & Technology, 46, 6455-6469,
doi:10.1021/es204686w.
Storelvmo, T., W.R. Boos, and N. Herger, 2014: Cirrus cloud seeding: a climate
engineering mechanism with reduced side effects? Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
372(2031), 20140116-20140116,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2014.0116.
Strassburg, B.B.N. et al., 2014: Biophysical suitability, economic pressure and
land-cover change: a global probabilistic approach and insights for REDD+.
Sustainability Science, 9(2), 129-141,
doi:10.1007/s11625-013-0209-5.
Strefler, J., T. Amann, N. Bauer, E. Kriegler, and J. Hartmann, 2018a: Potential
and costs of carbon dioxide removal by enhanced weathering of rocks.

Chapter 4
Environmental Research Letters, 13(3), 034010,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa9c4.
Strefler, J. et al., 2018b: Between Scylla and Charybdis: Delayed mitigation narrows
the passage between large-scale CDR and high costs. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(4), 044015, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab2ba.
Strong, A., J.J. Cullen, and S.W. Chisholm, 2009: Ocean Fertilization. Oceanography,
22(3), 236-261, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2009.83.
Stua, M., 2017: From the Paris Agreement to a Low-Carbon Bretton Woods.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 239 pp.,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-54699-5.
Studart, R. and K. Gallagher, 2015: Guaranteeing Finance for Sustainable
Infrastructure: A Proposal. In: Moving the Trillions - a debate on positive
pricing of mitigation actions. Centro Brasil No Clima, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
pp. 92-113.
Stults, M. and S.C. Woodruff, 2017: Looking under the hood of local adaptation
plans: shedding light on the actions prioritized to build local resilience to
climate change. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
22(8), 1249-1279, doi:10.1007/s11027-016-9725-9.
Su, Y., P. Zhang, and Y. Su, 2015: An overview of biofuels policies and industrialization
in the major biofuel producing countries. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 50, 991-1003, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.032.
Suarez, P. and M. van Aalst, 2017: Geoengineering: a humanitarian concern. Earth's
Future, 5, 183-195, doi:10.1002/eft2.181.
Sugiyama, M., Y. Arino, T. Kosugi, A. Kurosawa, and S. Watanabe, 2017a: Next
steps in geoengineering scenario research: limited deployment scenarios and
beyond. Climate Policy, 1-9, doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1323721.
Sugiyama, M. et al., 2017b: Transdisciplinary co-design of scientific research
agendas: 40 research questions for socially relevant climate engineering
research. Sustainability Science, 12(1), 31-44,
doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0376-2.
Sullivan-Wiley, K.A. and A.G. Short Gianotti, 2017: Risk Perception in a MultiHazard Environment. World Development, 97, 138-152,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.04.002.
Summers, L.H., 2016: The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do
About It. Foreign Affairs, 95, 2, www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/unitedstates/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.
Sun, Y., G. Huang, X. Xu, and A.C.-K. Lai, 2018: Building-group-level performance
evaluations of net zero energy buildings with non-collaborative controls.
Applied Energy, 212, 565-576, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.11.076.
Sunderlin, W.D. et al., 2014: How are REDD+ Proponents Addressing Tenure
Problems? Evidence from Brazil, Cameroon, Tanzania, Indonesia, and Vietnam.
World Development, 55, 37-52,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.01.013.
Sundqvist, E., P. Crill, M. Molder, P. Vestin, and A. Lindroth, 2012: Atmospheric
methane removal by boreal plants. Geophysical Research Letters, 39(21),
L21806, doi:10.1029/2012gl053592.
Sunikka-Blank, M. and Y. Iwafune, 2011: Sustainable Building in Japan -
Observations on a Market Transformation Policy. Environmental Policy and
Governance, 21(5), 351-363, doi:10.1002/eet.580.
Surminski, S., 2013: Private-sector adaptation to climate risk. Nature Climate
Change, 3(11), 943-945, doi:10.1038/nclimate2040.
Sutherland, R.J., 1991: Market Barriers to Energy-Efficiency Investments. Energy
Journal, 12(3), 15-34, www.jstor.org/stable/41322426.
Svoboda, T., 2017: The Ethics of Climate Engineering: Solar Radiation Management
and Non-Ideal Justice. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 176 pp.
Swatuk, L.A., 2015: Water conflict and cooperation in Southern Africa. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 2(3), 215-230,
doi:10.1002/wat2.1070.
Szabo, S., M. Moner-Girona, I. Kougias, R. Bailis, and K. Bodis, 2016: Identification of
advantageous electricity generation options in sub-Saharan Africa integrating
existing resources. Nature Energy, 1, 16140,
doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.140.
Szerszynski, B., M. Kearnes, P. Macnaghten, R. Owen, and J. Stilgoe, 2013: Why
solar radiation management geoengineering and democracy won't mix.
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 45(12), 2809-2816,
doi:10.1068/a45649.
Tacoli, C., B. Bukhari, and S. Fisher, 2013: Urban poverty, food security and climate
change. International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED)
Human Settlements Group, London, UK, 29 pp.
Tait, L. and M. Euston-Brown, 2017: What role can African cities play in lowcarbon development? A multilevel governance perspective of Ghana,

437

4

Chapter 4

4

Uganda and South Africa. Journal of Energy in Southern Africa, 28(3), 43-53,
doi:10.17159/2413-3051/2017/v28i3a1959.
Takahashi, B., M. Burnham, C. Terracina-Hartman, A.R. Sopchak, and T. Selfa, 2016:
Climate Change Perceptions of NY State Farmers: The Role of Risk Perceptions
and Adaptive Capacity. Environmental Management, 58(6), 946-957,
doi:10.1007/s00267-016-0742-y.
Takahashi, N. et al., 2015: Community Trial on Heat Related-Illness Prevention
Behaviors and Knowledge for the Elderly. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(3), 3188-3214,
doi:10.3390/ijerph120303188.
Talberg, A., P. Christoff, S. Thomas, and D. Karoly, 2018: Geoengineering
governance-by-default: an earth system governance perspective. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(2), 229-253,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9374-9.
Tall, A. et al., 2014: Scaling up climate services for farmers: Mission possible.
Learning from good practice in Africa and South Asia. CCAFS Report No. 13,
CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
(CCAFS), Copenhagen, Denmark, 44 pp.
Tallis, M., G. Taylor, D. Sinnett, and P. Freer-Smith, 2011: Estimating the removal of
atmospheric particulate pollution by the urban tree canopy of London, under
current and future environments. Landscape and Urban Planning, 103(2),
129-138, doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.07.003.
Tassey, G., 2014: Competing in Advanced Manufacturing: The Need for Improved
Growth Models and Policies. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(1), 27-48,
doi:10.1257/jep.28.1.27.
Taub, D.R., B. Miller, and H. Allen, 2008: Effects of elevated CO2 on the protein
concentration of food crops: a meta-analysis. Global Change Biology, 14(3),
565-575, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2007.01511.x.
Taufik, D., J.W. Bolderdijk, and L. Steg, 2015: Acting green elicits a literal warm
glow. Nature Climate Change, 5(1), 37-40, doi:10.1038/nclimate2449.
Taufik, D., J.W. Bolderdijk, and L. Steg, 2016: Going green? The relative importance
of feelings over calculation in driving environmental intent in the Netherlands
and the United States. Energy Research & Social Science, 22, 52-62,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.08.012.
Taylor, A.L., S. Dessai, and W. Bruine de Bruin, 2014: Public perception of climate
risk and adaptation in the UK: A review of the literature. Climate Risk
Management, 4-5, 1-16, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2014.09.001.
Taylor, L.L. et al., 2016: Enhanced weathering strategies for stabilizing climate
and averting ocean acidification. Nature Climate Change, 6(4), 402-406,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2882.
TEC, 2016: Updated guidance on technology action plans. TEC/2016/12/7,
Technology Executive Committee (TEC), United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 21 pp.
Teferi, Z.A. and P. Newman, 2017: Slum Regeneration and Sustainability: Applying
the Extended Metabolism Model and the SDGs. Sustainability, 9(12), 2273,
doi:10.3390/su9122273.
Teferi, Z.A. and P. Newman, 2018: Slum Upgrading: Can the 1.5C Carbon
Reduction Work with SDGs in these Settlements? Urban Planning, 3(2), 52-
63, doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1239.
Tehranian, H. and J.F. Waegelein, 1985: Market reaction to short-term executive
compensation plan adoption. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 7(1-3),
131-144, doi:10.1016/0165-4101(85)90032-1.
ten Berge, H.F.M. et al., 2012: Olivine weathering in soil, and its effects on growth
and nutrient uptake in Ryegrass (Lolium perenne L.): a pot experiment. PLOS
ONE, 7(8), e42098, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0042098.
Termeer, C.J.A.M., A. Dewulf, and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational change:
governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a continuous
change perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
60(4), 558-576, doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
Tessler, Z.D. et al., 2015: Profiling risk and sustainability in coastal deltas of the
world. Science, 349(6248), 638-643, doi:10.1126/science.aab3574.
Teulings, C. and R. Baldwin (eds.), 2014: Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and
Cures. Centre for Economic Policy Research Press (CEPR), London, UK, 154 pp.
Thi Hong Phuong, L., G.R. Biesbroek, and A.E.J. Wals, 2017: The interplay between
social learning and adaptive capacity in climate change adaptation: A
systematic review. NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences, 82, 1-9,
doi:10.1016/j.njas.2017.05.001.
Thieme, T.A., 2018: The hustle economy: Informality, uncertainty and the
geographies of getting by. Progress in Human Geography, 42(4), 529-548,
doi:10.1177/0309132517690039.
Thogersen, J. and F. Olander, 2003: Spillover of environment-friendly consumer

438

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
behaviour. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 23, 225-236,
doi:10.1016/s0272-4944(03)00018-5.
Thomas, S., L.-A. Brischke, J. Thema, L. Leuser, and M. Kopatz, 2017: Energy
sufficiency policy: how to limit energy consumption and per capita dwelling
size in a decent way. In: Proceedings of the ECEEE 2017 Summer Study on
Consumption, Efficiency & Limits. European Council for an Energy Efficient
Economy (ECEEE) Secretariat, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 103-112.
Thomas, S.D., 1988: The realities of nuclear power: international economic and
regulatory experience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY , USA, 289 pp.
Thomson, G. and P. Newman, 2016: Geoengineering in the Anthropocene through
Regenerative Urbanism. Geosciences, 6(4), 46,
doi:10.3390/geosciences6040046.
Thornton, P.K. and M. Herrero, 2014: Climate change adaptation in mixed croplivestock systems in developing countries. Global Food Security, 3(2), 99-107,
doi:10.1016/j.gfs.2014.02.002.
Thornton, P.K. and M. Herrero, 2015: Adapting to climate change in the mixed crop
and livestock farming systems in sub-Saharan Africa. Nature Climate Change,
5(9), 830-836, doi:10.1038/nclimate2754.
Thornton, P.K. et al., 2018: A Qualitative Evaluation of CSA Options in Mixed CropLivestock Systems in Developing Countries. In: Climate Smart Agriculture:
Building Resilience to Climate Change [Lipper, L., N. McCarthy, D. Zilberman,
S. Asfaw, and G. Branca (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp.
385-423, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-61194-5_17.
Thornton, T.F. and N. Manasfi, 2010: Adaptation - Genuine and Spurious:
Demystifying Adaptation Processes in Relation to Climate Change.
Environment and Society, 1(1), 132-155,
doi:10.3167/ares.2010.010107.
Thornton, T.F. and C. Comberti, 2017: Synergies and trade-offs between adaptation,
mitigation and development. Climatic Change, 140(1), 5-18,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0884-3.
Tiefenbeck, V. et al., 2016: Overcoming Salience Bias: How Real-Time Feedback
Fosters Resource Conservation. Management Science, 64(3), 1458-1476,
doi:10.1287/mnsc.2016.2646.
Tilleard, S. and J. Ford, 2016: Adaptation readiness and adaptive capacity
of transboundary river basins. Climatic Change, 137(3-4), 575-591,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1699-9.
Tilman, D. and M. Clark, 2014: Global diets link environmental sustainability and
human health. Nature, 515(7528), 518-522,
doi:10.1038/nature13959.
Tilmes, S., B.M. Sanderson, and B.C. O'Neill, 2016: Climate impacts of geoengineering
in a delayed mitigation scenario. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(15), 8222-
8229, doi:10.1002/2016gl070122.
Tilmes, S. et al., 2012: Impact of very short-lived halogens on stratospheric ozone
abundance and UV radiation in a geo-engineered atmosphere. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 12(22), 10945-10955,
doi:10.5194/acp-12-10945-2012.
Tjiputra, J.F., A. Grini, and H. Lee, 2016: Impact of idealized future stratospheric
aerosol injection on the large-scale ocean and land carbon cycles.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 121(1), 2-27,
doi:10.1002/2015jg003045.
Tobler, C., V.H.M. Visschers, and M. Siegrist, 2011: Organic Tomatoes
Versus Canned Beans: How Do Consumers Assess the Environmental
Friendliness of Vegetables? Environment and Behavior, 43(5), 591-611,
doi:10.1177/0013916510372865.
Tobler, C., V.H.M. Visschers, and M. Siegrist, 2012: Consumers' knowledge about
climate change. Climatic Change, 114(2), 189-209,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0393-1.
Tokarska, K.B. and K. Zickfeld, 2015: The effectiveness of net negative carbon
dioxide emissions in reversing anthropogenic climate change. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(9), 094013, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/9/094013.
Toleikyte, A., L. Kranzl, and A. Muller, 2018: Cost curves of energy efficiency
investments in buildings - Methodologies and a case study of Lithuania.
Energy Policy, 115, 148-157, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.12.043.
Tollefson, J., 2017: World's carbon emissions set to spike by 2% in 2017. Nature,
551(7680), 283-283, doi:10.1038/nature.2017.22995.
Torssonen, P. et al., 2016: Effects of climate change and management on net
climate impacts of production and utilization of energy biomass in Norway
spruce with stable age-class distribution. GCB Bioenergy, 8(2), 419-427,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12258.
Trabacchi, C. and B.K. Buchner, 2017: Adaptation Finance: Setting the Ground for

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Post-Paris Action. In: Climate Finance [Markandya, A., I. Galarraga, and D.
Rubbelke (eds.)]. World Scientific Series on the Economics of Climate Change
Volume 2, World Scientific, Singapore, pp. 35-54,
doi:10.1142/9789814641814_0003.
Trenberth, K.E., M. Marquis, and S. Zebiak, 2016: The vital need for a climate
information system. Nature Climate Change, 6(12), 1057-1059,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3170.
Trisos, C.H. et al., 2018: Potentially dangerous consequences for biodiversity of
solar geoengineering implementation and termination. Nature Ecology &
Evolution, 2(3), 475-482, doi:10.1038/s41559-017-0431-0.
Truelove, H., A.R. Carrico, and L. Thabrew, 2015: A socio-psychological model
for analyzing climate change adaptation: A case study of Sri Lankan paddy
farmers. Global Environmental Change, 31, 85-97,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.12.010.
Truelove, H.B., A.R. Carrico, E.U. Weber, K.T. Raimi, and M.P. Vandenbergh, 2014:
Positive and negative spillover of pro-environmental behavior: An integrative
review and theoretical framework. Global Environmental Change, 29, 127-
138, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.09.004.
Tschakert, P. et al., 2017: Climate change and loss, as if people mattered: values,
places, and experiences. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change,
8(5), e476, doi:10.1002/wcc.476.
Tukker, A. et al., 2011: Environmental impacts of changes to healthier diets in
Europe. Ecological Economics, 70(10), 1776-1788,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.05.001.
Tuomisto, H.L. and M.J. Teixeira de Mattos, 2011: Environmental Impacts of
Cultured Meat Production. Environmental Science & Technology, 45(14),
6117-6123, doi:10.1021/es200130u.
Turner, P.A. et al., 2018: The global overlap of bioenergy and carbon sequestration
potential. Climatic Change, 148(1-2), 1-10, doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2189-z.
Turnhout, E. et al., 2017: Envisioning REDD+ in a post-Paris era: between evolving
expectations and current practice. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate
Change, 8(1), e425, doi:10.1002/wcc.425.
UN, 2016: Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
A/RES/70/1, United Nations (UN), New York, NY, USA, 41 pp.
UN DESA, 2014: World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. ST/ESA/
SER.A/366, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN
DESA) Population Division, New York, NY, USA, 493 pp.
UN DESA, 2017: World Population Prospects - 2017 Revision. Working Paper No.
ESA/P/WP/248, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UN DESA) Population Division, New York, NY, USA, 46 pp.
Unal, A.B., L. Steg, and M. Gorsira, 2017: Values Versus Environmental
Knowledge as Triggers of a Process of Activation of Personal Norms
for Eco-Driving. Environment and Behavior, 50(10), 1092-1118,
doi:10.1177/0013916517728991.
Underwood, B.S., Z. Guido, P. Gudipudi, and Y. Feinberg, 2017: Increased costs to
US pavement infrastructure from future temperature rise. Nature Climate
Change, 7(10), 704-707, doi:10.1038/nclimate3390.
UNEP, 2005: Enhancing Capacity Building for Integrated Policy Design and
Implementation for Sustainable Development. Economics and Trade Branch,
Division of Technology, Industry and Economics, United Nations Environment
Programme, Geneva, Switzerland, 65 pp.
UNEP, 2011: Near-term Climate Protection and Clean Air Benefits: Actions for
Controlling Short-Lived Climate Forcers. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 78 pp.
UNEP, 2014: Decoupling 2: Technologies, Opportunities and Policy Options. United
Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya, 174 pp.
UNEP, 2015: The financial system we need; aligning the financial system with
sustainable development. United Nations Environment Programme, Geneva,
Switzerland, 112 pp.
UNEP, 2016: The Adaptation Finance Gap Report 2016. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 50 pp.
UNEP, 2017a: The Adaptation Gap Report 2017. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 62 pp.
UNEP, 2017b: The Emissions Gap Report 2017. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 116 pp., doi:978-92-807-3673-1.
UNEP/Climate Analytics, 2015: Africa's Adaptation Gap 2: Bridging the gap -
mobilising sources. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and
Climate Analytics, 67 pp.
UNESCO, 2017: What is Local and Indigenous Knowledge? United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Retrieved
from: www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/priority-areas/links/related-

Chapter 4
information/what-is-local-and-indigenous-knowledge.
UNFCCC, 1992: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. FCCC/
INFORMAL/84, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), 24 pp.
UNFCCC, 2016: Decision 1/CP.21: Adoption of the Paris Agreement. In: Report of
the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from
30 November to 13 December 2015. Addendum: Part two: Action taken by
the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session. FCCC/CP/2015/10/
Add.1, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
pp. 1-36.
UN-Habitat, 2011: Cities and Climate Change: Global Report on Human Settlements
2011. Earthscan, London, UK and Washington, DC, USA, 300 pp.
UN-Habitat, 2017: Sustainable Urbanisation in the Paris Agreement. United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), Nairobi, Kenya, 46 pp.
UNISDR, 2009: Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2009 - Risk
and Poverty in a Changing Climate: Invest Today for a Safer Tomorrow. United
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva,
Switzerland, 14 pp.
Upadhyay, A.P. and A. Bijalwan, 2015: Climate Change Adaptation: Services and Role
of Information Communication Technology (ICT) in India. American Journal of
Environmental Protection, 4(1), 70-74, doi:10.11648/j.ajep.20150401.20.
Upton, G.B. and B.F. Snyder, 2017: Funding Renewable Energy: An Analysis
of Renewable Portfolio Standards. Energy Economics, 66(0), 205-216,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2017.06.003.
Ura, K., 2015: The Experience of Gross National Happiness as Development
Framework. ADB South Asia Working Paper Series No. 42, Asian Development
Bank (ADB), Manila, Philippines, 38 pp.
Urge-Vorsatz, D., S.T. Herrero, N.K. Dubash, and F. Lecocq, 2014: Measuring the
Co-Benefits of Climate Change Mitigation. Annual Review of Environment and
Resources, 39(1), 549-582, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-031312-125456.
Valdivia, C., C. Barbieri, and M.A. Gold, 2012: Between Forestry and Farming: Policy
and Environmental Implications of the Barriers to Agroforestry Adoption.
Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 60(2), 155-175,
doi:10.1111/j.1744-7976.2012.01248.x.
van Asselt, H., P. Pauw, and H. Saelen, 2015: Assessment and Review under a
2015 Climate Change Agreement. Nordic Council of Ministers, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 141 pp., doi:10.6027/tn2015-530.
van der Brugge, R. and R. Roosjen, 2015: An institutional and sociocultural
perspective on the adaptation pathways approach. Journal of Water and
Climate Change, 6(4), 743-758, doi:10.2166/wcc.2015.001.
van der Giesen, C. et al., 2017: A Life Cycle Assessment Case Study of Coal-Fired
Electricity Generation with Humidity Swing Direct Air Capture of CO2 versus
MEA-Based Postcombustion Capture. Environmental Science & Technology,
51(2), 1024-1034, doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b05028.
van der Keur, P. et al., 2016: Identification and analysis of uncertainty in disaster
risk reduction and climate change adaptation in South and Southeast Asia.
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 16, 208-214,
doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2016.03.002.
van Der Werff, E. and L. Steg, 2015: One model to predict them all: Predicting
energy behaviours with the norm activation model. Energy Research & Social
Science, 6, 8-14, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2014.11.002.
van der Werff, E., L. Steg, and K. Keizer, 2013a: It is a moral issue: The relationship
between environmental self-identity, obligation-based intrinsic motivation
and pro-environmental behaviour. Global Environmental Change, 23(5),
1258-1265, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.018.
van der Werff, E., L. Steg, and K. Keizer, 2013b: The value of environmental selfidentity: The relationship between biospheric values, environmental selfidentity and environmental preferences, intentions and behaviour. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 34, 55-63, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2012.12.006.
van der Werff, E., L. Steg, and K. Keizer, 2014a: Follow the signal: When past
pro-environmental actions signal who you are. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 40, 273-282, doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.07.004.
van der Werff, E., L. Steg, and K. Keizer, 2014b: I Am What I Am, by Looking
Past the Present: The Influence of Biospheric Values and Past Behavior
on Environmental. Environment and Behavior, 46(5), 626-657,
doi:10.1177/0013916512475209.
van Dooren, C., M. Marinussen, H. Blonk, H. Aiking, and P. Vellinga, 2014: Exploring
dietary guidelines based on ecological and nutritional values: A comparison
of six dietary patterns. Food Policy, 44, 36-46,
doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2013.11.002.
van Kasteren, Y., 2014: How are householders talking about climate change

439

4

Chapter 4

4

adaptation? Journal of Environmental Psychology, 40, 339-350,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.09.001.
van Oppen, M.J.H., J.K. Oliver, H.M. Putnam, and R.D. Gates, 2015: Building coral
reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112(8), 2307-2313,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1422301112.
van Sluisveld, M.A.E. et al., 2015: Comparing future patterns of energy system
change in 2C scenarios with historically observed rates of change. Global
Environmental Change, 35, 436-449,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.09.019.
van Soest, D.P. and E.H. Bulte, 2001: Does the Energy-Efficiency Paradox Exist?
Technological Progress and Uncertainty. Environmental and Resource
Economics, 18(1), 101-112, doi:10.1023/a:1011112406964.
van Soest, H.L. et al., 2017: Early action on Paris Agreement allows for more time to
change energy systems. Climatic Change, 144(2), 165-179,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2027-8.
van Vliet, M.T.H., D. Wiberg, S. Leduc, and K. Riahi, 2016: Power-generation system
vulnerability and adaptation to changes in climate and water resources.
Nature Climate Change, 6(4), 375-380,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2903.
van Vuuren, D.P., O.Y. Edelenbosch, D.L. McCollum, and K. Riahi, 2017: A special
issue on model-based long-term transport scenarios: Model comparison and
new methodological developments to improve energy and climate policy
analysis. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 55,
277-280, doi:10.1016/j.trd.2017.05.003.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2018: Alternative pathways to the 1.5C target reduce the
need for negative emission technologies. Nature Climate Change, 8(5), 391-
397, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0119-8.
Vandentorren, S. et al., 2006: Heat-related mortality August 2003 Heat Wave in
France: Risk Factors for Death of Elderly People Living at Home. European
Journal of Public Health, 16(6), 583-591,
doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckl063.
Vandyck, T., K. Keramidas, B. Saveyn, A. Kitous, and Z. Vrontisi, 2016: A global
stocktake of the Paris pledges: Implications for energy systems and economy.
Global Environmental Change, 41, 46-63,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.08.006.
Varela-Ortega, C. et al., 2016: How can irrigated agriculture adapt to climate
change? Insights from the Guadiana Basin in Spain. Regional Environmental
Change, 16(1), 59-70, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0720-y.
Vaughan, C. and S. Dessai, 2014: Climate services for society: Origins, institutional
arrangements, and design elements for an evaluation framework. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(5), 587-603,
doi:10.1002/wcc.290.
Vaughan, C., S. Dessai, and C. Hewitt, 2018: Surveying Climate Services: What Can
We Learn from a Bird's-Eye View? Weather, Climate, and Society, 10(2), 373-
395, doi:10.1175/wcas-d-17-0030.1.
Vaughan, N.E. and C. Gough, 2016: Expert assessment concludes negative
emissions scenarios may not deliver. Environmental Research Letters, 11(9),
095003, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095003.
Velasquez Barrero, L.S., 1998: Agenda 21: a form of joint environmental
management in Manizales, Colombia. Environment and Urbanization, 10(2),
9-36, doi:10.1177/095624789801000218.
Velders, G.J.M., D.W. Fahey, J.S. Daniel, S.O. Andersen, and M. McFarland, 2015:
Future atmospheric abundances and climate forcings from scenarios of global
and regional hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions. Atmospheric Environment,
123, 200-209, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.10.071.
Veldman, J.W. et al., 2015: Where Tree Planting and Forest Expansion are Bad
for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. BioScience, 65(10), 1011-1018,
doi:10.1093/biosci/biv118.
Venables, A.J., 2016: Using Natural Resources for Development: Why Has It Proven
So Difficult? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(1), 161-184,
doi:10.1257/jep.30.1.161.
Venhoeven, L.A., J.W. Bolderdijk, and L. Steg, 2013: Explaining the paradox:
How pro-environmental behaviour can both thwart and foster well-being.
Sustainability, 5(4), 1372-1386, doi:10.3390/su5041372.
Venhoeven, L.A., J.W. Bolderdijk, and L. Steg, 2016: Why acting environmentallyfriendly feels good: Exploring the role of self-image. Frontiers in Psychology,
7(NOV), 1990-1991, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01846.
Venkataraman, C., S. Ghosh, and M. Kandlikar, 2016: Breaking out of the Box: India
and Climate Action on Short-Lived Climate Pollutants. Environmental Science
& Technology, 50(23), 12527-12529,

440

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b05246.
Vergara, W., A.R. Rios, L.M. Galindo, and J. Samaniego, 2015: Physical Damages
Associated with Climate Change Impacts and the Need for Adaptation
Actions in Latin America and the Caribbean. In: Handbook of Climate Change
Adaptation [Leal Filho, W. (ed.)]. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, pp.
479-491, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38670-1_101.
Verhoef, L.A., B.W. Budde, C. Chockalingam, B. Garcia Nodar, and A.J.M. van
Wijk, 2018: The effect of additive manufacturing on global energy demand:
An assessment using a bottom-up approach. Energy Policy, 112, 349-360,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.10.034.
Verplanken, B. and D. Roy, 2013: "My Worries Are Rational, Climate Change Is
Not": Habitual Ecological Worrying Is an Adaptive Response. PLOS ONE, 8(9),
e74708, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0074708.
Verplanken, B. and D. Roy, 2016: Empowering interventions to promote sustainable
lifestyles: Testing the habit discontinuity hypothesis in a field experiment.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 45, 127-134,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.11.008.
Verplanken, B., H. Aarts, and A. Van Knippenberg, 1997: Habit, information
acquisition, and the process of making travel mode choices. European Journal
of Social Psychology, 27(5), 539-560,
doi:10.1002/(sici)1099-0992(199709/10)27:5<539::aid-ejsp831>3.0.co;2-a.
Verstegen, J. et al., 2015: What can and can't we say about indirect land-use
change in Brazil using an integrated economic - land-use change model?
GCB Bioenergy, 8(3), 561-578, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12270.
Veugelers, R., 2012: Which policy instruments to induce clean innovating? Research
Policy, 41(10), 1770-1778, doi:10.1016/j.respol.2012.06.012.
Vicente-Vicente, J.L., R. Garcia-Ruiz, R. Francaviglia, E. Aguilera, and P. Smith,
2016: Soil carbon sequestration rates under Mediterranean woody crops
using recommended management practices: A meta-analysis. Agriculture,
Ecosystems & Environment, 235, 204-214,
doi:10.1016/j.agee.2016.10.024.
Viegas, J., L. Martinez, P. Crist, and S. Masterson, 2016: Shared Mobility: Inovation
for Liveable Cities. International Transport Forum, Paris, France, 54 pp.,
doi:10.1787/5jlwvz8bd4mx-en.
Villarroel Walker, R., M.B. Beck, J.W. Hall, R.J. Dawson, and O. Heidrich, 2014: The
energy-water-food nexus: Strategic analysis of technologies for transforming
the urban metabolism. Journal of Environmental Management, 141, 104-
115, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.01.054.
Vinke-de Kruijf, J. and C. Pahl-Wostl, 2016: A multi-level perspective on learning
about climate change adaptation through international cooperation.
Environmental Science & Policy, 66, 242-249,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.07.004.
Vision 2020 Project Team, 2011: Vision 2020: New York City Comprehensive
Waterfront Plan. Department of City Planning (DCP), City of New York, New
York, NY, USA, 192 pp.
Visioni, D., G. Pitari, and V. Aquila, 2017a: Sulfate geoengineering: a review of
the factors controlling the needed injection of sulfur dioxide. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 17(6), 3879-3889,
doi:10.5194/acp-17-3879-2017.
Visioni, D. et al., 2017b: Sulfate geoengineering impact on methane transport and
lifetime: results from the Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project
(GeoMIP). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 17(18), 11209-11226,
doi:10.5194/acp-17-11209-2017.
Visschers, V.H.M., J. Shi, M. Siegrist, and J. Arvai, 2017: Beliefs and values explain
international differences in perception of solar radiation management:
insights from a cross-country survey. Climatic Change, 142(3-4), 531-544,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1970-8.
Vlek, C.A.J. and L. Steg, 2007: Human behavior and environmental sustainability:
Problems, driving forces, and research topics. Journal of Social Issues, 63(1),
1-19, doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2007.00493.x.
Vogel, C., S.C. Moser, R.E. Kasperson, and G.D. Dabelko, 2007: Linking vulnerability,
adaptation, and resilience science to practice: Pathways, players, and
partnerships. Global Environmental Change, 17(3-4), 349-364,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2007.05.002.
von der Assen, N., J. Jung, and A. Bardow, 2013: Life-cycle assessment of carbon
dioxide capture and utilization: avoiding the pitfalls. Energy & Environmental
Science, 6(9), 2721-2734, doi:10.1039/c3ee41151f.
Voskamp, I.M. and F.H.M. Van de Ven, 2015: Planning support system for climate
adaptation: Composing effective sets of blue-green measures to reduce urban
vulnerability to extreme weather events. Building and Environment, 83, 159-
167, doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.07.018.

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Vrontisi, Z. et al., 2018: Enhancing global climate policy ambition towards a 1.5C
stabilization: a short-term multi-model assessment. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(4), 044039, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab53e.
Wachsmuth, D., D.A. Cohen, and H. Angelo, 2016: Expand the frontiers of urban
sustainability. Nature, 536(7617), 391-393,
doi:10.1038/536391a.
Wadud, Z., D. MacKenzie, and P. Leiby, 2016: Help or hindrance? The travel, energy
and carbon impacts of highly automated vehicles. Transportation Research
Part A: Policy and Practice, 86, 1-18,
doi:10.1016/j.tra.2015.12.001.
Waisman, H., J. Rozenberg, and J.C. Hourcade, 2013: Monetary compensations in
climate policy through the lens of a general equilibrium assessment: The case
of oil-exporting countries. Energy Policy, 63, 951-961,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.08.055.
Waisman, H., C. Guivarch, F. Grazi, and J.C. Hourcade, 2012: The Imaclim-R model:
infrastructures, technical inertia and the costs of low carbon futures under
imperfect foresight. Climatic Change, 114(1), 101-120,
doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0387-z.
Walker, W. and M. Lonnroth, 1983: Nuclear power struggles: industrial competition
and proliferation control. Allen & Unwin, London, UK and Boston, USA, 204 pp.
Wallace, B., 2017: A framework for adapting to climate change risk in coastal cities.
Environmental Hazards, 16(2), 149-164, doi:10.1080/17477891.2017.1298511.
Walsh, J.E., 2014: Intensified warming of the Arctic: Causes and impacts on middle
latitudes. Global and Planetary Change, 117, 52-63,
doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2014.03.003.
Wamsler, C., 2007: Bridging the gaps: stakeholder-based strategies for risk
reduction and financing for the urban poor. Environment & Urbanization,
19(1), 115-152, doi:10.1177/0956247807077029.
Wamsler, C., 2017: Stakeholder involvement in strategic adaptation planning:
Transdisciplinarity and co-production at stake? Environmental Science &
Policy, 75, 148-157, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.03.016.
Wamsler, C. and E. Brink, 2014a: Interfacing citizens' and institutions' practice
and responsibilities for climate change adaptation. Urban Climate, 7, 64-91,
doi:10.1016/j.uclim.2013.10.009.
Wamsler, C. and E. Brink, 2014b: Moving beyond short-term coping and adaptation.
Environment & Urbanization, 26(6), 86-111,
doi:10.1177/0956247813516061.
Wang, G. et al., 2017: Continued increase of extreme El Nino frequency long
after 1.5C warming stabilization. Nature Climate Change, 7(8), 568-572,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3351.
Wang, Q., F. Xiao, F. Zhang, and S. Wang, 2013: Labile soil organic carbon and
microbial activity in three subtropical plantations. Forestry, 86(5), 569-574,
doi:10.1093/forestry/cpt024.
Wang, Q., X. Chen, A.N. Jha, and H. Rogers, 2014: Natural gas from shale formation
- The evolution, evidences and challenges of shale gas revolution in United
States. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 30, 1-28,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.065.
Wang, Q. et al., 2015: Structural Evolution of Household Energy Consumption: A
China Study. Sustainability, 7, 3919-3932, doi:10.3390/su7043919.
Wang, X. et al., 2016: Taking account of governance: Implications for land-use
dynamics, food prices, and trade patterns. Ecological Economics, 122, 12-24,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.11.018.
Wangui, E.E. and T.A. Smucker, 2017: Gendered opportunities and constraints to
scaling up: a case study of spontaneous adaptation in a pastoralist community
in Mwanga District, Tanzania. Climate and Development, 1-8,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1301867.
Ward, J., S. Fankhauser, C. Hepburn, H. Jackson, and R. Rajan, 2009: Catalysing lowcarbon growth in developing economies: Public Finance Mechanisms to scale
up private sector investment in climate solution. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Paris, France, 28 pp.
Ward, P.J., W.P. Pauw, M.W. van Buuren, and M.A. Marfai, 2013: Governance of
flood risk management in a time of climate change: the cases of Jakarta and
Rotterdam. Environmental Politics, 22(3), 518-536,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2012.683155.
Warren, C.R. et al., 2005: `Green On Green': Public perceptions of wind power in
Scotland and Ireland. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
48(6), 853-875, doi:10.1080/09640560500294376.
Waters, J. and W.N. Adger, 2017: Spatial, network and temporal dimensions of the
determinants of adaptive capacity in poor urban areas. Global Environmental
Change, 46, 42-49, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.06.011.
Watkins, K., 2015: Power, People, Planet: Seizing Africa's Energy and Climate

Chapter 4
Opportunities. Africa Progress Report 2015. Africa Progress Panel, Geneva,
Switzerland, 179 pp.
WBCSD, 2017: LCTPi Progress Report 2017. World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD), Geneva, Switzerland, 47 pp.
Weber, E.U., 2015: Climate Change Demands Behavioral Change: What Are the
Challenges? Social Research: An International Quarterly, 82(3), 561-580,
http://muse.jhu.edu/article/603150.
Wedlock, D.N., P.H. Janssen, S.C. Leahy, D. Shu, and B.M. Buddle, 2013: Progress
in the development of vaccines against rumen methanogens. Animal, 7(S2),
244-252, doi:10.1017/s1751731113000682.
Wee, B., 2015: Peak car: The first signs of a shift towards ICT-based activities
replacing travel? A discussion paper. Transport Policy, 42, 1-3,
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2015.04.002.
Weenig, M.W.H. and C.J.H. Midden, 1991: Communication Network Influences
on Information Diffusion and Persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 61(5), 734-742, doi:10.1037/0022-3514.61.5.734.
WEF, 2013: The Green Investment Report: ways and means to unlock private finance
for green growth. World Economic Forum (WEF), Geneva, Switzerland, 40 pp.
WEF, 2015: Industrial Internet of Things. World Economic Forum (WEF), Geneva,
Switzerland, 39 pp.
Wehkamp, J., N. Koch, S. Lubbers, and S. Fuss, 2018a: Governance and deforestation
- a meta-analysis in economics. Ecological Economics, 144, 214-227,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.07.030.
Wehkamp, J. et al., 2018b: Accounting for institutional quality in global forest
modeling. Environmental Modelling & Software, 102, 250-259,
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.01.020.
Wehner, M.F., K.A. Reed, B. Loring, D. Stone, and H. Krishnan, 2018: Changes in
tropical cyclones under stabilized 1.5 and 2.0C global warming scenarios as
simulated by the Community Atmospheric Model under the HAPPI protocols.
Earth System Dynamics, 9(1), 187-195,
doi:10.5194/esd-9-187-2018.
Wei, M., S.J. Smith, and M.D. Sohn, 2017: Experience curve development and cost
reduction disaggregation for fuel cell markets in Japan and the US. Applied
Energy, 191, 346-357, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.01.056.
Wei, Y., D. Tang, Y. Ding, and G. Agoramoorthy, 2016: Incorporating water
consumption into crop water footprint: A case study of China's South-North
Water Diversion Project. Science of The Total Environment, 545-546, 601-
608, doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.12.062.
Weindl, I. et al., 2015: Livestock in a changing climate: production system
transitions as an adaptation strategy for agriculture. Environmental Research
Letters, 10(9), 094021,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/9/094021.
Weischer, L., J. Morgan, and M. Patel, 2012: Climate Clubs: Can Small Groups of
Countries make a Big Difference in Addressing Climate Change? Review of
European Community & International Environmental Law, 21(3), 177-192,
doi:10.1111/reel.12007.
Weitzman, M.L., 2015: A Voting Architecture for the Governance of Free-Driver
Externalities, with Application to Geoengineering. Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 117(4), 1049-1068, doi:10.1111/sjoe.12120.
Wejs, A., K. Harvold, S.V. Larsen, and I.-L. Saglie, 2014: Legitimacy building in weak
institutional settings: climate change adaptation at local level in Denmark and
Norway. Environmental Politics, 23(3), 490-508,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2013.854967.
Weldegebriel, Z.B. and M. Prowse, 2013: Climate-Change Adaptation in Ethiopia:
To What Extent Does Social Protection Influence Livelihood Diversification?
Development Policy Review, 31, o35-o56,
doi:10.1111/dpr.12038.
Well, M. and A. Carrapatoso, 2017: REDD+ finance: policy making in the context of
fragmented institutions. Climate Policy, 17(6), 687-707,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1202096.
Wells, L., B. Rismanchi, and L. Aye, 2018: A review of Net Zero Energy Buildings with
reflections on the Australian context. Energy and Buildings, 158, 616-628,
doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.10.055.
Wenzel, G.W., 2009: Canadian Inuit subsistence and ecological instability - If the
climate changes, must the Inuit? Polar Research, 28(1), 89-99,
doi:10.1111/j.1751-8369.2009.00098.x.
Werner, C., H.-P. Schmidt, D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and C. Kammann, 2018:
Biogeochemical potential of biomass pyrolysis systems for limiting
global warming to 1.5C. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 44036,
doi:10.1088/1478-3975/aa9768.
Wesseling, J.H. et al., 2017: The transition of energy intensive processing industries

441

4

Chapter 4

4

towards deep decarbonization: Characteristics and implications for future
research. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 79, 1303-1313,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.156.
West, S.E. and R.C. Williams, 2004: Estimates from a consumer demand
system: implications for the incidence of environmental taxes. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 47(3), 535-558,
doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2003.11.004.
Westphal, M.I., S. Martin, L. Zhou, and D. Satterthwaite, 2017: Powering Cities in
the Global South: How Energy Access for All Benefits the Economy and the
Environment. World Resources Institute (WRI), Washington DC, USA, 55 pp.
White, C.J. et al., 2017: Potential applications of subseasonal-to-seasonal (S2S)
predictions. Meteorological Applications, 24(3), 315-325,
doi:10.1002/met.1654.
White, R., J. Turpie, and G. Letley, 2017: Greening Africa's Cities: Enhancing the
Relationship between Urbanization, Environmental Assets, and Ecosystem
Services. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 56 pp.
Whitmarsh, L., G. Seyfang, and S.O.N. Workspace., 2011: Public engagement with
carbon and climate change: To what extent is the public `carbon capable'?
Global Environmental Change, 21(1), 56-65,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.07.011.
WHO, 2015: Lessons learned on health adaptation to climate variability and
change: experiences across low- and middle-income countries. World Health
Organization (WHO), Geneva, Switzerland, 72 pp.
Whyte, K.P., 2012: Now This! Indigenous Sovereignty, Political Obliviousness and
Governance Models for SRM Research. Ethics, Policy & Environment, 15(2),
172-187, doi:10.1080/21550085.2012.685570.
Wibeck, V. et al., 2017: Making sense of climate engineering: a focus group study of
lay publics in four countries. Climatic Change, 145(1-2), 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2067-0.
Wigand, C. et al., 2017: A Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for Management of
Coastal Marsh Systems. Estuaries and Coasts, 40(3), 682-693,
doi:10.1007/s12237-015-0003-y.
Wilcox, J., P.C. Psarras, and S. Liguori, 2017: Assessment of reasonable opportunities
for direct air capture. Environmental Research Letters, 12(6), 065001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa6de5.
Williams, M. et al., 2011: Options for policy responses and their impacts. In:
Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone. United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 171-250.
Williams, P. et al., 2017: Community-based observing networks and systems in the
Arctic: Human perceptions of environmental change and instrument-derived
data. Regional Environmental Change, 18(2), 547-559,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1220-7.
Williams, P.M. and E.R.M. Druffel, 1987: Radiocarbon in dissolved organic
matter in the central North Pacific Ocean. Nature, 330(6145), 246-248,
doi:10.1038/330246a0.
Williamson, P. and R. Bodle, 2016: Update on Climate Geoengineering in Relation
to the Convention on Biological Diversity: Potential Impacts and Regulatory
Framework. CBD Technical Series No. 84, Secretariat of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, Montreal, QC, Canada, 158 pp.
Williamson, P. et al., 2012: Ocean fertilization for geoengineering: A review of
effectiveness, environmental impacts and emerging governance. Process
Safety and Environmental Protection, 90(6), 475-488,
doi:10.1016/j.psep.2012.10.007.
Willis, R., 2017: How Members of Parliament understand and respond to climate
change. The Sociological Review, 1-17,
doi:10.1177/0038026117731658.
Wilson, C., 2012: Up-scaling, formative phases, and learning in the historical
diffusion of energy technologies. Energy Policy, 50, 81-94,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.04.077.
Wilson, C. and H. Dowlatabadi, 2007: Models of Decision Making and Residential
Energy Use. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 32(1), 169-203,
doi:10.1146/annurev.energy.32.053006.141137.
Wilson, C., A. Grubler, N. Bauer, V. Krey, and K. Riahi, 2013: Future capacity growth
of energy technologies: Are scenarios consistent with historical evidence?
Climatic Change, 118(2), 381-395, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0618-y.
Wilson, S.A. et al., 2009: Carbon Dioxide Fixation within Mine Wastes of UltramaficHosted Ore Deposits: Examples from the Clinton Creek and Cassiar Chrysotile
Deposits, Canada. Economic Geology, 104(1), 95-112,
doi:10.2113/gsecongeo.104.1.95.
Windeatt, J.H. et al., 2014: Characteristics of biochars from crop residues: Potential
for carbon sequestration and soil amendment. Journal of Environmental

442

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
Management, 146, 189-197, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.08.003.
Winkler, H., 2017: Reducing energy poverty through carbon tax revenues in South
Africa. Journal of Energy in Southern Africa, 28(3), 12-26,
doi:10.17159/2413-3051/2017/v28i3a2332.
Winkler, H. and N.K. Dubash, 2015: Who determines transformational change
in development and climate finance? Climate Policy, 783-791, doi:
10.1080/14693062.2015.1033674.
Winkler, H., T. Letete, and A. Marquard, 2013: Equitable access to sustainable
development: operationalizing key criteria. Climate Policy, 13(4), 411-432,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2013.777610.
Winkler, H. et al., 2017: Countries start to explain how their climate contributions
are fair: more rigour needed. International Environmental Agreements:
Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 99-115,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9381-x.
Wise, M., M. Muratori, and P. Kyle, 2017: Biojet fuels and emissions mitigation
in aviation: An integrated assessment modeling analysis. Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 52, 244-253,
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2017.03.006.
WMO, 2015: Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Meteorological
and Hydrological Services. WMO-No. 1153, World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), Geneva, Switzerland, 308 pp.
Wolak, F.A., 2011: Do residential customers respond to hourly prices? Evidence
from a dynamic pricing experiment. American Economic Review, 101(3),
83-87, doi:10.1257/aer.101.3.83.
Wolfrom, L. and M. Yokoi-Arai, 2015: Financial instruments for managing disaster
risks related to climate change. OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends,
2015(1), 25-47, doi:10.1787/fmt-2015-5jrqdkpxk5d5.
Wollenberg, E. et al., 2016: Reducing emissions from agriculture to meet the 2C
target. Global Change Biology, 22(12), 3859-3864,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13340.
Wolske, K.S., P.C. Stern, and T. Dietz, 2017: Explaining interest in adopting
residential solar photovoltaic systems in the United States: Toward an
integration of behavioral theories. Energy Research & Social Science, 25,
134-151, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.12.023.
Wong, P.-H., 2014: Maintenance Required: The Ethics of Geoengineering and PostImplementation Scenarios. Ethics, Policy & Environment, 17(2), 186-191,
doi:10.1080/21550085.2014.926090.
Wong, S., 2012: Overcoming obstacles against effective solar lighting interventions
in South Asia. Energy Policy, 40, 110-120, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.09.030.
Wood, B.T., C.H. Quinn, L.C. Stringer, and A.J. Dougill, 2017: Investigating Climate
Compatible Development Outcomes and their Implications for Distributive
Justice: Evidence from Malawi. Environmental Management, 1, 1-18,
doi:10.1007/s00267-017-0890-8.
Wood, P. and F. Jotzo, 2011: Price floors for emissions trading. Energy Policy, 39(3),
1746-1753, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.01.004.
Wood, S.A., A.S. Jina, M. Jain, P. Kristjanson, and R.S. DeFries, 2014: Smallholder
farmer cropping decisions related to climate variability across multiple
regions. Global Environmental Change, 25, 163-172,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.011.
Woodcock, J. et al., 2009: Public health benefits of strategies to reduce greenhousegas emissions: urban land transport. The Lancet, 374(9705), 1930-1943,
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(09)61714-1.
Woodruff, S.C. and M. Stults, 2016: Numerous strategies but limited implementation
guidance in US local adaptation plans. Nature Climate Change, 6(8), 796-
802, doi:10.1038/nclimate3012.
Woods, B.A., H. Nielsen, A.B. Pedersen, and D. Kristofersson, 2017: Farmers'
perceptions of climate change and their likely responses in Danish agriculture.
Land Use Policy, 65, 109-120, doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.04.007.
Woolf, D., J.E. Amonette, A. Street-Perrott, J. Lehmann, and S. Joseph,
2010: Sustainable bio-char to mitigate global climate change. Nature
Communications, 1, 56, doi:10.1038/ncomms1053.
World Bank, 2016: World Bank Group Climate Action Plan. The World Bank,
Washington DC, USA, 59 pp.
World Bank, 2017a: Pacific Possible: Long-term Economic Opportunities and
Challenges for Pacific Island Countries. World Bank Group, Washington DC,
USA, 158 pp.
World Bank, 2017b: Understanding Poverty: Safety Nets. The World Bank,
Washington DC, USA. Retrieved from:
www.worldbank.org/en/topic/safetynets.
World Bank, 2018a: Global Financial Development Report 2017/2018:
Bankers without Borders. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 159 pp.,

Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1148-7.
World Bank, 2018b: Market capitalization of listed domestic companies (current
US$). World Federation of Exchanges database. Retrieved from:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/cm.mkt.lcap.cd.
Wright, H. et al., 2014: Farmers, food and climate change: ensuring communitybased adaptation is mainstreamed into agricultural programmes. Climate and
Development, 6(4), 318-328, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.965654.
Wu, P., J. Ridley, A. Pardaens, R. Levine, and J. Lowe, 2015: The reversibility of CO2
induced climate change. Climate Dynamics, 45(3), 745-754,
doi:10.1007/s00382-014-2302-6.
Xia, L., A. Robock, S. Tilmes, and R.R. Neely, 2016: Stratospheric sulfate
geoengineering could enhance the terrestrial photosynthesis rate.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 16(3), 1479-1489,
doi:10.5194/acp-16-1479-2016.
Xiao, J.J., H. Li, J. Jian, and X. Haifeng, 2011: Sustainable Consumption and Life
Satisfaction. Social Indicators Research, 104(2), 323-329,
doi:10.1007/s11205-010-9746-9.
Xie, J. et al., 2017: An integrated assessment of urban flooding mitigation strategies
for robust decision making. Environmental Modelling & Software, 95, 143-
155, doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.06.027.
Xu, Y. and V. Ramanathan, 2017: Well below 2C: Mitigation strategies for avoiding
dangerous to catastrophic climate changes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(39), 10315-10323, doi:10.1073/pnas.1618481114.
Xue, X. et al., 2015: Critical insights for a sustainability framework to address
integrated community water services: Technical metrics and approaches.
Water Research, 77, 155-169, doi:10.1016/j.watres.2015.03.017.
Yamamoto, L., D.A. Serraglio, and F.S. Cavedon-Capdeville, 2017: Human mobility
in the context of climate change and disasters: a South American approach.
International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management, 10(1),
65-85, doi:10.1108/ijccsm-03-2017-0069.
Yang, Y.C.E., S. Wi, P.A. Ray, C.M. Brown, and A.F. Khalil, 2016: The future nexus of the
Brahmaputra River Basin: Climate, water, energy and food trajectories. Global
Environmental Change, 37, 16-30, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.01.002.
Yangka, D. and M. Diesendorf, 2016: Modeling the benefits of electric cooking in
Bhutan: A long term perspective. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
59, 494-503, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.265.
Yangka, D. and P. Newman, 2018: Bhutan: Can the 1.5C Agenda Be Integrated
with Growth in Wealth and Happiness? Urban Planning, 3(2), 94-112,
doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1250.
Yenneti, K. and R. Day, 2016: Distributional justice in solar energy implementation
in India: The case of Charanka solar park. Journal of Rural Studies, 46, 35-46,
doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.05.009.
Young, O.R., 2016: Governing Complex Systems: Social Capital for the
Anthropocene. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA and London, UK, 296 pp.
Young, W. et al., 2015: Changing Behaviour: Successful Environmental Programmes
in the Workplace. Business Strategy and the Environment, 24(8), 689-703,
doi:10.1002/bse.1836.
Yuan, X., J. Zuo, R. Ma, and Y. Wang, 2017: How would social acceptance affect
nuclear power development? A study from China. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 163, 179-186, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.04.049.
Zahariev, K., J.R. Christian, and K.L. Denman, 2008: Preindustrial, historical,
and fertilization simulations using a global ocean carbon model with new
parameterizations of iron limitation, calcification, and N2 fixation. Progress in
Oceanography, 77(1), 56-82, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2008.01.007.
Zanchi, G., N. Pena, and N. Bird, 2012: Is woody bioenergy carbon neutral? A
comparative assessment of emissions from consumption of woody bioenergy
and fossil fuel. GCB Bioenergy, 4(6), 761-772,
doi:10.1111/j.1757-1707.2011.01149.x.
Zangheri, P., R. Armani, M. Pietrobon, and L. Pagliano, 2018: Identification of
cost-optimal and NZEB refurbishment levels for representative climates
and building typologies across Europe. Energy Efficiency, 11(2), 337-369,
doi:10.1007/s12053-017-9566-8.
Zaval, L., E.M. Markowitz, and E.U. Weber, 2015: How Will I Be Remembered?
Conserving the Environment for the Sake of One's Legacy. Psychological
Science, 26(2), 231-236, doi:10.1177/0956797614561266.
Zeebe, R.E., 2005: Feasibility of ocean fertilization and its impact on future
atmospheric CO2 levels. Geophysical Research Letters, 32(9), L09703,
doi:10.1029/2005gl022449.
Zelli, F., 2011: The fragmentation of the global climate governance architecture.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 2(1), 255-270, doi:10.1002/
wcc.104.

Chapter 4
Zeman, F.S., 2014: Reducing the Cost of Ca-Based Direct Air Capture of CO2.
Environmental Science & Technology, 48(19), 11730-11735,
doi:10.1021/es502887y.
Zeng, S. and Z. Chen, 2016: Impact of fossil fuel subsidy reform in China: Estimations
of household welfare effects based on 2007-2012 data. Economic and
Political Studies, 4(3), 299-318, doi:10.1080/20954816.2016.1218669.
Zhang, H., 2016: Towards global green shipping: the development of international
regulations on reduction of GHG emissions from ships. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 16(4), 561-577,
doi:10.1007/s10784-014-9270-5.
Zhang, H., W. Chen, and W. Huang, 2016: TIMES modelling of transport sector in
China and USA: Comparisons from a decarbonization perspective. Applied
Energy, 162, 1505-1514, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.08.124.
Zhang, W. et al., 2017: Perception, knowledge and behaviors related to typhoon: A
cross sectional study among rural residents in Zhejiang, China. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(5), 1-12,
doi:10.3390/ijerph14050492.
Ziervogel, G., A. Cowen, and J. Ziniades, 2016a: Moving from Adaptive to
Transformative Capacity: Building Foundations for Inclusive, Thriving, and
Regenerative Urban Settlements. Sustainability, 8(9), 955,
doi:10.3390/su8090955.
Ziervogel, G., J. Waddell, W. Smit, and A. Taylor, 2016b: Flooding in Cape Town's
informal settlements: barriers to collaborative urban risk governance. South
African Geographical Journal, 98(1), 1-20,
doi:10.1080/03736245.2014.924867.
Ziervogel, G. et al., 2017: Inserting rights and justice into urban resilience: a
focus on everyday risk. Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 123-138,
doi:10.1177/0956247816686905.
Zilberman, D., 2017: Indirect land use change: much ado about (almost) nothing.
GCB Bioenergy, 9(3), 485-488, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12368.
Zomer, R.J. et al., 2016: Global Tree Cover and Biomass Carbon on Agricultural
Land: The contribution of agroforestry to global and national carbon budgets.
Scientific Reports, 6, 29987, doi:10.1038/srep29987.
Zusman, E., A. Miyatsuka, J. Romero, and M. Arif, 2015: Aligning Interests around
Mitigating Short Lived Climate Pollutants (SLCP) in Asia: A Stepwise Approach.
IGES Discussion Paper, Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES),
Hayama, Japan, 14 pp.

4

443

5

Sustainable Development,
Poverty Eradication and
Reducing Inequalities
Coordinating Lead Authors:
Joyashree Roy (India), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria), Henri Waisman (France)

Lead Authors:
Sharina Abdul Halim (Malaysia), Philip Antwi-Agyei (Ghana), Purnamita Dasgupta (India), Bronwyn
Hayward (New Zealand), Markku Kanninen (Finland), Diana Liverman (USA), Chukwumerije
Okereke (UK/Nigeria), Patricia Fernanda Pinho (Brazil), Keywan Riahi (Austria), Avelino G. Suarez
Rodriguez (Cuba)

Contributing Authors:
Fernando Aragon-Durand (Mexico), Mustapha Babiker (Sudan), Mook Bangalore (USA), Paolo
Bertoldi (Italy), Bishwa Bhaskar Choudhary (India), Edward Byres (Austria/Brazil), Anton Cartwright
(South Africa), Riyanti Djalante (Japan/Indonesia), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Neville Ellis (Australia),
Francois Engelbrecht (South Africa), Maria Figueroa (Denmark/Venezuela), Mukesh Gupta (India),
Diana Hinge Salili (Vanuatu), Daniel Huppmann (Austria), Saleemul Huq (Bangladesh/UK), Daniela
Jacob (Germany), Rachel James (UK), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Peter Marcotullio (USA),
Omar Massera (Mexico), Reinhard Mechler (Germany), Haileselassie Amaha Medhin (Ethiopia),
Shagun Mehrotra (USA/India), Peter Newman (Australia), Karen Paiva Henrique (Brazil), Simon
Parkinson (Canada), Aromar Revi (India), Wilfried Rickels (Germany), Lisa Schipper (UK/Sweden),
Jorn Schmidt (Germany), Seth Schultz (USA), Pete Smith (UK), William Solecki (USA), Shreya Some
(India), Nenenteiti Teariki-Ruatu (Kiribati), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas), Penny Urquhart (South
Africa), Margaretha Wewerinke-Singh (Netherlands)

Review Editors:
Svitlana Krakovska (Ukraine), Ramon Pichs Madruga (Cuba), Roberto Sanchez (Mexico)

Chapter Scientist:
Neville Ellis (Australia)

This chapter should be cited as:
Roy, J., P. Tschakert, H. Waisman, S. Abdul Halim, P. Antwi-Agyei, P. Dasgupta, B. Hayward, M. Kanninen, D. Liverman,
C. Okereke, P.F. Pinho, K. Riahi, and A.G. Suarez Rodriguez, 2018: Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication
and Reducing Inequalities. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming
of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia,
C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and
T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

445

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Table of Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................447

5.5

5.1

5.5.1


Integration of Adaptation, Mitigation
and Sustainable Development.....................................467

5.5.2


Pathways for Adaptation, Mitigation
and Sustainable Development.....................................467

5.5.3

Climate-Resilient Development Pathways...................468

Scope and Delineations...............................................450

5.1.1


Sustainable Development, SDGs, Poverty
Eradication and Reducing Inequalities........................450

5.1.2

Pathways to 1.5C.......................................................450

5.1.3

Types of evidence........................................................451

5.2


Poverty, Equality and Equity Implications
of a 1.5C Warmer World.............................................451

5.2.1


Impacts and Risks of a 1.5C Warmer World:
Implications for Poverty and Livelihoods.....................452

5.2.2


Avoided Impacts of 1.5C Versus 2C
Warming for Poverty and Inequality............................452

5.2.3


Risks from 1.5C Versus 2C Global Warming
and the Sustainable Development Goals.....................453

Cross-Chapter Box 12: Residual Risks,
Limits to Adaptation and Loss and Damage.........................454

5.3


Climate Adaptation and
Sustainable Development...........................................456

Box 5.3: Republic of Vanuatu - National Planning
for Development and Climate Resilience..............................471
Cross-Chapter Box 13: Cities and Urban Transformation....472

5.6




Conditions for Achieving Sustainable
Development, Eradicating Poverty
and Reducing Inequalities in
1.5C Warmer Worlds....................................................474

5.6.1

Finance and Technology Aligned with Local Needs......474

5.6.2

Integration of Institutions...........................................474

5.6.3

Inclusive Processes......................................................475

5.6.4

Attention to Issues of Power and Inequality................475

5.6.5

Reconsidering Values..................................................475

5.3.1


Sustainable Development in Support
of Climate Adaptation.................................................456

5.7

5.3.2


Synergies and Trade-Offs between Adaptation
Options and Sustainable Development.......................457

Frequently Asked Questions

5.3.3


Adaptation Pathways towards a 1.5C Warmer
World and Implications for Inequalities.......................458

Box 5.1 : Ecosystem- and Community-Based
Practices in Drylands................................................................459

5.4

Mitigation and Sustainable Development.............459

5.4.1


5

Sustainable Development Pathways to 1.5C......466

Synergies and Trade-Offs between Mitigation
Options and Sustainable Development.......................459

Box 5.2: Challenges and Opportunities of
Low-Carbon Pathways in Gulf Cooperative
Council Countries.....................................................................462
5.4.2


446

Sustainable Development Implications of 1.5C
and 2C Mitigation Pathways......................................463

Synthesis and Research Gaps....................................475

FAQ 5.1




What are the Connections between
Sustainable Development and Limiting
Global Warming to 1.5C above
Pre-Industrial Levels?...........................................477

FAQ 5.2 What are the Pathways to Achieving

Poverty Reduction and Reducing Inequalities

while Reaching a 1.5C World?...............................479

References ....................................................................................510

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Executive Summary
This chapter takes sustainable development as the starting point
and focus for analysis. It considers the broad and multifaceted
bi-directional interplay between sustainable development, including
its focus on eradicating poverty and reducing inequality in their
multidimensional aspects, and climate actions in a 1.5C warmer world.
These fundamental connections are embedded in the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The chapter also examines synergies
and trade-offs of adaptation and mitigation options with sustainable
development and the SDGs and offers insights into possible pathways,
especially climate-resilient development pathways towards a 1.5C
warmer world.

Sustainable Development, Poverty and Inequality
in a 1.5C Warmer World
Limiting global warming to 1.5C rather than 2C above preindustrial levels would make it markedly easier to achieve many
aspects of sustainable development, with greater potential to
eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities (medium evidence,
high agreement). Impacts avoided with the lower temperature
limit could reduce the number of people exposed to climate risks and
vulnerable to poverty by 62 to 457 million, and lessen the risks of
poor people to experience food and water insecurity, adverse health
impacts, and economic losses, particularly in regions that already face
development challenges (medium evidence, medium agreement).
{5.2.2, 5.2.3} Avoided impacts expected to occur between 1.5C and
2C warming would also make it easier to achieve certain SDGs, such as
those that relate to poverty, hunger, health, water and sanitation, cities
and ecosystems (SDGs 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 14 and 15) (medium evidence,
high agreement). {5.2.3, Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter}
Compared to current conditions, 1.5C of global warming would
nonetheless pose heightened risks to eradicating poverty,
reducing inequalities and ensuring human and ecosystem wellbeing (medium evidence, high agreement). Warming of 1.5C is
not considered `safe' for most nations, communities, ecosystems and
sectors and poses significant risks to natural and human systems as
compared to the current warming of 1C (high confidence). {CrossChapter Box 12 in Chapter 5} The impacts of 1.5C of warming would
disproportionately affect disadvantaged and vulnerable populations
through food insecurity, higher food prices, income losses, lost
livelihood opportunities, adverse health impacts and population
displacements (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.2.1} Some of
the worst impacts on sustainable development are expected to be
felt among agricultural and coastal dependent livelihoods, indigenous
people, children and the elderly, poor labourers, poor urban dwellers in
African cities, and people and ecosystems in the Arctic and Small Island
Developing States (SIDS) (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.2.1,
Box 5.3, Chapter 3, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4}

Climate Adaptation and Sustainable Development
Prioritization of sustainable development and meeting the
SDGs is consistent with efforts to adapt to climate change (high

Chapter 5

confidence). Many strategies for sustainable development enable
transformational adaptation for a 1.5C warmer world, provided
attention is paid to reducing poverty in all its forms and to promoting
equity and participation in decision-making (medium evidence, high
agreement). As such, sustainable development has the potential
to significantly reduce systemic vulnerability, enhance adaptive
capacity, and promote livelihood security for poor and disadvantaged
populations (high confidence). {5.3.1}
Synergies between adaptation strategies and the SDGs are
expected to hold true in a 1.5C warmer world, across sectors
and contexts (medium evidence, medium agreement). Synergies
between adaptation and sustainable development are significant
for agriculture and health, advancing SDGs 1 (extreme poverty),
2 (hunger), 3 (healthy lives and well-being) and 6 (clean water) (robust
evidence, medium agreement). {5.3.2} Ecosystem- and communitybased adaptation, along with the incorporation of indigenous and
local knowledge, advances synergies with SDGs 5 (gender equality),
10 (reducing inequalities) and 16 (inclusive societies), as exemplified
in drylands and the Arctic (high evidence, medium agreement). {5.3.2,
Box 5.1, Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4}
Adaptation strategies can result in trade-offs with and among
the SDGs (medium evidence, high agreement). Strategies that
advance one SDG may create negative consequences for other
SDGs, for instance SDGs 3 (health) versus 7 (energy consumption)
and agricultural adaptation and SDG 2 (food security) versus SDGs 3
(health), 5 (gender equality), 6 (clean water), 10 (reducing inequalities),
14 (life below water) and 15 (life on the land) (medium evidence,
medium agreement). {5.3.2}
Pursuing place-specific adaptation pathways towards a 1.5C
warmer world has the potential for significant positive outcomes
for well-being in countries at all levels of development (medium
evidence, high agreement). Positive outcomes emerge when
adaptation pathways (i) ensure a diversity of adaptation options based
on people's values and the trade-offs they consider acceptable, (ii)
maximize synergies with sustainable development through inclusive,
participatory and deliberative processes, and (iii) facilitate equitable
transformation. Yet such pathways would be difficult to achieve
without redistributive measures to overcome path dependencies,
uneven power structures, and entrenched social inequalities (medium
evidence, high agreement). {5.3.3}

Mitigation and Sustainable Development
The deployment of mitigation options consistent with 1.5C
pathways leads to multiple synergies across a range of
sustainable development dimensions. At the same time, the
rapid pace and magnitude of change that would be required
to limit warming to 1.5C, if not carefully managed, would lead
to trade-offs with some sustainable development dimensions
(high confidence). The number of synergies between mitigation
response options and sustainable development exceeds the number
of trade-offs in energy demand and supply sectors; agriculture, forestry
and other land use (AFOLU); and for oceans (very high confidence).
{Figure 5.2, Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter} The 1.5C
447

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

pathways indicate robust synergies, particularly for the SDGs 3 (health),
7 (energy), 12 (responsible consumption and production) and 14
(oceans) (very high confidence). {5.4.2, Figure 5.3} For SDGs 1 (poverty),
2 (hunger), 6 (water) and 7 (energy), there is a risk of trade-offs or
negative side effects from stringent mitigation actions compatible with
1.5C of warming (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.2}
Appropriately designed mitigation actions to reduce energy
demand can advance multiple SDGs simultaneously. Pathways
compatible with 1.5C that feature low energy demand show the
most pronounced synergies and the lowest number of trade-offs
with respect to sustainable development and the SDGs (very high
confidence). Accelerating energy efficiency in all sectors has synergies
with SDGs 7 (energy), 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure),
11 (sustainable cities and communities), 12 (responsible consumption
and production), 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions), and
17 (partnerships for the goals) (robust evidence, high agreement).
{5.4.1, Figure 5.2, Table 5.2} Low-demand pathways, which would
reduce or completely avoid the reliance on bioenergy with carbon
capture and storage (BECCS) in 1.5C pathways, would result in
significantly reduced pressure on food security, lower food prices and
fewer people at risk of hunger (medium evidence, high agreement).
{5.4.2, Figure 5.3}
The impacts of carbon dioxide removal options on SDGs depend
on the type of options and the scale of deployment (high
confidence). If poorly implemented, carbon dioxide removal (CDR)
options such as bioenergy, BECCS and AFOLU would lead to tradeoffs. Appropriate design and implementation requires considering
local people's needs, biodiversity and other sustainable development
dimensions (very high confidence). {5.4.1.3, Cross-Chapter Box 7 in
Chapter 3}

5

The design of the mitigation portfolios and policy instruments
to limit warming to 1.5C will largely determine the overall
synergies and trade-offs between mitigation and sustainable
development (very high confidence). Redistributive policies
that shield the poor and vulnerable can resolve trade-offs for
a range of SDGs (medium evidence, high agreement). Individual
mitigation options are associated with both positive and negative
interactions with the SDGs (very high confidence). {5.4.1} However,
appropriate choices across the mitigation portfolio can help to
maximize positive side effects while minimizing negative side effects
(high confidence). {5.4.2, 5.5.2} Investment needs for complementary
policies resolving trade-offs with a range of SDGs are only a small
fraction of the overall mitigation investments in 1.5C pathways
(medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.2, Figure 5.4} Integration of
mitigation with adaptation and sustainable development compatible
with 1.5C warming requires a systems perspective (high confidence).
{5.4.2, 5.5.2}
Mitigation consistent with 1.5C of warming create high risks
for sustainable development in countries with high dependency
on fossil fuels for revenue and employment generation (high
confidence). These risks are caused by the reduction of global demand
affecting mining activity and export revenues and challenges to rapidly
decrease high carbon intensity of the domestic economy (robust
448

evidence, high agreement). {5.4.1.2, Box 5.2} Targeted policies that
promote diversification of the economy and the energy sector could
ease this transition (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.1.2,
Box 5.2}

Sustainable Development Pathways to 1.5C
Sustainable development broadly supports and often enables
the fundamental societal and systems transformations that
would be required for limiting warming to 1.5C above preindustrial levels (high confidence). Simulated pathways that
feature the most sustainable worlds (e.g., Shared Socio-Economic
Pathways (SSP) 1) are associated with relatively lower mitigation and
adaptation challenges and limit warming to 1.5C at comparatively
lower mitigation costs. In contrast, development pathways with high
fragmentation, inequality and poverty (e.g., SSP3) are associated with
comparatively higher mitigation and adaptation challenges. In such
pathways, it is not possible to limit warming to 1.5C for the vast
majority of the integrated assessment models (medium evidence,
high agreement). {5.5.2} In all SSPs, mitigation costs substantially
increase in 1.5C pathways compared to 2C pathways. No pathway
in the literature integrates or achieves all 17 SDGs (high confidence).
{5.5.2} Real-world experiences at the project level show that the
actual integration between adaptation, mitigation and sustainable
development is challenging as it requires reconciling trade-offs across
sectors and spatial scales (very high confidence). {5.5.1}
Without societal transformation and rapid implementation
of ambitious greenhouse gas reduction measures, pathways
to limiting warming to 1.5C and achieving sustainable
development will be exceedingly difficult, if not impossible,
to achieve (high confidence). The potential for pursuing such
pathways differs between and within nations and regions, due to
different development trajectories, opportunities and challenges (very
high confidence). {5.5.3.2, Figure 5.1} Limiting warming to 1.5C
would require all countries and non-state actors to strengthen their
contributions without delay. This could be achieved through sharing
efforts based on bolder and more committed cooperation, with support
for those with the least capacity to adapt, mitigate and transform
(medium evidence, high agreement). {5.5.3.1, 5.5.3.2} Current
efforts towards reconciling low-carbon trajectories and reducing
inequalities, including those that avoid difficult trade-offs associated
with transformation, are partially successful yet demonstrate notable
obstacles (medium evidence, medium agreement). {5.5.3.3, Box 5.3,
Cross-Chapter Box 13 in this chapter}
Social justice and equity are core aspects of climate-resilient
development pathways for transformational social change.
Addressing challenges and widening opportunities between
and within countries and communities would be necessary
to achieve sustainable development and limit warming to
1.5C, without making the poor and disadvantaged worse off
(high confidence). Identifying and navigating inclusive and socially
acceptable pathways towards low-carbon, climate-resilient futures is a
challenging yet important endeavour, fraught with moral, practical and
political difficulties and inevitable trade-offs (very high confidence).
{5.5.2, 5.5.3.3, Box 5.3} It entails deliberation and problem-solving

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

processes to negotiate societal values, well-being, risks and resilience
and to determine what is desirable and fair, and to whom (medium
evidence, high agreement). Pathways that encompass joint, iterative
planning and transformative visions, for instance in Pacific SIDS
like Vanuatu and in urban contexts, show potential for liveable and
sustainable futures (high confidence). {5.5.3.1, 5.5.3.3, Figure 5.5,
Box 5.3, Cross-Chapter Box 13 in this chapter}
The fundamental societal and systemic changes to achieve
sustainable development, eradicate poverty and reduce
inequalities while limiting warming to 1.5C would require
meeting a set of institutional, social, cultural, economic and
technological conditions (high confidence). The coordination
and monitoring of policy actions across sectors and spatial scales
is essential to support sustainable development in 1.5C warmer
conditions (very high confidence). {5.6.2, Box 5.3} External funding
and technology transfer better support these efforts when they
consider recipients' context-specific needs (medium evidence, high
agreement). {5.6.1} Inclusive processes can facilitate transformations
by ensuring participation, transparency, capacity building and iterative
social learning (high confidence). {5.5.3.3, Cross-Chapter Box 13,
5.6.3} Attention to power asymmetries and unequal opportunities
for development, among and within countries, is key to adopting
1.5C-compatible development pathways that benefit all populations
(high confidence). {5.5.3, 5.6.4, Box 5.3} Re-examining individual and
collective values could help spur urgent, ambitious and cooperative
change (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.5.3, 5.6.5}

5

449

Chapter 5

5.1

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Scope and Delineations

This chapter takes sustainable development as the starting point and
focus for analysis, considering the broader bi-directional interplay
and multifaceted interactions between development patterns and
climate actions in a 1.5C warmer world and in the context of
eradicating poverty and reducing inequality. It assesses the impacts
of keeping temperatures at or below 1.5C of global warming above
pre-industrial levels on sustainable development and compares the
impacts avoided at 1.5C compared to 2C (Section 5.2). It then
examines the interactions, synergies and trade-offs of adaptation
(Section 5.3) and mitigation (Section 5.4) measures with sustainable
development and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The
chapter offers insights into possible pathways towards a 1.5C
warmer world, especially through climate-resilient development
pathways providing a comprehensive vision across different contexts
(Section 5.5). The chapter also identifies the conditions that would be
needed to simultaneously achieve sustainable development, poverty
eradication, the reduction of inequalities, and the 1.5C climate
objective (Section 5.6).

5.1.1

Sustainable Development, SDGs, Poverty
Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 1 (see Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1) defines sustainable
development as `development that meets the needs of the present
and future generations' through balancing economic, social and
environmental considerations, and then introduces the United Nations
(UN) 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which sets out
17 ambitious goals for sustainable development for all countries by
2030. These SDGs are: no poverty (SDG 1), zero hunger (SDG 2), good
health and well-being (SDG 3), quality education (SDG 4), gender
equality (SDG 5), clean water and sanitation (SDG 6), affordable and
clean energy (SDG 7), decent work and economic growth (SDG 8),
industry, innovation and infrastructure (SDG 9), reduced inequalities
(SDG 10), sustainable cities and communities (SDG 11), responsible
consumption and production (SDG 12), climate action (SDG 13), life
below water (SDG 14), life on land (SDG 15), peace, justice and strong
institutions (SDG 16) and partnerships for the goals (SDG 17).

5

The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) included extensive discussion
of links between climate and sustainable development, especially in
Chapter 13 (Olsson et al., 2014) and Chapter 20 (Denton et al., 2014)
in Working Group II and Chapter 4 (Fleurbaey et al., 2014) in Working
Group III. However, the AR5 preceded the 2015 adoption of the SDGs
and the literature that argues for their fundamental links to climate
(Wright et al., 2015; Salleh, 2016; von Stechow et al., 2016; Hammill
and Price-Kelly, 2017; ICSU, 2017; Maupin, 2017; Gomez-Echeverri,
2018).
The SDGs build on efforts under the UN Millennium Development Goals
to reduce poverty, hunger, and other deprivations. According to the UN,
the Millennium Development Goals were successful in reducing poverty
and hunger and improving water security (UN, 2015a). However, critics
argued that they failed to address within-country disparities, human
rights and key environmental concerns, focused only on developing
countries, and had numerous measurement and attribution problems
450

(Langford et al., 2013; Fukuda-Parr et al., 2014). While improvements
in water security, slums and health may have reduced some aspects
of climate vulnerability, increases in incomes were linked to rising
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and thus to a trade-off between
development and climate change (Janetos et al., 2012; UN, 2015a;
Hubacek et al., 2017).
While the SDGs capture many important aspects of sustainable
development, including the explicit goals of poverty eradication
and reducing inequality, there are direct connections from
climate to other measures of sustainable development including
multidimensional poverty, equity, ethics, human security, wellbeing and climate-resilient development (Bebbington and
Larrinaga, 2014; Robertson, 2014; Redclift and Springett, 2015;
Barrington-Leigh, 2016; Helliwell et al., 2018; Kirby and O'Mahony,
2018) (see Glossary). The UN proposes sustainable development
as `eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, combating
inequality within and among countries, preserving the planet,
creating sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth and
fostering social inclusion' (UN, 2015b). There is robust evidence
of the links between climate change and poverty (see Chapter 1,
Cross-Chapter Box 4). The AR5 concluded with high confidence
that disruptive levels of climate change would preclude reducing
poverty (Denton et al., 2014; Fleurbaey et al., 2014). International
organizations have since stated that climate changes `undermine
the ability of all countries to achieve sustainable development' (UN,
2015b) and can reverse or erase improvements in living conditions
and decades of development (Hallegatte et al., 2016).
Climate warming has unequal impacts on different people and places
as a result of differences in regional climate changes, vulnerabilities
and impacts, and these differences then result in unequal impacts
on sustainable development and poverty (Section 5.2). Responses to
climate change also interact in complex ways with goals of poverty
reduction. The benefits of adaptation and mitigation projects and
funding may accrue to some and not others, responses may be costly
and unaffordable to some people and countries, and projects may
disadvantage some individuals, groups and development initiatives
(Sections 5.3 and 5.4, Cross-Chapter Box 11 in Chapter 4).

5.1.2

Pathways to 1.5C

Pathways to 1.5C (see Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1,
Glossary) include ambitious reductions in emissions and strategies for
adaptation that are transformational, as well as complex interactions
with sustainable development, poverty eradication and reducing
inequalities. The AR5 WGII introduced the concept of climateresilient development pathways (CRDPs) (see Glossary) which
combine adaptation and mitigation to reduce climate change and
its impacts, and emphasize the importance of addressing structural
and intersecting inequalities, marginalization and multidimensional
poverty to `transform [...] the development pathways themselves
towards greater social and environmental sustainability, equity,
resilience, and justice' (Olsson et al., 2014). This chapter assesses
literature on CRDPs relevant to 1.5C global warming (Section 5.5.3),
to understand better the possible societal and systems transformations
(see Glossary) that reduce inequality and increase well-being

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

(Figure 5.1). It also summarizes the knowledge on conditions to
achieve such transformations, including changes in technologies,

Chapter 5

culture, values, financing and institutions that support low-carbon
and resilient pathways and sustainable development (Section 5.6).

Figure 5.1 | Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) (green arrows) between a current world in which countries and communities exist at different levels of
development (A) and future worlds that range from climate-resilient (bottom) to unsustainable (top) (D). CRDPs involve societal transformation rather than business-as-usual
approaches, and all pathways involve adaptation and mitigation choices and trade-offs (B). Pathways that achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 and beyond,
strive for net zero emissions around mid-21st century, and stay within the global 1.5C warming target by the end of the 21st century, while ensuring equity and well-being for
all, are best positioned to achieve climate-resilient futures (C). Overshooting on the path to 1.5C will make achieving CRDPs and other sustainable trajectories more difficult;
yet, the limited literature does not allow meaningful estimates.

5.1.3

Types of Evidence

A variety of sources of evidence are used to assess the interactions
of sustainable development and the SDGs with the causes, impacts
and responses to climate change of 1.5C warming. This chapter builds
on Chapter 3 to assess the sustainable development implications of
impacts at 1.5C and 2C, and on Chapter 4 to examine the implications
of response measures. Scientific and grey literature, with a postAR5 focus, and data that evaluate, measure and model sustainable
development-climate links from various perspectives, quantitatively
and qualitatively, across scales, and through well-documented case
studies are assessed.
Literature that explicitly links 1.5C global warming to sustainable
development across scales remains scarce; yet we find relevant insights
in many recent publications on climate and development that assess
impacts across warming levels, the effects of adaptation and mitigation
response measures, and interactions with the SDGs. Relevant evidence
also stems from emerging literature on possible pathways, overshoot

and enabling conditions (see Glossary) for integrating sustainable
development, poverty eradication and reducing inequalities in the
context of 1.5C.

5.2

Poverty, Equality and Equity Implications
of a 1.5C Warmer World

Climate change could lead to significant impacts on extreme poverty
by 2030 (Hallegatte et al., 2016; Hallegatte and Rozenberg, 2017).
The AR5 concluded, with very high confidence, that climate change
and climate variability worsen existing poverty and exacerbate
inequalities, especially for those disadvantaged by gender, age, race,
class, caste, indigeneity and (dis)ability (Olsson et al., 2014). New
literature on these links is substantial, showing that the poor will
continue to experience climate change severely, and climate change
will exacerbate poverty (very high confidence) (Fankhauser and
Stern, 2016; Hallegatte et al., 2016; O'Neill et al., 2017a; Winsemius
et al., 2018). The understanding of regional impacts and risks of
1.5C global warming and interactions with patterns of societal
451

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

vulnerability and poverty remains limited. Yet identifying and
addressing poverty and inequality is at the core of staying within
a safe and just space for humanity (Raworth, 2017; Bathiany et al.,
2018). Building on relevant findings from Chapter 3 (see Section 3.4),
this section examines anticipated impacts and risks of 1.5C and
higher warming on sustainable development, poverty, inequality and
equity (see Glossary).

5.2.1

Impacts and Risks of a 1.5C Warmer World:
Implications for Poverty and Livelihoods

Global warming of 1.5C will have consequences for sustainable
development, poverty and inequalities. This includes residual risks,
limits to adaptation, and losses and damages (Cross-Chapter Box 12
in this chapter; see Glossary). Some regions have already experienced
a 1.5C warming, with impacts on food and water security, health and
other components of sustainable development (medium evidence,
medium agreement) (see Chapter 3, Section 3.4). Climate change is also
already affecting poorer subsistence communities through decreases
in crop production and quality, increases in crop pests and diseases,
and disruption to culture (Savo et al., 2016). It disproportionally affects
children and the elderly and can increase gender inequality (Kaijser
and Kronsell, 2014; Vinyeta et al., 2015; Carter et al., 2016; Hanna and
Oliva, 2016; Li et al., 2016).

5

At 1.5C warming, compared to current conditions, further negative
consequences are expected for poor people, and inequality and
vulnerability (medium evidence, high agreement). Hallegatte and
Rozenberg (2017) report that by 2030 (roughly approximating a 1.5C
warming), 122 million additional people could experience extreme
poverty, based on a `poverty scenario' of limited socio-economic
progress, comparable to the Shared Socio-Economic Pathway (SSP)
4 (inequality), mainly due to higher food prices and declining health,
with substantial income losses for the poorest 20% across 92 countries.
Pretis et al. (2018) estimate negative impacts on economic growth
in lower-income countries at 1.5C warming, despite uncertainties.
Impacts are likely to occur simultaneously across livelihood, food,
human, water and ecosystem security (limited evidence, high
agreement) (Byers et al., 2018), but the literature on interacting and
cascading effects remains scarce (Hallegatte et al., 2014; O'Neill et
al., 2017b; Reyer et al., 2017a, b).
Chapter 3 outlines future impacts and risks for ecosystems and
human systems, many of which could also undermine sustainable
development and efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger, and
to protect health and ecosystems. Chapter 3 findings (see Section
3.5.2.1) suggest increasing Reasons for Concern from moderate to
high at a warming of 1.1 to 1.6C, including for indigenous people
and their livelihoods, and ecosystems in the Arctic (O'Neill et al.,
2017b). In 2050, based on the Hadley Centre Climate Prediction
Model 3 (HadCM3) and the Special Report on Emission Scenarios A1b
scenario (roughly comparable to 1.5C warming), 450 million more
flood-prone people would be exposed to doubling in flood frequency,
and global flood risk would increase substantially (Arnell and
Gosling, 2016). For droughts, poor people are expected to be more
exposed (85% in population terms) in a warming scenario greater
than 1.5C for several countries in Asia and southern and western
452

Africa (Winsemius et al., 2018). In urban Africa, a 1.5C warming
could expose many households to water poverty and increased
flooding (Pelling et al., 2018). At 1.5C warming, fisheries-dependent
and coastal livelihoods, of often disadvantaged populations, would
suffer from the loss of coral reefs (see Chapter 3, Box 3.4).
Global heat stress is projected to increase in a 1.5C warmer world,
and by 2030, compared to 1961-1990, climate change could be
responsible for additional annual deaths of 38,000 people from heat
stress, particularly among the elderly, and 48,000 from diarrhoea,
60,000 from malaria, and 95,000 from childhood undernutrition (WHO,
2014). Each 1C increase could reduce work productivity by 1 to 3%
for people working outdoors or without air conditioning, typically the
poorer segments of the workforce (Park et al., 2015).
The regional variation in the `warming experience at 1.5C' (see Chapter
1, Section 1.3.1) is large (see Chapter 3, Section 3.3.2). Declines in crop
yields are widely reported for Africa (60% of observations), with serious
consequences for subsistence and rain-fed agriculture and food security
(Savo et al., 2016). In Bangladesh, by 2050, damages and losses are
expected for poor households dependent on freshwater fish stocks due
to lack of mobility, limited access to land and strong reliance on local
ecosystems (Dasgupta et al., 2017). Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) are expected to experience challenging conditions at 1.5C
warming due to increased risk of internal migration and displacement
and limits to adaptation (see Chapter 3, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box
12 in this chapter). An anticipated decline of marine fisheries of
3 million metric tonnes per degree warming would have serious
regional impacts for the Indo-Pacific region and the Arctic (Cheung et
al., 2016).

5.2.2

Avoided Impacts of 1.5C versus 2C
Warming for Poverty and Inequality

Avoided impacts between 1.5C and 2C warming are expected to
have significant positive implications for sustainable development,
and reducing poverty and inequality. Using the SSPs (see Chapter 1,
Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1, Section 5.5.2), Byers et al. (2018)
model the number of people exposed to multi-sector climate risks
and vulnerable to poverty (income < $10/day), comparing 2C and
1.5C; the respective declines are from 86 million to 24 million for
SSP1 (sustainability), from 498 million to 286 million for SSP2 (middle
of the road), and from 1220 million to 763 million for SSP3 (regional
rivalry), which suggests overall 62-457 million fewer people exposed
and vulnerable at 1.5C warming. Across the SSPs, the largest
populations exposed and vulnerable are in South Asia (Byers et
al., 2018). The avoided impacts on poverty at 1.5C relative to 2C
are projected to depend at least as much or more on development
scenarios than on warming (Wiebe et al., 2015; Hallegatte and
Rozenberg, 2017).
Limiting warming to 1.5C is expected to reduce the number of people
exposed to hunger, water stress and disease in Africa (Clements,
2009). It is also expected to limit the number of poor people exposed
to floods and droughts at higher degrees of warming, especially in
African and Asian countries (Winsemius et al., 2018). Challenges for
poor populations - relating to food and water security, clean energy

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

access and environmental well-being - are projected to be less at
1.5C, particularly for vulnerable people in Africa and Asia (Byers et
al., 2018). The overall projected socio-economic losses compared to the
present day are less at 1.5C (8% loss of gross domestic product per
capita) compared to 2C (13%), with lower-income countries projected
to experience greater losses, which may increase economic inequality
between countries (Pretis et al., 2018).

5.2.3

Risks from 1.5C versus 2C Global Warming
and the Sustainable Development Goals

The risks that can be avoided by limiting global warming to 1.5C rather
than 2C have many complex implications for sustainable development
(ICSU, 2017; Gomez-Echeverri, 2018). There is high confidence that
constraining warming to 1.5C rather than 2C would reduce risks
for unique and threatened ecosystems, safeguarding the services they
provide for livelihoods and sustainable development and making
adaptation much easier (O'Neill et al., 2017b), particularly in Central
America, the Amazon, South Africa and Australia (Schleussner et al.,
2016; O'Neill et al., 2017b; Reyer et al., 2017b; Bathiany et al., 2018).
In places that already bear disproportionate economic and social
challenges to their sustainable development, people will face lower
risks at 1.5C compared to 2C. These include North Africa and
the Levant (less water scarcity), West Africa (less crop loss), South
America and Southeast Asia (less intense heat), and many other
coastal nations and island states (lower sea level rise, less coral reef
loss) (Schleussner et al., 2016; Betts et al., 2018). The risks for food,
water and ecosystems, particularly in subtropical regions such as
Central America and countries such as South Africa and Australia,
are expected to be lower at 1.5C than at 2C warming (Schleussner
et al., 2016). Fewer people would be exposed to droughts and

Chapter 5

heat waves and the associated health impacts in countries such as
Australia and India (King et al., 2017; Mishra et al., 2017).
Limiting warming to 1.5C would make it markedly easier to achieve
the SDGs for poverty eradication, water access, safe cities, food
security, healthy lives and inclusive economic growth, and would help
to protect terrestrial ecosystems and biodiversity (medium evidence,
high agreement) (Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter). For
example, limiting species loss and expanding climate refugia will
make it easier to achieve SDG 15 (see Chapter 3, Section 3.4.3). One
indication of how lower temperatures benefit the SDGs is to compare
the impacts of Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 (lower
emissions) and RCP8.5 (higher emissions) on the SDGs (Ansuategi
et al., 2015). A low emissions pathway allows for greater success in
achieving SDGs for reducing poverty and hunger, providing access
to clean energy, reducing inequality, ensuring education for all and
making cities more sustainable. Even at lower emissions, a medium
risk of failure exists to meet goals for water and sanitation, and marine
and terrestrial ecosystems.
Action on climate change (SDG 13), including slowing the rate of
warming, would help reach the goals for water, energy, food and
land (SDGs 6, 7, 2 and 15) (Obersteiner et al., 2016; ICSU, 2017)
and contribute to poverty eradication (SDG 1) (Byers et al., 2018).
Although the literature that connects 1.5C to the SDGs is limited, a
pathway that stabilizes warming at 1.5C by the end of the century is
expected to increase the chances of achieving the SDGs by 2030, with
greater potential to eradicate poverty, reduce inequality and foster
equity (limited evidence, medium agreement). There are no studies
on overshoot and dimensions of sustainable development, although
literature on 4C of warming suggests the impacts would be severe
(Reyer et al., 2017b).

Table 5.1 | Sustainable development implications of avoided impacts between 1.5C and 2C global warming.

Impacts

Chapter 3
Section

8% more people exposed to water stress,
with 184-270 million people more exposed

Table 3.4

496 (range 103-1159) million people exposed
and vulnerable to water stress

586 (range 115-1347) million people exposed
and vulnerable to water stress

3.4.3,
Table 3.4

Around 7% of land area experiences biome
shifts

Around 13% (range 8-20%) of land area
experiences biome shifts

Box 3.5

70-90% of coral reefs at risk from bleaching

99% of coral reefs at risk from bleaching

3.4.5.1

31-69 million people exposed to coastal
flooding

32-79 million exposed to coastal flooding

3.4.5.2

Fewer cities and coasts exposed to sea level rise
and extreme events

More people and cities exposed to flooding

3.4.6,
Box 3.1

Significant declines in crop yields avoided,
some yields may increase

Average crop yields decline

Table 3.4

32-36 million people exposed to lower yields

330-396 million people exposed to lower yields

3.4.5.1

Lower risk of temperature-related morbidity
and smaller mosquito range

Higher risks of temperature-related morbidity
and mortality and larger geographic range
of mosquitoes

3.4.5.2

3546-4508 million people exposed to heat waves

5417-6710 million people exposed to heat waves

Water scarcity

Coastal cities

Food systems

Health

2C

4% more people exposed to water stress

3.4.2.1

Ecosystems

1.5C

Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) More Easily Achieved
when Limiting Warming to 1.5C

5

SDG 6 water availability for all

SDG 15 to protect terrestrial ecosystems
and halt biodiversity loss

SDG 11 to make cities and human
settlements safe and resilient

SDG 2 to end hunger and
achieve food security

SDG 3 to ensure healthy lives for all

453

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Cross-Chapter Box 12 | Residual Risks, Limits to Adaptation and Loss and Damage
Lead Authors:
Riyanti Djalante (Japan/Indonesia), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Reinhard Mechler (Germany), Patricia
Fernanda Pinho (Brazil), Aromar Revi (India), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria)

Contributing Authors:
Karen Paiva Henrique (Brazil), Saleemul Huq (Bangladesh/UK), Rachel James (UK), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas), Margaretha
Wewerinke-Singh (Netherlands)

Introduction
Residual climate-related risks, limits to adaptation, and loss and damage (see Glossary) are increasingly assessed in the scientific
literature (van der Geest and Warner, 2015; Boyd et al., 2017; Mechler et al., 2019). The AR5 (IPCC, 2013; Oppenheimer et al., 2014)
documented impacts that have been detected and attributed to climate change, projected increasing climate-related risks with continued global warming, and recognized barriers and limits to adaptation. It recognized that adaptation is constrained by biophysical, institutional, financial, social and cultural factors, and that the interaction of these factors with climate change can lead to soft
adaptation limits (adaptive actions currently not available) and hard adaptation limits (adaptive actions appear infeasible leading
to unavoidable impacts) (Klein et al., 2014).

Loss and damage: concepts and perspectives
`Loss and Damage' (L&D) has been discussed in international climate negotiations for three decades (INC, 1991; Calliari, 2016;
Vanhala and Hestbaek, 2016). A work programme on L&D was established as part of the Cancun Adaptation Framework in 2010
supporting developing countries particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts (UNFCCC, 2011a). In 2013, the Conference of
the Parties (COP) 19 established the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage (WIM) as a formal part of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) architecture (UNFCCC, 2014). It acknowledges that L&D `includes,
and in some cases involves more than, that which can be reduced by adaptation' (UNFCCC, 2014). The Paris Agreement recognized
`the importance of averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change'
through Article 8 (UNFCCC, 2015).
There is no one definition of L&D in climate policy, and analysis of policy documents and stakeholder views has demonstrated ambiguity (Vanhala and Hestbaek, 2016; Boyd et al., 2017). UNFCCC documents suggest that L&D is associated with adverse impacts
of climate change on human and natural systems, including impacts from extreme events and slow-onset processes (UNFCCC,
2011b, 2014, 2015). Some documents focus on impacts in developing or particularly vulnerable countries (UNFCCC, 2011b, 2014).
They refer to economic (loss of assets and crops) and non-economic (biodiversity, culture, health) impacts, the latter also being an
action area under the WIM workplan, and irreversible and permanent loss and damage. Lack of clarity of what the term addresses
(avoidance through adaptation and mitigation, unavoidable losses, climate risk management, existential risk) was expressed among
stakeholders, with further disagreement ensuing about what constitutes anthropogenic climate change versus natural climate variability (Boyd et al., 2017).

5

Limits to adaptation and residual risks
The AR5 described adaptation limits as points beyond which actors' objectives are compromised by intolerable risks threatening key
objectives such as good health or broad levels of well-being, thus requiring transformative adaptation for overcoming soft limits
(see Chapter 4, Sections 4.2.2.3, 4.5.3 and Cross-Chapter Box 9, Section 5.3.1) (Dow et al., 2013; Klein et al., 2014). The AR5 WGII
risk tables, based on expert judgment, depicted the potential for, and the limits of, additional adaptation to reduce risk. Near-term
(2030-2040) risks can be used as a proxy for 1.5C warming by the end of the century and compared to longer-term (2080-2100)
risks associated with an approximate 2C warming. Building on the AR5 risk approach, Cross-Chapter Box 12, Figure 1 provides a
stylised application example to poverty and inequality.

454

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Cross-Chapter Box 12 (continued)

Cross-Chapter Box 12, Figure 1 | Stylized reduced risk levels due to avoided impacts between 2C and 1.5C warming (in solid red-orange), additional
avoided impacts with adaptation under 2C (striped orange) and under 1.5C (striped yellow), and unavoidable impacts (losses) with no or very limited
potential for adaptation (grey), extracted from the AR5 WGII risk tables (Field et al., 2014), and underlying chapters by Adger et al. (2014) and Olsson et al.
(2014). For some systems and sectors (A), achieving 1.5C could reduce risks to low (with adaptation) from very high (without adaptation) and high (with
adaptation) under 2C. For other areas (C), no or very limited adaptation potential is anticipated, suggesting limits, with the same risks for 1.5C and 2C.
Other risks are projected to be medium under 2C with further potential for reduction, especially with adaptation, to very low levels (B).

Limits to adaptation, residual risks, and losses in a 1.5C warmer world
The literature on risks at 1.5C (versus 2C and more) and potentials for adaptation remains limited, particularly for specific regions,
sectors, and vulnerable and disadvantaged populations. Adaptation potential at 1.5C and 2C is rarely assessed explicitly, making
an assessment of residual risk challenging. Substantial progress has been made since the AR5 to assess which climate change
impacts on natural and human systems can be attributed to anthropogenic emissions (Hansen and Stone, 2016) and to examine
the influence of anthropogenic emissions on extreme weather events (NASEM, 2016), and on consequent impacts on human life
(Mitchell et al., 2016), but less so on monetary losses and risks (Schaller et al., 2016). There has also been some limited research to
examine local-level limits to adaptation (Warner and Geest, 2013; Filho and Nalau, 2018). What constitutes losses and damages
is context-dependent and often requires place-based research into what people value and consider worth protecting (Barnett et
al., 2016; Tschakert et al., 2017). Yet assessments of non-material and intangible losses are particularly challenging, such as loss
of sense of place, belonging, identity, and damage to emotional and mental well-being (Serdeczny et al., 2017; Wewerinke-Singh,
2018a). Warming of 1.5C is not considered `safe' for most nations, communities, ecosystems and sectors, and poses significant risks
to natural and human systems as compared to the current warming of 1C (high confidence) (see Chapter 3, Section 3.4, Box 3.4,
Box 3.5, Table 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 3). Table 5.2, drawing on findings from Chapters 3, 4 and 5, presents examples
of soft and hard limits in natural and human systems in the context of 1.5C and 2C of warming.

5

Cross-Chapter Box 12, Table 1 | Soft and hard adaptation limits in the context of 1.5C and 2C of global warming.
System/Region

Example

Soft Limit

Hard Limit

Coral reefs

Loss of 70-90% of tropical coral reefs by mid-century under 1.5C scenario (total loss under 2C
scenario) (see Chapter 3, Sections 3.4.4 and 3.5.2.1, Box 3.4)



Biodiversity

6% of insects, 8% of plants and 4% of vertebrates lose over 50% of the climatically determined
geographic range at 1.5C (18% of insects, 16% of plants and 8% of vertebrates at 2C)
(see Chapter 3, Section 3.4.3.3)



Poverty

24-357 million people exposed to multi-sector climate risks and vulnerable to poverty at 1.5C
(86-1220 million at 2C) (see Section 5.2.2)



Human health

Twice as many megacities exposed to heat stress at 1.5C compared to present, potentially exposing
350 million additional people to deadly heat wave conditions by 2050 (see Chapter 3, Section 3.4.8)





Coastal livelihoods

Large-scale changes in oceanic systems (temperature and acidification) inflict damage and losses to
livelihoods, income, cultural identity and health for coastal-dependent communities at 1.5C (potential
higher losses at 2C) (see Chapter 3, Sections 3.4.4, 3.4.5, 3.4.6.3, Box 3.4, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter
Box 6, Chapter 4, Section 4.3.5; Section 5.2.3)





Small Island Developing States

Sea level rise and increased wave run up combined with increased aridity and decreased
freshwater availability at 1.5C warming potentially leaving several atoll islands uninhabitable
(see Chapter 3, Sections 3.4.3, 3.4.5, Box 3.5, Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 9)



455

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Cross-Chapter Box 12 (continued)

Approaches and policy options to address residual risk and loss and damage
Conceptual and applied work since the AR5 has highlighted the synergies and differences with adaptation and disaster risk reduction
policies (van der Geest and Warner, 2015; Thomas and Benjamin, 2017), suggesting more integration of existing mechanisms, yet
careful consideration is advised for slow-onset and potentially irreversible impacts and risk (Mechler and Schinko, 2016). Scholarship
on justice and equity has provided insight on compensatory, distributive and procedural equity considerations for policy and practice
to address loss and damage (Roser et al., 2015; Wallimann-Helmer, 2015; Huggel et al., 2016). A growing body of legal literature
considers the role of litigation in preventing and addressing loss and damage and finds that litigation risks for governments and
business are bound to increase with improved understanding of impacts and risks as climate science evolves (high confidence)
(Mayer, 2016; Banda and Fulton, 2017; Marjanac and Patton, 2018; Wewerinke-Singh, 2018b). Policy proposals include international
support for experienced losses and damages (Crosland et al., 2016; Page and Heyward, 2017), addressing climate displacement,
donor-supported implementation of regional public insurance systems (Surminski et al., 2016) and new global governance systems
under the UNFCCC (Biermann and Boas, 2017).

5.3

5

Climate Adaptation and
Sustainable Development

Adaptation will be extremely important in a 1.5C warmer world
since substantial impacts will be felt in every region (high confidence)
(Chapter 3, Section 3.3), even if adaptation needs will be lower than
in a 2C warmer world (see Chapter 4, Sections 4.3.1 to 4.3.5, 4.5.3,
Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4). Climate adaptation options
comprise structural, physical, institutional and social responses, with
their effectiveness depending largely on governance (see Glossary),
political will, adaptive capacities and availability of finance (see
Chapter 4, Sections 4.4.1 to 4.4.5) (Betzold and Weiler, 2017; Sonwa
et al., 2017; Sovacool et al., 2017). Even though the literature is scarce
on the expected impacts of future adaptation measures on sustainable
development specific to warming experiences of 1.5C, this section
assesses available literature on how (i) prioritising sustainable
development enhances or impedes climate adaptation efforts
(Section 5.3.1); (ii) climate adaptation measures impact sustainable
development and the SDGs in positive (synergies) or negative (tradeoffs) ways (Section 5.3.2); and (iii) adaptation pathways towards a 1.5C
warmer world affect sustainable development, poverty and inequalities
(Section 5.3.3). The section builds on Chapter 4 (see Section 4.3.5)
regarding available adaptation options to reduce climate vulnerability
and build resilience (see Glossary) in the context of 1.5C-compatible
trajectories, with emphasis on sustainable development implications.

5.3.1

Sustainable Development in Support
of Climate Adaptation

Making sustainable development a priority, and meeting the SDGs,
is consistent with efforts to adapt to climate change (very high
confidence). Sustainable development is effective in building adaptive
capacity if it addresses poverty and inequalities, social and economic
exclusion, and inadequate institutional capacities (Noble et al., 2014;
Abel et al., 2016; Colloff et al., 2017). Four ways in which sustainable
development leads to effective adaptation are described below.
First, sustainable development enables transformational adaptation
(see Chapter 4, Section 4.2.2.2) when an integrated approach is
456

adopted, with inclusive, transparent decision-making, rather than
addressing current vulnerabilities as stand-alone climate problems
(Mathur et al., 2014; Arthurson and Baum, 2015; Shackleton et al.,
2015; Lemos et al., 2016; Antwi-Agyei et al., 2017b). Ending poverty
in its multiple dimensions (SDG 1) is often a highly effective form of
climate adaptation (Fankhauser and McDermott, 2014; Leichenko
and Silva, 2014; Hallegatte and Rozenberg, 2017). However, ending
poverty is not sufficient, and the positive outcome as an adaptation
strategy depends on whether increased household wealth is actually
directed towards risk reduction and management strategies (Nelson
et al., 2016), as shown in urban municipalities (Colenbrander et al.,
2017; Rasch, 2017) and agrarian communities (Hashemi et al., 2017),
and whether finance for adaptation is made available (Section 5.6.1).
Second, local participation is effective when wider socio-economic
barriers are addressed via multiscale planning (McCubbin et al.,
2015; Nyantakyi-Frimpong and Bezner-Kerr, 2015; Toole et al., 2016).
This is the case, for instance, when national education efforts (SDG 4)
(Muttarak and Lutz, 2014; Striessnig and Loichinger, 2015) and
indigenous knowledge (Nkomwa et al., 2014; Pandey and Kumar, 2018)
enhance information sharing, which also builds resilience (Santos et al.,
2016; Martinez-Baron et al., 2018) and reduces risks for maladaptation
(Antwi-Agyei et al., 2018; Gajjar et al., 2018).
Third, development promotes transformational adaptation when
addressing social inequalities (Section 5.5.3, 5.6.4), as in SDGs
4, 5, 16 and 17 (O'Brien, 2016; O'Brien, 2017). For example, SDG 5
supports measures that reduce women's vulnerabilities and allow
women to benefit from adaptation (Antwi-Agyei et al., 2015; Van Aelst
and Holvoet, 2016; Cohen, 2017). Mobilization of climate finance,
carbon taxation and environmentally motivated subsidies can reduce
inequalities (SDG 10), advance climate mitigation and adaptation
(Chancel and Picketty, 2015), and be conducive to strengthening and
enabling environments for resilience building (Nhamo, 2016; Halonen
et al., 2017).
Fourth, when sustainable development promotes livelihood security,
it enhances the adaptive capacities of vulnerable communities and
households. Examples include SDG 11 supporting adaptation in cities

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

to reduce harm from disasters (Kelman, 2017; Parnell, 2017); access to
water and sanitation (SDG 6) with strong institutions (SDG 16) (Rasul
and Sharma, 2016); SDG 2 and its targets that promote adaptation
in agricultural and food systems (Lipper et al., 2014); and targets for
SDG 3 such as reducing infectious diseases and providing health cover
are consistent with health-related adaptation (ICSU, 2017; GomezEcheverri, 2018).

et al., 2017a; Carr and Onzere, 2018). Agricultural adaptation measures
may increase workloads, especially for women, while changes in crop
mix can result in loss of income or culturally inappropriate food (Carr
and Thompson, 2014; Thompson-Hall et al., 2016; Bryan et al., 2017),
and they may benefit farmers with more land to the detriment of landpoor farmers, as seen in the Mekong River Basin (see Chapter 3, CrossChapter Box 6 in Chapter 3).

Sustainable development has the potential to significantly reduce
systemic vulnerability, enhance adaptive capacity and promote
livelihood security for poor and disadvantaged populations (high
confidence). Transformational adaptation (see Chapter 4, Sections
4.2.2.2 and 4.5.3) would require development that takes into
consideration multidimensional poverty and entrenched inequalities,
local cultural specificities and local knowledge in decision-making,
thereby making it easier to achieve the SDGs in a 1.5C warmer world
(medium evidence, high agreement).

Adaptation to protect human health: Adaptation options in the health
sector are expected to reduce morbidity and mortality (Arbuthnott
et al., 2016; Ebi and Otmani del Barrio, 2017). Heat-early-warning
systems help lower injuries, illnesses and deaths (Hess and Ebi, 2016),
with positive impacts for SDG 3. Institutions better equipped to
share information, indicators for detecting climate-sensitive diseases,
improved provision of basic health care services and coordination
with other sectors also improve risk management, thus reducing
adverse health outcomes (Dasgupta et al., 2016; Dovie et al., 2017).
Effective adaptation creates synergies via basic public health measures
(K.R. Smith et al., 2014; Dasgupta, 2016) and health infrastructure
protected from extreme weather events (Watts et al., 2015). Yet tradeoffs can occur when adaptation in one sector leads to negative impacts
in another sector. Examples include the creation of urban wetlands
through flood control measures which can breed mosquitoes, and
migration eroding physical and mental well-being, hence adversely
affecting SDG 3 (K.R. Smith et al., 2014; Watts et al., 2015). Similarly,
increased use of air conditioning enhances resilience to heat stress
(Petkova et al., 2017), yet it can result in higher energy consumption,
undermining SDG 13.

5.3.2

Synergies and Trade-Offs between Adaptation
Options and Sustainable Development

There are short-, medium-, and long-term positive impacts (synergies)
and negative impacts (trade-offs) between the dual goals of keeping
temperatures below 1.5C global warming and achieving sustainable
development. The extent of synergies between development and
adaptation goals will vary by the development process adopted for a
particular SDG and underlying vulnerability contexts (medium evidence,
high agreement). Overall, the impacts of adaptation on sustainable
development, poverty eradication and reducing inequalities in general,
and the SDGs specifically, are expected to be largely positive, given
that the inherent purpose of adaptation is to lower risks. Building on
Chapter 4 (see Section 4.3.5), this section examines synergies and
trade-offs between adaptation and sustainable development for some
key sectors and approaches.
Agricultural adaptation: The most direct synergy is between SDG 2
(zero hunger) and adaptation in cropping, livestock and food systems,
designed to maintain or increase production (Lipper et al., 2014;
Rockstrom et al., 2017). Farmers with effective adaptation strategies
tend to enjoy higher food security and experience lower levels of
poverty (FAO, 2015; Douxchamps et al., 2016; Ali and Erenstein, 2017).
Vermeulen et al. (2016) report strong positive returns on investment
across the world from agricultural adaptation with side benefits for
environment and economic well-being. Well-adapted agricultural
systems contribute to safe drinking water, health, biodiversity and
equity goals (DeClerck et al., 2016; Myers et al., 2017). Climate-smart
agriculture has synergies with food security, though it can be biased
towards technological solutions, may not be gender sensitive, and can
create specific challenges for institutional and distributional aspects
(Lipper et al., 2014; Arakelyan et al., 2017; Taylor, 2017).
At the same time, adaptation options increase risks for human
health, oceans and access to water if fertiliser and pesticides are used
without regulation or when irrigation reduces water availability for
other purposes (Shackleton et al., 2015; Campbell et al., 2016). When
agricultural insurance and climate services overlook the poor, inequality
may rise (Dinku et al., 2014; Carr and Owusu-Daaku, 2015; Georgeson

Coastal adaptation: Adaptation to sea level rise remains essential
in coastal areas even under a climate stabilization scenario of 1.5C
(Nicholls et al., 2018). Coastal adaptation to restore ecosystems (for
instance by planting mangrove forests) supports SDGs for enhancing
life and livelihoods on land and oceans (see Chapter 4, Sections
4.3.2.3). Synergistic outcomes between development and relocation
of coastal communities are enhanced by participatory decision-making
and settlement designs that promote equity and sustainability (van der
Voorn et al., 2017). Limits to coastal adaptation may rise, for instance
in low-lying islands in the Pacific, Caribbean and Indian Ocean, with
attendant implications for loss and damage (see Chapter 3 Box 3.5,
Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in
Chapter 5, Box 5.3).
Migration as adaptation: Migration has been used in various contexts
to protect livelihoods from challenges related to climate change
(Marsh, 2015; Jha et al., 2017), including through remittances (Betzold
and Weiler, 2017). Synergies between migration and the achievement
of sustainable development depend on adaptive measures and
conditions in both sending and receiving regions (Fatima et al., 2014;
McNamara, 2015; Entzinger and Scholten, 2016; Ober and Sakdapolrak,
2017; Schwan and Yu, 2017). Adverse developmental impacts arise
when vulnerable women or the elderly are left behind or if migration
is culturally disruptive (Wilkinson et al., 2016; Albert et al., 2017; Islam
and Shamsuddoha, 2017).
Ecosystem-based adaptation: Ecosystem-based adaptation (EBA) can
offer synergies with sustainable development (Morita and Matsumoto,
457

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

2015; Ojea, 2015; Szabo et al., 2015; Brink et al., 2016; Butt et al.,
2016; Conservation International, 2016; Huq et al., 2017), although
assessments remain difficult (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2.2) (Doswald
et al., 2014). Examples include mangrove restoration reducing
coastal vulnerability, protecting marine and terrestrial ecosystems,
and increasing local food security, as well as watershed management
reducing flood risks and improving water quality (Chong, 2014).
In drylands, EBA practices, combined with community-based
adaptation, have shown how to link adaptation with mitigation to
improve livelihood conditions of poor farmers (Box 5.1). Synergistic
developmental outcomes arise where EBA is cost effective, inclusive
of indigenous and local knowledge and easily accessible by the poor
(Ojea, 2015; Daigneault et al., 2016; Estrella et al., 2016). Payment for
ecosystem services can provide incentives to land owners and natural
resource managers to preserve environmental services with synergies
with SDGs 1 and 13 (Arriagada et al., 2015), when implementation
challenges are overcome (Calvet-Mir et al., 2015; Wegner, 2016; Chan
et al., 2017). Trade-offs include loss of other economic land use types,
tension between biodiversity and adaptation priorities, and conflicts
over governance (Wamsler et al., 2014; Ojea, 2015).
Community-based adaptation: Community-based adaptation (CBA)
(see Chapter 4, Sections 4.3.3.2) enhances resilience and sustainability
of adaptation plans (Ford et al., 2016; Fernandes-Jesus et al., 2017;
Grantham and Rudd, 2017; Gustafson et al., 2017). Yet negative
impacts occur if it fails to fairly represent vulnerable populations
and to foster long-term social resilience (Ensor, 2016; Taylor Aiken
et al., 2017). Mainstreaming CBA into planning and decision-making
enables the attainment of SDGs 5, 10 and 16 (Archer et al., 2014;
Reid and Huq, 2014; Vardakoulias and Nicholles, 2014; Cutter, 2016;
Kim et al., 2017). Incorporating multiple forms of indigenous and
local knowledge is an important element of CBA, as shown for
instance in the Arctic region (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.5.5, Box 4.3,
Cross-Chapter Box 9) (Apgar et al., 2015; Armitage, 2015; Pearce
et al., 2015; Chief et al., 2016; Cobbinah and Anane, 2016; Ford et
al., 2016). Indigenous and local knowledge can be synergistic with
achieving SDGs 2, 6 and 10 (Ayers et al., 2014; Lasage et al., 2015;
Regmi and Star, 2015; Berner et al., 2016; Chief et al., 2016; Murtinho,
2016; Reid, 2016).

5

There are clear synergies between adaptation options and several
SDGs, such as poverty eradication, elimination of hunger, clean water
and health (robust evidence, high agreement), as well-integrated
adaptation supports sustainable development (Eakin et al., 2014;
Weisser et al., 2014; Adam, 2015; Smucker et al., 2015). Substantial
synergies are observed in the agricultural and health sectors, and
in ecosystem-based adaptations. However, particular adaptation
strategies can lead to adverse consequences for developmental
outcomes (medium evidence, high agreement). Adaptation strategies
that advance one SDG can result in trade-offs with other SDGs; for
instance, agricultural adaptation to enhance food security (SDG 2)
causing negative impacts for health, equality and healthy ecosystems
(SDGs 3, 5, 6, 10, 14 and 15), and resilience to heat stress increasing
energy consumption (SDGs 3 and 7) and high-cost adaptation
in resource-constrained contexts (medium evidence, medium
agreement).

458

5.3.3

Adaptation Pathways towards a 1.5C Warmer
World and Implications for Inequalities

In a 1.5C warmer world, adaptation measures and options would
need to be intensified, accelerated and scaled up. This entails not only
the right `mix' of options (asking `right for whom and for what?') but
also a forward-looking understanding of dynamic trajectories, that is
adaptation pathways (see Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter
1), best understood as decision-making processes over sets of potential
action sequenced over time (Campeanu and Fazey, 2014; Wise et al.,
2014). Given the scarcity of literature on adaptation pathways that
navigate place-specific warming experiences at 1.5C, this section
presents insights into current local decision-making for adaptation
futures. This grounded evidence shows that choices between possible
pathways, at different scales and for different groups of people, are
shaped by uneven power structures and historical legacies that create
their own, often unforeseen change (Fazey et al., 2016; Bosomworth
et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2017; Murphy et al., 2017; Pelling et al., 2018).
Pursuing a place-specific adaptation pathway approach towards a
1.5C warmer world harbours the potential for significant positive
outcomes, with synergies for well-being possibilities to `leap-frog the
SDGs' (J.R.A. Butler et al., 2016), in countries at all levels of development
(medium evidence, high agreement). It allows for identifying local,
socially salient tipping points before they are crossed, based on what
people value and trade-offs that are acceptable to them (Barnett et al.,
2014, 2016; Gorddard et al., 2016; Tschakert et al., 2017). Yet evidence
also reveals adverse impacts that reinforce rather than reduce existing
social inequalities and hence may lead to poverty traps (medium
evidence, high agreement) (Nagoda, 2015; Warner et al., 2015; Barnett
et al., 2016; J.R.A. Butler et al., 2016; Godfrey-Wood and Naess, 2016;
Pelling et al., 2016; Albert et al., 2017; Murphy et al., 2017).
Past development trajectories as well as transformational adaptation
plans can constrain adaptation futures by reinforcing dominant
political-economic structures and processes, and narrowing option
spaces; this leads to maladaptive pathways that preclude alternative,
locally relevant and sustainable development initiatives and increase
vulnerabilities (Warner and Kuzdas, 2017; Gajjar et al., 2018). Such
dominant pathways tend to validate the practices, visions and
values of existing governance regimes and powerful members of a
community while devaluing those of less privileged stakeholders.
Examples from Romania, the Solomon Islands and Australia illustrate
such pathway dynamics in which individual economic gains and
prosperity matter more than community cohesion and solidarity; this
discourages innovation, exacerbates inequalities and further erodes
adaptive capacities of the most vulnerable (Davies et al., 2014; Fazey
et al., 2016; Bosomworth et al., 2017). In the city of London, United
Kingdom, the dominant adaptation and disaster risk management
pathway promotes resilience that emphasizes self-reliance; yet it
intensifies the burden on low-income citizens, the elderly, migrants
and others unable to afford flood insurance or protect themselves
against heat waves (Pelling et al., 2016). Adaptation pathways in the
Bolivian Altiplano have transformed subsistence farmers into worldleading quinoa producers, but loss of social cohesion and traditional
values, dispossession and loss of ecosystem services now constitute
undesirable trade-offs (Chelleri et al., 2016).

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

A narrow view of adaptation decision-making, for example focused on
technical solutions, tends to crowd out more participatory processes
(Lawrence and Haasnoot, 2017; Lin et al., 2017), obscures contested
values and reinforces power asymmetries (Bosomworth et al., 2017;
Singh, 2018). A situated and context-specific understanding of
adaptation pathways that galvanizes diverse knowledge, values and
joint initiatives helps to overcome dominant path dependencies, avoid
trade-offs that intensify inequities and challenge policies detached

Chapter 5

from place (Fincher et al., 2014; Wyborn et al., 2015; Murphy et al.,
2017; Gajjar et al., 2018). These insights suggest that adaptation
pathway approaches to prepare for 1.5C warmer futures would be
difficult to achieve without considerations for inclusiveness, placespecific trade-off deliberations, redistributive measures and procedural
justice mechanisms to facilitate equitable transformation (medium
evidence, high agreement).

Box 5.1 | Ecosystem- and Community-Based Practices in Drylands
Drylands face severe challenges in building climate resilience (Fuller and Lain, 2017), yet small-scale farmers can play a crucial
role as agents of change through ecosystem- and community-based practices that combine adaptation, mitigation and sustainable
development.
Farmer managed natural regeneration (FMNR) of trees in cropland is practised in 18 countries across sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast
Asia, Timor-Leste, India and Haiti and has, for example, permitted the restoration of over five million hectares of land in the Sahel
(Niang et al., 2014; Bado et al., 2016). In Ethiopia, the Managing Environmental Resources to Enable Transitions programme,
which entails community-based watershed rehabilitation in rural landscapes, supported around 648,000 people, resulting in
the rehabilitation of 25,400,000 hectares of land in 72 severely food-insecure districts across Ethiopia between 2012 and 2015
(Gebrehaweria et al., 2016). In India, local farmers have benefitted from watershed programmes across different agro-ecological
regions (Singh et al., 2014; Datta, 2015).
These low-cost, flexible community-based practices represent low-regrets adaptation and mitigation strategies. These strategies
often contribute to strengthened ecosystem resilience and biodiversity, increased agricultural productivity and food security,
reduced household poverty and drudgery for women, and enhanced agency and social capital (Niang et al., 2014; Francis et al.,
2015; Kassie et al., 2015; Mbow et al., 2015; Reij and Winterbottom, 2015; Weston et al., 2015; Bado et al., 2016; Dumont et al.,
2017). Small check dams in dryland areas and conservation agriculture can significantly increase agricultural output (Kumar et al.,
2014; Agoramoorthy and Hsu, 2016; Pradhan et al., 2018). Mitigation benefits have also been quantified (Weston et al., 2015); for
example, FMNR of more than five million hectares in Niger has sequestered 25-30 Mtonnes of carbon over 30 years (Stevens et
al., 2014).
However, several constraints hinder scaling-up efforts: inadequate attention to the socio-technical processes of innovation (Grist
et al., 2017; Scoones et al., 2017), difficulties in measuring the benefits of an innovation (Coe et al., 2017), farmers' inability to
deal with long-term climate risk (Singh et al., 2017), and difficulties for matching practices with agro-ecological conditions and
complementary modern inputs (Kassie et al., 2015). Key conditions to overcome these challenges include: developing agroforestry
value chains and markets (Reij and Winterbottom, 2015) and adaptive planning and management (Gray et al., 2016). Others include
inclusive processes giving greater voice to women and marginalized groups (MRFCJ, 2015a; UN Women and MRFCJ, 2016; Dumont
et al., 2017), strengthening community land and forest rights (Stevens et al., 2014; Vermeulen et al., 2016), and co-learning among
communities of practice at different scales (Coe et al., 2014; Reij and Winterbottom, 2015; Sinclair, 2016; Binam et al., 2017; Dumont
et al., 2017; Epule et al., 2017).

5.4

Mitigation and Sustainable Development

The AR5 WGIII examined the potential of various mitigation options
for specific sectors (energy supply, industry, buildings, transport, and
agriculture, forestry, and other land use; AFOLU); it provided a narrative
of dimensions of sustainable development and equity as a framing for
evaluating climate responses and policies, respectively, in Chapters 4,
7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 (IPCC, 2014a). This section builds on the analyses of
Chapters 2 and 4 of this report to re-assess mitigation and sustainable
development in the context of 1.5C global warming as well as the
SDGs.

5.4.1

5

Synergies and Trade-Offs between Mitigation
Options and Sustainable Development

Adopting stringent climate mitigation options can generate multiple
positive non-climate benefits that have the potential to reduce the
costs of achieving sustainable development (IPCC, 2014b; UrgeVorsatz et al., 2014, 2016; Schaeffer et al., 2015; von Stechow et al.,
2015). Understanding the positive impacts (synergies) but also the
negative impacts (trade-offs) is key for selecting mitigation options
and policy choices that maximize the synergies between mitigation
and developmental actions (Hildingsson and Johansson, 2015; Nilsson
459

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

et al., 2016; Delponte et al., 2017; van Vuuren et al., 2017b; McCollum
et al., 2018b). Aligning mitigation response options to sustainable
development objectives can ensure public acceptance (IPCC, 2014a),
encourage faster action (Lechtenboehmer and Knoop, 2017) and
support the design of equitable mitigation (Holz et al., 2018; Winkler
et al., 2018) that protect human rights (MRFCJ, 2015b) (Section 5.5.3).
This sub-section assesses available literature on the interactions of
individual mitigation options (see Chapter 2, Section 2.3.1.2, Chapter
4, Sections 4.2 and 4.3) with sustainable development and the SDGs
and underlying targets. Table 5.2 presents an assessment of these
synergies and trade-offs and the strength of the interaction using an
SDG-interaction score (see Glossary) (McCollum et al., 2018b), with
evidence and agreements levels. Figure 5.2 presents the information
of Table 5.2, showing gross (not net) interactions with the SDGs. This
detailed assessment of synergies and trade-offs of individual mitigation
options with the SDGs (Table 5.2 a-d and Figure 5.2) reveals that the
number of synergies exceeds that of trade-offs. Mitigation response
options in the energy demand sector, AFOLU and oceans have more
positive interactions with a larger number of SDGs compared to those
on the energy supply side (robust evidence, high agreement).

5.4.1.1 Energy Demand: Mitigation Options to Accelerate
Reduction in Energy Use and Fuel Switch
For mitigation options in the energy demand sectors, the number
of synergies with all sixteen SDGs exceeds the number of trade-offs
(Figure 5.2 and Table 5.2) (robust evidence, high agreement). Most
of the interactions are of a reinforcing nature, hence facilitating the
achievement of the goals.

5

Accelerating energy efficiency in all sectors, which is a necessary
condition for a 1.5C warmer world (see Chapters 2 and 4), has
synergies with a large number of SDGs (robust evidence, high
agreement) (Figure 5.2 and Table 5.2). The diffusion of efficient
equipment and appliances across end use sectors has synergies with
international partnership (SDG 17) and participatory and transparent
institutions (SDG 16) because innovations and deployment of new
technologies require transnational capacity building and knowledge
sharing. Resource and energy savings support sustainable production
and consumption (SDG 12), energy access (SDG 7), innovation and
infrastructure development (SDG 9) and sustainable city development
(SDG 11). Energy efficiency supports the creation of decent jobs by new
service companies providing services for energy efficiency, but the net
employment effect of efficiency improvement remains uncertain due to
macro-economic feedback (SDG 8) (McCollum et al., 2018b).
In the buildings sector, accelerating energy efficiency by way of,
for example, enhancing the use of efficient appliances, refrigerant
transition, insulation, retrofitting and low- or zero-energy buildings
generates benefits across multiple SDG targets. For example,
improved cook stoves make fuel endowments last longer and
hence reduce deforestation (SDG 15), support equal opportunity by
reducing school absences due to asthma among children (SDGs 3
and 4) and empower rural and indigenous women by reducing drudgery
(SDG 5) (robust evidence, high agreement) (Derbez et al., 2014; Lucon
et al., 2014; Maidment et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2014; Cameron et al.,
460

2015; Fay et al., 2015; Liddell and Guiney, 2015; Shah et al., 2015;
Sharpe et al., 2015; Wells et al., 2015; Willand et al., 2015; Hallegatte
et al., 2016; Kusumaningtyas and Aldrian, 2016; Berrueta et al., 2017;
McCollum et al., 2018a).
In energy-intensive processing industries, 1.5C-compatible trajectories
require radical technology innovation through maximum electrification,
shift to other low emissions energy carriers such as hydrogen or
biomass, integration of carbon capture and storage (CCS) and
innovations for carbon capture and utilization (CCU) (see Chapter 4,
Section 4.3.4.5). These transformations have strong synergies with
innovation and sustainable industrialization (SDG 9), supranational
partnerships (SDGs 16 and 17) and sustainable production (SDG 12).
However, possible trade-offs due to risks of CCS-based carbon
leakage, increased electricity demands, and associated price impacts
affecting energy access and poverty (SDGs 7 and 1) would need careful
regulatory attention (Wesseling et al., 2017). In the mining industry,
energy efficiency can be synergetic or face trade-offs with sustainable
management (SDG 6), depending on the option retained for water
management (Nguyen et al., 2014). Substitution and recycling are
also an important driver of 1.5C-compatible trajectories in industrial
systems (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.4.2). Structural changes and
reorganization of economic activities in industrial park/clusters
following the principles of industrial symbiosis (circular economy)
improves the overall sustainability by reducing energy and waste
(Fan et al., 2017; Preston and Lehne, 2017) and reinforces responsible
production and consumption (SDG 12) through recycling, water use
efficiency (SDG 6), energy access (SDG 7) and ecosystem protection
and restoration (SDG 15) (Karner et al., 2015; Zeng et al., 2017).
In the transport sector, deep electrification may trigger increases of
electricity prices and adversely affect poor populations (SDG 1), unless
pro-poor redistributive policies are in place (Klausbruckner et al., 2016). In
cities, governments can lay the foundations for compact, connected lowcarbon cities, which are an important component of 1.5C-compatible
transformations (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.3) and show synergies with
sustainable cities (SDG 11) (Colenbrander et al., 2016).
Behavioural responses are important determinants of the ultimate
outcome of energy efficiency on emission reductions and energy access
(SDG 7) and their management requires a detailed understanding
of the drivers of consumption and the potential for and barriers to
absolute reductions (Fuchs et al., 2016). Notably, the rebound effect
tends to offset the benefits of efficiency for emissions reductions
through growing demand for energy services (Sorrell, 2015; Suffolk and
Poortinga, 2016). However, high rebound can help in providing faster
access to affordable energy (SDG 7.1) where the goal is to reduce energy
poverty and unmet energy demand (see Chapter 2, Section 2.4.3)
(Chakravarty et al., 2013). Comprehensive policy design - including
rebound supressing policies, such as carbon pricing and policies that
encourage awareness building and promotional material design - is
needed to tap the full potential of energy savings, as applicable to a
1.5C warming context (Chakravarty and Tavoni, 2013; IPCC, 2014b;
Karner et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Altieri et al., 2016; Santarius
et al., 2016) and to address policy-related trade-offs and welfareenhancing benefits (robust evidence, high agreement) (Chakravarty et
al., 2013; Chakravarty and Roy, 2016; Gillingham et al., 2016).

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Other behavioural responses will affect the interplay between energy
efficiency and sustainable development. Building occupants reluctant
to change their habits may miss out on welfare-enhancing energy
efficiency opportunities (Zhao et al., 2017). Preferences for new
products and premature obsolescence for appliances is expected to
adversely affect sustainable consumption and production (SDG 12) with
ramifications for resource use efficiency (Echegaray, 2016). Changes
in user behaviour towards increased physical activity, less reliance on
motorized travel over short distances and the use of public transport
would help to decarbonize the transport sector in a synergetic manner
with SDGs 3, 11 and 12 (Shaw et al., 2014; Ajanovic, 2015; Chakrabarti
and Shin, 2017), while reducing inequality in access to basic facilities
(SDG 10) (Lucas and Pangbourne, 2014; Kagawa et al., 2015). However,
infrastructure design and regulations would need to ensure road safety
and address risks of road accidents for pedestrians (Hwang et al.,
2017; Khreis et al., 2017) to ensure sustainable infrastructure growth
in human settlements (SDGs 9 and 11) (Lin et al., 2015; SLoCaT, 2017).

5.4.1.2 Energy Supply: Accelerated Decarbonization
Decreasing the share of coal in energy supply in line with 1.5C-compatible
scenarios (see Chapter 2, Section 2.4.2) reduces adverse impacts of
upstream supply-chain activities, in particular air and water pollution and
coal mining accidents, and enhances health by reducing air pollution,
notably in cities, showing synergies with SDGs 3, 11 and 12 (Yang et al.,
2016; UNEP, 2017).
Fast deployment of renewables such as solar, wind, hydro and modern
biomass, together with the decrease of fossil fuels in energy supply (see
Chapter 2, Section 2.4.2.1), is aligned with the doubling of renewables
in the global energy mix (SDG 7.2). Renewables could also support
progress on SDGs 1, 10, 11 and 12 and supplement new technology
(robust evidence, high agreement) (Chaturvedi and Shukla, 2014; Rose
et al., 2014; Smith and Sagar, 2014; Riahi et al., 2015; IEA, 2016; van
Vuuren et al., 2017a; McCollum et al., 2018a). However, some tradeoffs with the SDGs can emerge from offshore installations, particularly
SDG 14 in local contexts (McCollum et al., 2018a). Moreover, tradeoffs between renewable energy production and affordability (SDG 7)
(Labordena et al., 2017) and other environmental objectives would
need to be scrutinised for potential negative social outcomes. Policy
interventions through regional cooperation-building (SDG 17) and
institutional capacity (SDG 16) can enhance affordability (SDG 7)
(Labordena et al., 2017). The deployment of small-scale renewables, or
off-grid solutions for people in remote areas (Sanchez and Izzo, 2017),
has strong potential for synergies with access to energy (SDG 7), but
the actualization of these potentials requires measures to overcome
technology and reliability risks associated with large-scale deployment
of renewables (Giwa et al., 2017; Heard et al., 2017). Bundling energyefficient appliances and lighting with off-grid renewables can lead
to substantial cost reduction while increasing reliability (IEA, 2017).
Low-income populations in industrialized countries are often left out of
renewable energy generation schemes, either because of high start-up
costs or lack of home ownership (UNRISD, 2016).

Chapter 5

(e.g., for water use; SDG 6) and have mixed effects for human health
when replacing fossil fuels (SDGs 7 and 3) (see Table 5.2). The use of
fossil CCS, which plays an important role in deep mitigation pathways
(see Chapter 2, Section 2.4.2.3), implies continued adverse impacts
of upstream supply-chain activities in the coal sector, and because of
lower efficiency of CCS coal power plants (SDG 12), upstream impacts
and local air pollution are likely to be exacerbated (SDG 3). Furthermore,
there is a non-negligible risk of carbon dioxide leakage from geological
storage and the carbon dioxide transport infrastructure (SDG 3)
(Table 5.2).
Economies dependent upon fossil fuel-based energy generation and/or
export revenue are expected to be disproportionally affected by future
restrictions on the use of fossil fuels under stringent climate goals and
higher carbon prices; this includes impacts on employment, stranded
assets, resources left underground, lower capacity use and early phasing
out of large infrastructure already under construction (robust evidence,
high agreement) (Box 5.2) (Johnson et al., 2015; McGlade and Ekins,
2015; UNEP, 2017; Spencer et al., 2018). Investment in coal continues
to be attractive in many countries as it is a mature technology and
provides cheap energy supplies, large-scale employment and energy
security (Jakob and Steckel, 2016; Vogt-Schilb and Hallegatte, 2017;
Spencer et al., 2018). Hence, accompanying policies and measures
would be required to ease job losses and correct for relatively higher
prices of alternative energy (Oosterhuis and Ten Brink, 2014; Oei and
Mendelevitch, 2016; Garg et al., 2017; HLCCP, 2017; Jordaan et al.,
2017; OECD, 2017; UNEP, 2017; Blondeel and van de Graaf, 2018;
Green, 2018). Research on historical transitions shows that managing
the impacts on workers through retraining programmes is essential
in order to align the phase-down of mining industries with meeting
ambitious climate targets, and the objectives of a `just transition'
(Galgoczi, 2014; Caldecott et al., 2017; Healy and Barry, 2017). This
aspect is even more important in developing countries where the
mining workforce is largely semi- or unskilled (Altieri et al., 2016; Tung,
2016). Ambitious emissions reduction targets can unlock very strong
decoupling potentials in industrialized fossil exporting economies
(Hatfield-Dodds et al., 2015).

5

Nuclear energy, the share of which increases in most of the
1.5C-compatible pathways (see Chapter 2, Section 2.4.2.1), can increase
the risks of proliferation (SDG 16), have negative environmental effects
461

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Box 5.2 | Challenges and Opportunities of Low-Carbon Pathways in Gulf Cooperative Council Countries
The Gulf Cooperative Council (GCC) region (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates) is characterized
by high dependency on hydrocarbon resources (natural oil and gas), with high risks of socio-economic impacts of policies and
response measures to address climate change. The region is also vulnerable to the decrease of the global demand and price of
hydrocarbons as a result of climate change response measures. The projected declining use of oil and gas under low emissions
pathways creates risks of significant economic losses for the GCC region (e.g., Waisman et al., 2013; Van de Graaf and Verbruggen,
2015; Al-Maamary et al., 2016; Bauer et al., 2016), given that natural gas and oil revenues contributed to about 70% of government
budgets and > 35% of the gross domestic product in 2010 (Callen et al., 2014).
The current high energy intensity of the domestic economies (Al-Maamary et al., 2017), triggered mainly by low domestic energy
prices (Alshehry and Belloumi, 2015), suggests specific challenges for aligning mitigation towards 1.5C-consistent trajectories,
which would require strong energy efficiency and economic development for the region.
The region's economies are highly reliant on fossil fuel for their domestic activities. Yet the renewables deployment potentials are
large, deployment is already happening (Cugurullo, 2013; IRENA, 2016) and positive economic benefits can be envisaged (Sgouridis
et al., 2016). Nonetheless, the use of renewables is currently limited by economics and structural challenges (Lilliestam and Patt,
2015; Griffiths, 2017a). Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is also envisaged with concrete steps towards implementation (Alsheyab,
2017; Ustadi et al., 2017); yet the real potential of this technology in terms of scale and economic dimensions is still uncertain.
Beyond the above mitigation-related challenges, the region's human societies and fragile ecosystems are highly vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, such as water stress (Evans et al., 2004; Shaffrey et al., 2009), desertification (Bayram and Ozturk, 2014),
sea level rise affecting vast low coastal lands, and high temperature and humidity with future levels potentially beyond adaptive
capacities (Pal and Eltahir, 2016). A low-carbon pathway that manages climate-related risks within the context of sustainable
development requires an approach that jointly addresses both types of vulnerabilities (Al Ansari, 2013; Lilliestam and Patt, 2015;
Babiker, 2016; Griffiths, 2017b).
The Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) for GCC countries identified energy efficiency, deployment of renewables and
technology transfer to enhance agriculture, food security, protection of marine resources, and management of water and costal zones
(Babiker, 2016). Strategic vision documents, such as Saudi Arabia's `Vision 2030', identify emergent opportunities for energy price
reforms, energy efficiency, turning emissions into valuable products, and deployment of renewables and other clean technologies, if
accompanied with appropriate policies to manage the transition and in the context of economic diversification (Luomi, 2014; Atalay
et al., 2016; Griffiths, 2017b; Howarth et al., 2017).

5

5.4.1.3 Land-based agriculture, forestry and ocean: mitigation
response options and carbon dioxide removal
In the AFOLU sector, dietary change towards global healthy diets, that
is, a shift from over-consumption of animal-related to plant-related
diets, and food waste reduction (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2.1) are
in synergy with SDGs 2 and 6, and SDG 3 through lower consumption
of animal products and reduced losses and waste throughout the food
system, contributing to achieving SDGs 12 and 15 (Bajelj et al., 2014;
Bustamante et al., 2014; Tilman and Clark, 2014; Hic et al., 2016).
Power dynamics play an important role in achieving behavioural change
and sustainable consumption (Fuchs et al., 2016). In forest management
(see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2.2), encouraging responsible sourcing of
forest products and securing indigenous land tenure has the potential to
increase economic benefits by creating decent jobs (SDG 8), maintaining
biodiversity (SDG 15), facilitating innovation and upgrading technology
(SDG 9), and encouraging responsible and just decision-making
(SDG 16) (medium evidence, high agreement) (Ding et al., 2016; WWF,
2017).
462

Emerging evidence indicates that future mitigation efforts that would
be required to reach stringent climate targets, particularly those
associated with carbon dioxide removal (CDR) (e.g., afforestation and
reforestation and bioenergy with carbon capture and storage; BECCS),
may also impose significant constraints upon poor and vulnerable
communities (SDG 1) via increased food prices and competition for
arable land, land appropriation and dispossession (Cavanagh and
Benjaminsen, 2014; Hunsberger et al., 2014; Work, 2015; Muratori et
al., 2016; Smith et al., 2016; Burns and Nicholson, 2017; Corbera et
al., 2017) with disproportionate negative impacts upon rural poor and
indigenous populations (SDG 1) (robust evidence, high agreement)
(Section 5.4.2.2, Table 5.2, Figure 5.2) (Grubert et al., 2014; Grill et al.,
2015; Zhang and Chen, 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Johansson et al., 2016;
Aha and Ayitey, 2017; De Stefano et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2017). Crops
for bioenergy may increase irrigation needs and exacerbate water
stress with negative associated impacts on SDGs 6 and 10 (Boysen et
al., 2017).
Ocean iron fertilization and enhanced weathering have two-way
interactions with life under water and on land and food security (SDGs

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

2, 14 and 15) (Table 5.2). Development of blue carbon resources through
coastal (mangrove) and marine (seaweed) vegetative ecosystems
encourages: integrated water resource management (SDG 6) (Vierros,
2017); promotes life on land (SDG 15) (Potouroglou et al., 2017); poverty

Chapter 5

reduction (SDG 1) (Schirmer and Bull, 2014; Lamb et al., 2016); and food
security (SDG 2) (Ahmed et al., 2017a, b; Duarte et al., 2017; Sondak et
al., 2017; Vierros, 2017; Zhang et al., 2017).

Figure 5.2 | Synergies and trade-offs and gross Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)-interaction with individual mitigation options. The top three wheels represent synergies
and the bottom three wheels show trade-offs. The colours on the border of the wheels correspond to the SDGs listed above, starting at the 9 o'clock position, with reading
guidance in the top-left corner with the quarter circle (Note 1). Mitigation (climate action, SDG 13) is at the centre of the circle. The coloured segments inside the circles can be
counted to arrive at the number of synergies (green) and trade-offs (red). The length of the coloured segments shows the strength of the synergies or trade-offs (Note 3) and
the shading indicates confidence (Note 2). Various mitigation options within the energy demand sector, energy supply sector, and land and ocean sector, and how to read them
within a segment are shown in grey (Note 4). See also Table 5.2.

5.4.2

Sustainable Development Implications of
1.5C and 2C Mitigation Pathways

While previous sections have focused on individual mitigation options
and their interaction with sustainable development and the SDGs,
this section takes a systems perspective. Emphasis is on quantitative
pathways depicting path-dependent evolutions of human and
natural systems over time. Specifically, the focus is on fundamental
transformations and thus stringent mitigation policies consistent with
1.5C or 2C, and the differential synergies and trade-offs with respect
to the various sustainable development dimensions.

Both 1.5C and 2C pathways would require deep cuts in greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions and large-scale changes of energy supply and
demand, as well as in agriculture and forestry systems (see Chapter
2, Section 2.4). For the assessment of the sustainable development
implications of these pathways, this chapter draws upon studies that
show the aggregated impact of mitigation for multiple sustainable
development dimensions (Grubler et al., 2018; McCollum et al.,
2018b; Rogelj et al., 2018) and across multiple integrated assessment
modelling (IAM) frameworks. Often these tools are linked to
disciplinary models covering specific SDGs in more detail (Cameron
et al., 2016; Rao et al., 2017; Grubler et al., 2018; McCollum et al.,
463

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

2018b). Using multiple IAMs and disciplinary models is important
for a robust assessment of the sustainable development implications
of different pathways. Emphasis is on multi-regional studies, which
can be aggregated to the global scale. The recent literature on 1.5C
mitigation pathways has begun to provide quantifications for a range
of sustainable development dimensions, including air pollution and
health, food security and hunger, energy access, water security, and
multidimensional poverty and equity.

5.4.2.1 Air pollution and health
GHGs and air pollutants are typically emitted by the same sources.
Hence, mitigation strategies that reduce GHGs or the use of fossil fuels
typically also reduce emissions of pollutants, such as particulate matter
(e.g., PM2.5 and PM10), black carbon (BC), sulphur dioxide (SO2),
nitrogen oxides (NOx) and other harmful species (Clarke et al., 2014)
(Figure 5.3), causing adverse health and ecosystem effects at various
scales (Kusumaningtyas and Aldrian, 2016).
Mitigation pathways typically show that there are significant synergies
for air pollution, and that the synergies increase with the stringency of
the mitigation policies (Amann et al., 2011; Rao et al., 2016; Klimont
et al., 2017; Shindell et al., 2017; Markandya et al., 2018). Recent
multimodel comparisons indicate that mitigation pathways consistent
with 1.5C would result in higher synergies with air pollution compared
to pathways that are consistent with 2C (Figures 5.4 and 5.5). Shindell
et al. (2018) indicate that health benefits worldwide over the century
of 1.5C pathways could be in the range of 110 to 190 million fewer
premature deaths compared to 2C pathways. The synergies for air
pollution are highest in the developing world, particularly in Asia. In
addition to significant health benefits, there are also economic benefits
from mitigation, reducing the investment needs in air pollution control
technologies by about 35% globally (or about 100 billion USD2010 per
year to 2030 in 1.5C pathways; McCollum et al., 2018b) (Figure 5.4).

5.4.2.2 Food security and hunger

5

Stringent climate mitigation pathways in line with `well below 2C' or
`1.5C' goals often rely on the deployment of large-scale land-related
measures, like afforestation and/or bioenergy supply (Popp et al., 2014;
Rose et al., 2014; Creutzig et al., 2015). These land-related measures
can compete with food production and hence raise food security
concerns (Section 5.4.1.3) (P. Smith et al., 2014). Mitigation studies
indicate that so-called `single-minded' climate policy, aiming solely
at limiting warming to 1.5C or 2C without concurrent measures in
the food sector, can have negative impacts for global food security
(Hasegawa et al., 2015; McCollum et al., 2018b). Impacts of 1.5C
mitigation pathways can be significantly higher than those of 2C
pathways (Figures 5.4 and 5.5). An important driver of the food security
impacts in these scenarios is the increase of food prices and the effect
of mitigation on disposable income and wealth due to GHG pricing. A
recent study indicates that, on aggregate, the price and income effects
on food may be bigger than the effect due to competition over land
between food and bioenergy (Hasegawa et al., 2015).
In order to address the issue of trade-offs with food security, mitigation
policies would need to be designed in a way that shields the population
464

at risk of hunger, including through the adoption of different
complementary measures, such as food price support. The investment
needs of complementary food price policies are found to be globally
relatively much smaller than the associated mitigation investments
of 1.5C pathways (Figure 5.3) (McCollum et al., 2018b). Besides
food support price, other measures include improving productivity
and efficiency of agricultural production systems (FAO and NZAGRC,
2017a, b; Frank et al., 2017) and programmes focusing on forest landuse change (Havlik et al., 2014). All these lead to additional benefits of
mitigation, improving resilience and livelihoods.
Van Vuuren et al. (2018) and Grubler et al. (2018) show that 1.5C
pathways without reliance on BECCS can be achieved through a
fundamental transformation of the service sectors which would
significantly reduce energy and food demand (see Chapter 2, Sections
2.1.1, 2.3.1 and 2.4.3). Such low energy demand (LED) pathways
would result in significantly reduced pressure on food security, lower
food prices and fewer people at risk of hunger. Importantly, the tradeoffs with food security would be reduced by the avoided impacts in the
agricultural sector due to the reduced warming associated with the
1.5C pathways (see Chapter 3, Section 3.5). However, such feedbacks
are not comprehensively captured in the studies on mitigation.

5.4.2.3 Lack of energy access/energy poverty
A lack of access to clean and affordable energy (especially for cooking)
is a major policy concern in many countries, especially in those in South
Asia and Africa where major parts of the population still rely primarily
on solid fuels for cooking (IEA and World Bank, 2017). Scenario studies
which quantify the interactions between climate mitigation and energy
access indicate that stringent climate policy which would affect energy
prices could significantly slow down the transition to clean cooking
fuels, such as liquefied petroleum gas or electricity (Cameron et al.,
2016).
Estimates across six different IAMs (McCollum et al., 2018b) indicate
that, in the absence of compensatory measures, the number of people
without access to clean cooking fuels may increase. Redistributional
measures, such as subsidies on cleaner fuels and stoves, could
compensate for the negative effects of mitigation on energy access.
Investment costs of the redistributional measures in 1.5C pathways
(on average around 120 billion USD2010 per year to 2030; Figure 5.4)
are much smaller than the mitigation investments of 1.5C pathways
(McCollum et al., 2018b). The recycling of revenues from climate policy
might act as a means to help finance the costs of providing energy
access to the poor (Cameron et al., 2016).

5.4.2.4 Water security
Transformations towards low emissions energy and agricultural
systems can have major implications for freshwater demand as well as
water pollution. The scaling up of renewables and energy efficiency as
depicted by low emissions pathways would, in most instances, lower
water demands for thermal energy supply facilities (`water-for-energy')
compared to fossil energy technologies, and thus reinforce targets
related to water access and scarcity (see Chapter 4, Section 4.2.1).
However, some low-carbon options such as bioenergy, centralized solar

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

5

Figure 5.3 | Sustainable development implications of mitigation actions in 1.5C pathways. Panel (a) shows ranges for 1.5C pathways for selected sustainable development
dimensions compared to the ranges of 2C pathways and baseline pathways. The panel (a) depicts interquartile and the full range across the scenarios for Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 2 (hunger), SDG 3 (health), SDG 6 (water), SDG 7 (energy), SDG 12 (resources), SDG 13/14 (climate/ocean) and SDG 15 (land). Progress towards
achieving the SDGs is denoted by arrow symbols (increase or decrease of indicator). Black horizontal lines show 2015 values for comparison. Note that sustainable development
effects are estimated for the effect of mitigation and do not include benefits from avoided impacts (see Chapter 3, Section 3.5). Low energy demand (LED) denotes estimates
from a pathway with extremely low energy demand reaching 1.5C without bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS). Panel (b) presents the resulting full range
for synergies and trade-offs of 1.5C pathways compared to the corresponding baseline scenarios. The y-axis in panel (b) indicates the factor change in the 1.5C pathway
compared to the baseline. Note that the figure shows gross impacts of mitigation and does not include feedbacks due to avoided impacts. The realization of the side effects
will critically depend on local circumstances and implementation practice. Trade-offs across many sustainable development dimensions can be reduced through complementary/
re-distributional measures. The figure is not comprehensive and focuses on those sustainable development dimensions for which quantifications across models are available.
Sources: 1.5C pathways database from Chapter 2 (Grubler et al., 2018; McCollum et al., 2018b).

465

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

power, nuclear and hydropower technologies could, if not managed
properly, have counteracting effects that compound existing waterrelated problems in a given locale (Byers et al., 2014; Fricko et al., 2016;
IEA, 2016; Fujimori et al., 2017a; Wang, 2017; McCollum et al., 2018a).
Under stringent mitigation efforts, the demand for bioenergy can
result in a substantial increase of water demand for irrigation, thereby
potentially contributing to water scarcity in water-stressed regions
(Berger et al., 2015; Bonsch et al., 2016; Jagermeyr et al., 2017).
However, this risk can be reduced by prioritizing rain-fed production of
bioenergy (Hayashi et al., 2015, 2018; Bonsch et al., 2016), but might
have adverse effects for food security (Boysen et al., 2017).
Reducing food and energy demand without compromising the needs
of the poor emerges as a robust strategy for both water conservation
and GHG emissions reductions (von Stechow et al., 2015; IEA, 2016;
Parkinson et al., 2016; Grubler et al., 2018). The results underscore the
importance of an integrated approach when developing water, energy
and climate policy (IEA, 2016).
Estimates across different models for the impacts of stringent
mitigation pathways on energy-related water uses seem ambiguous.
Some pathways show synergies (Mouratiadou et al., 2018) while
others indicate trade-offs and thus increases of water use due to
mitigation (Fricko et al., 2016). The synergies depend on the adopted
policy implementation or mitigation strategies and technology
portfolio. A number of adaptation options exist (e.g., dry cooling),
which can effectively reduce electricity-related water trade-offs (Fricko
et al., 2016; IEA, 2016). Similarly, irrigation water use will depend on
the regions where crops are produced, the sources of bioenergy (e.g.,
agriculture vs. forestry) and dietary change induced by climate policy.
Overall, and also considering other water-related SDGs, including
access to safe drinking water and sanitation as well as waste-water
treatment, investments into the water sector seem to be only modestly
affected by stringent climate policy compatible with 1.5C (Figure 5.4)
(McCollum et al., 2018b).

5

In summary, the assessment of mitigation pathways shows that to
meet the 1.5C target, a wide range of mitigation options would need
to be deployed (see Chapter 2, Sections 2.3 and 2.4). While pathways
aiming at 1.5C are associated with high synergies for some sustainable
development dimensions (such as human health and air pollution, forest
preservation), the rapid pace and magnitude of the required changes
would also lead to increased risks for trade-offs for other sustainable
development dimensions (particularly food security) (Figures 5.4 and
5.5). Synergies and trade-offs are expected to be unevenly distributed
between regions and nations (Box 5.2), though little literature has
formally examined such distributions under 1.5C-consistent mitigation
scenarios. Reducing these risks requires smart policy designs and
mechanisms that shield the poor and redistribute the burden so that the
most vulnerable are not disproportionately affected. Recent scenario
analyses show that associated investments for reducing the trade-offs
for, for example, food, water and energy access to be significantly lower
than the required mitigation investments (McCollum et al., 2018b).
Fundamental transformation of demand, including efficiency and
behavioural changes, can help to significantly reduce the reliance on
risky technologies, such as BECCS, and thus reduce the risk of potential
466

Figure 5.4 | Investment into mitigation up until 2030 and implications for
investments for four sustainable development dimensions. Cross-hatched bars show
the median investment in 1.5C pathways across results from different models, and
solid bars for 2C pathways, respectively. Whiskers on bars represent minima and
maxima across estimates from six models. Clean water and air pollution investments
are available only from one model. Mitigation investments show the change in
investments across mitigation options compared to the baseline. Negative mitigation
investments (grey bars) denote disinvestment (reduced investment needs) into
fossil fuel sectors compared to the baseline. Investments for different sustainable
development dimensions denote the investment needs for complementary measures
in order to avoid trade-offs (negative impacts) of mitigation. Negative sustainable
development investments for air pollution indicate cost savings, and thus synergies
of mitigation for air pollution control costs. The values compare to about 2 trillion
USD2010 (range of 1.4 to 3 trillion) of total energy-related investments in the 1.5C
pathways. Source: Estimates from CD-LINKS scenarios summarised by McCollum et
al., 2018b.

trade-offs between mitigation and other sustainable development
dimensions (von Stechow et al., 2015; Grubler et al., 2018; van Vuuren
et al., 2018). Reliance on demand-side measures only, however, would
not be sufficient for meeting stringent targets, such as 1.5C and 2C
(Clarke et al., 2014).

5.5

Sustainable Development
Pathways to 1.5C

This section assesses what is known in the literature on development
pathways that are sustainable and climate-resilient and relevant to
a 1.5C warmer world. Pathways, transitions from today's world to
achieving a set of future goals (see Chapter 1, Section 1.2.3, CrossChapter Box 1), follow broadly two main traditions: first, as integrated
pathways describing the required societal and systems transformations,
combining quantitative modelling and qualitative narratives at multiple
spatial scales (global to sub-national); and second, as country- and
community-level, solution-oriented trajectories and decision-making
processes about context- and place-specific opportunities, challenges
and trade-offs. These two notions of pathways offer different, though
complementary, insights into the nature of 1.5C-relevant trajectories
and the short-term actions that enable long-term goals. Both highlight
to varying degrees the urgency, ethics and equity dimensions of
possible trajectories and society- and system-wide transformations, yet
at different scales, building on Chapter 2 (see Section 2.4) and Chapter
4 (see Section 4.5).

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

5.5.1

Integration of Adaptation, Mitigation
and Sustainable Development

Insights into climate-compatible development (see Glossary)
illustrate how integration between adaptation, mitigation and
sustainable development works in context-specific projects, how
synergies are achieved and what challenges are encountered during
implementation (Stringer et al., 2014; Suckall et al., 2014; Antwi-Agyei
et al., 2017a; Bickersteth et al., 2017; Kalafatis, 2017; Nunan, 2017).
The operationalization of climate-compatible development, including
climate-smart agriculture and carbon-forestry projects (Lipper et al.,
2014; Campbell et al., 2016; Quan et al., 2017), shows multilevel
and multisector trade-offs involving `winners' and `losers' across
governance levels (high confidence) (Kongsager and Corbera, 2015;
Naess et al., 2015; Karlsson et al., 2017; Tanner et al., 2017; Taylor,
2017; Wood, 2017; Ficklin et al., 2018). Issues of power, participation,
values, equity, inequality and justice transcend case study examples of
attempted integrated approaches (Nunan, 2017; Phillips et al., 2017;
Stringer et al., 2017; Wood, 2017), also reflected in policy frameworks
for integrated outcomes (Stringer et al., 2014; Di Gregorio et al., 2017;
Few et al., 2017; Tanner et al., 2017).
Ultimately, reconciling trade-offs between development needs and
emissions reductions towards a 1.5C warmer world requires a
dynamic view of the interlinkages between adaptation, mitigation
and sustainable development (Nunan, 2017). This entails recognition
of the ways in which development contexts shape the choice and
effectiveness of interventions, limit the range of responses afforded
to communities and governments, and potentially impose injustices
upon vulnerable groups (UNRISD, 2016; Thornton and Comberti, 2017).
A variety of approaches, both quantitative and qualitative, exist to
examine possible sustainable development pathways under which
climate and sustainable development goals can be achieved, and
synergies and trade-offs for transformation identified (Sections 5.3
and 5.4).

5.5.2

Pathways for Adaptation, Mitigation
and Sustainable Development

This section focuses on the growing body of pathways literature
describing the dynamic and systemic integration of mitigation
and adaptation with sustainable development in the context of a
1.5C warmer world. These studies are critically important for the
identification of `enabling' conditions under which climate and the
SDGs can be achieved, and thus help the design of transformation
strategies that maximize synergies and avoid potential trade-offs
(Sections 5.3 and 5.4). Full integration of sustainable development
dimensions is, however, challenging, given their diversity and the need
for high temporal, spatial and social resolution to address local effects,
including heterogeneity related to poverty and equity (von Stechow
et al., 2015). Research on long-term climate change mitigation and
adaptation pathways has covered individual SDGs to different degrees.
Interactions between climate and other SDGs have been explored for
SDGs 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14 and 15 (Clarke et al., 2014; Abel et al., 2016;
von Stechow et al., 2016; Rao et al., 2017), while interactions with
SDGs 1, 5, 11 and 16 remain largely underexplored in integrated longterm scenarios (Zimm et al., 2018).

Chapter 5

Quantitative pathways studies now better represent `nexus'
approaches to assess sustainable development dimensions. In such
approaches (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.3.8), a subset of sustainable
development dimensions are investigated together because of their
close relationships (Welsch et al., 2014; Conway et al., 2015; Keairns
et al., 2016; Parkinson et al., 2016; Rasul and Sharma, 2016; Howarth
and Monasterolo, 2017). Compared to single-objective climate-SDG
assessments (Section 5.4.2), nexus solutions attempt to integrate
complex interdependencies across diverse sectors in a systems
approach for consistent analysis. Recent pathways studies show how
water, energy and climate (SDGs 6, 7 and 13) interact (Parkinson et al.,
2016; McCollum et al., 2018b) and call for integrated water-energy
investment decisions to manage systemic risks. For instance, the
provision of bioenergy, important in many 1.5C-consistent pathways,
can help resolve `nexus challenges' by alleviating energy security
concerns, but can also have adverse `nexus impacts' on food security,
water use and biodiversity (Lotze-Campen et al., 2014; Bonsch et al.,
2016). Policies that improve resource use efficiency across sectors can
maximize synergies for sustainable development (Bartos and Chester,
2014; McCollum et al., 2018b; van Vuuren et al., 2018). Mitigation
compatible with 1.5C can significantly reduce impacts and adaptation
needs in the nexus sectors compared to 2C (Byers et al., 2018). In
order to avoid trade-offs due to high carbon pricing of 1.5C pathways,
regulation in specific areas may complement price-based instruments.
Such combined policies generally lead also to more early action
maximizing synergies and avoiding some of the adverse climate effects
for sustainable development (Bertram et al., 2018).
The comprehensive analysis of climate change in the context of
sustainable development requires suitable reference scenarios that
lend themselves to broader sustainable development analyses.
The Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs) (Chapter 1, CrossChapter Box 1 in Chapter 1) (O'Neill et al., 2017a; Riahi et al., 2017)
constitute an important first step in providing a framework for
the integrated assessment of adaptation and mitigation and their
climate-development linkages (Ebi et al., 2014). The five underlying
SSP narratives (O'Neill et al., 2017a) map well into some of the key
SDG dimensions, with one of the pathways (SSP1) explicitly depicting
sustainability as the main theme (van Vuuren et al., 2017b).
To date, no pathway in the literature proves to achieve all 17 SDGs
because several targets are not met or not sufficiently covered in the
analysis, hence resulting in a sustainability gap (Zimm et al., 2018).
The SSPs facilitate the systematic exploration of different sustainable
dimensions under ambitious climate objectives. SSP1 proves to be in
line with eight SDGs (3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 15) and several of their
targets in a 2C warmer world (van Vuuren et al., 2017b; Zimm et al.,
2018). However, important targets for SDGs 1, 2 and 4 (i.e., people
living in extreme poverty, people living at the risk of hunger and gender
gap in years of schooling) are not met in this scenario.
The SSPs show that sustainable socio-economic conditions will play a
key role in reaching stringent climate targets (Riahi et al., 2017; Rogelj
et al., 2018). Recent modelling work has examined 1.5C-consistent,
stringent mitigation scenarios for 2100 applied to the SSPs, using
six different IAMs. Despite the limitations of these models, which
are coarse approximations of reality, robust trends can be identified
467

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

(Rogelj et al., 2018). SSP1 - which depicts broader `sustainability' as
well as enhancing equity and poverty reductions - is the only pathway
where all models could reach 1.5C and is associated with the lowest
mitigation costs across all SSPs. A decreasing number of models was
successful for SSP2, SSP4 and SSP5, respectively, indicating distinctly
higher risks of failure due to high growth and energy intensity as
well as geographical and social inequalities and uneven regional
development. And reaching 1.5C has even been found infeasible in
the less sustainable SSP3 - `regional rivalry' (Fujimori et al., 2017b;
Riahi et al., 2017). All these conclusions hold true if a 2C objective is
considered (Calvin et al., 2017; Fujimori et al., 2017b; Popp et al., 2017;
Riahi et al., 2017). Rogelj et al. (2018) also show that fewer scenarios
are, however, feasible across different SSPs in case of 1.5C, and
mitigation costs substantially increase in 1.5C pathways compared
to 2C pathways.

5

There is a wide range of SSP-based studies focusing on the connections
between adaptation/impacts and different sustainable development
dimensions (Hasegawa et al., 2014; Ishida et al., 2014; Arnell et al.,
2015; Bowyer et al., 2015; Burke et al., 2015; Lemoine and Kapnick,
2016; Rozenberg and Hallegatte, 2016; Blanco et al., 2017; Hallegatte
and Rozenberg, 2017; O'Neill et al., 2017a; Rutledge et al., 2017;
Byers et al., 2018). New methods for projecting inequality and poverty
(downscaled to sub-national rural and urban levels as well as spatially
explicit levels) have enabled advanced SSP-based assessments of
locally sustainable development implications of avoided impacts
and related adaptation needs. For instance, Byers et al. (2018) find
that, in a 1.5C warmer world, a focus on sustainable development
can reduce the climate risk exposure of populations vulnerable to
poverty by more than an order of magnitude (Section 5.2.2). Moreover,
aggressive reductions in between-country inequality may decrease
the emissions intensity of global economic growth (Rao and Min,
2018). This is due to the higher potential for decoupling of energy
from income growth in lower-income countries, due to high potential
for technological advancements that reduce the energy intensity of
growth of poor countries - critical also for reaching 1.5C in a socially
and economically equitable way. Participatory downscaling of SSPs in
several European Union countries and in Central Asia shows numerous
possible pathways of solutions to the 2C-1.5C goal, depending on
differential visions (Tabara et al., 2018). Other participatory applications
of the SSPs, for example in West Africa (Palazzo et al., 2017) and the
southeastern United States (Absar and Preston, 2015), illustrate the
potentially large differences in adaptive capacity within regions and
between sectors.
Harnessing the full potential of the SSP framework to inform sustainable
development requires: (i) further elaboration and extension of the
current SSPs to cover sustainable development objectives explicitly; (ii)
the development of new or variants of current narratives that would
facilitate more SDG-focused analyses with climate as one objective
(among other SDGs) (Riahi et al., 2017); (iii) scenarios with high regional
resolution (Fujimori et al., 2017b); (iv) a more explicit representation
of institutional and governance change associated with the SSPs
(Zimm et al., 2018); and (v) a scale-up of localized and spatially explicit
vulnerability, poverty and inequality estimates, which have emerged
in recent publications based on the SSPs (Byers et al., 2018) and are
essential to investigate equity dimensions (Klinsky and Winkler, 2018).
468

5.5.3

Climate-Resilient Development Pathways

This section assesses the literature on pathways as solutionoriented trajectories and decision-making processes for attaining
transformative visions for a 1.5C warmer world. It builds on climateresilient development pathways (CRDPs) introduced in the AR5
(Section 5.1.2) (Olsson et al., 2014) as well as growing literature
(e.g., Eriksen et al., 2017; Johnson, 2017; Orindi et al., 2017; Kirby and
O'Mahony, 2018; Solecki et al., 2018) that uses CRDPs as a conceptual
and aspirational idea for steering societies towards low-carbon,
prosperous and ecologically safe futures. Such a notion of pathways
foregrounds decision-making processes at local to national levels to
situate transformation, resilience, equity and well-being in the complex
reality of specific places, nations and communities (Harris et al., 2017;
Ziervogel et al., 2017; Fazey et al., 2018; Gajjar et al., 2018; Klinsky and
Winkler, 2018; Patterson et al., 2018; Tabara et al., 2018).
Pathways compatible with 1.5C warming are not merely scenarios
to envision possible futures but processes of deliberation and
implementation that address societal values, local priorities and
inevitable trade-offs. This includes attention to politics and power that
perpetuate business-as-usual trajectories (O'Brien, 2016; Harris et al.,
2017), the politics that shape sustainability and capabilities of everyday
life (Agyeman et al., 2016; Schlosberg et al., 2017), and ingredients
for community resilience and transformative change (Fazey et al.,
2018). Chartering CRDPs encourages locally situated and problemsolving processes to negotiate and operationalize resilience `on the
ground' (Beilin and Wilkinson, 2015; Harris et al., 2017; Ziervogel et
al., 2017). This entails contestation, inclusive governance and iterative
engagement of diverse populations with varied needs, aspirations,
agency and rights claims, including those most affected, to deliberate
trade-offs in a multiplicity of possible pathways (high confidence) (see
Figure 5.5) (Stirling, 2014; Vale, 2014; Walsh-Dilley and Wolford, 2015;
Biermann et al., 2016; J.R.A. Butler et al., 2016; O'Brien, 2016, 2018;
Harris et al., 2017; Jones and Tanner, 2017; Mapfumo et al., 2017;
Rosenbloom, 2017; Gajjar et al., 2018; Klinsky and Winkler, 2018; Lyon,
2018; Tabara et al., 2018).

5.5.3.1 Transformations, equity and well-being
Most literature related to CRDPs invokes the concept of transformation,
underscoring the need for urgent and far-reaching changes in practices,
institutions and social relations in society. Transformations towards a
1.5C warmer world would need to address considerations for equity
and well-being, including in trade-off decisions (see Figure 5.1).
To attain the anticipated transformations, all countries as well as nonstate actors would need to strengthen their contributions, through
bolder and more committed cooperation and equitable effort-sharing
(medium evidence, high agreement) (Rao, 2014; Frumhoff et al., 2015;
Ekwurzel et al., 2017; Millar et al., 2017; Shue, 2017; Holz et al., 2018;
Robinson and Shine, 2018). Sustaining decarbonization rates at a
1.5C-compatible level would be unprecedented and not possible
without rapid transformations to a net-zero-emissions global economy
by mid-century or the later half of the century (see Chapters 2 and
4). Such efforts would entail overcoming technical, infrastructural,
institutional and behavioural barriers across all sectors and levels

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Figure 5.5 | Pathways into the future, with path dependencies and iterative problem-solving and decision-making (after Fazey et al., 2016).

of society (Pfeiffer et al., 2016; Seto et al., 2016) and defeating path
dependencies, including poverty traps (Boonstra et al., 2016; Enqvist
et al., 2016; Lade et al., 2017; Haider et al., 2018). Transformation also
entails ensuring that 1.5C-compatible pathways are inclusive and
desirable, build solidarity and alliances, and protect vulnerable groups,
including against disruptions of transformation (Patterson et al., 2018).
There is growing emphasis on the role of equity, fairness and justice (see
Glossary) regarding context-specific transformations and pathways
to a 1.5C warmer world (medium evidence, high agreement) (Shue,
2014; Thorp, 2014; Dennig et al., 2015; Moellendorf, 2015; Klinsky et
al., 2017b; Roser and Seidel, 2017; Sealey-Huggins, 2017; Klinsky and
Winkler, 2018; Robinson and Shine, 2018). Consideration for what is
equitable and fair suggests the need for stringent decarbonization
and up-scaled adaptation that do not exacerbate social injustices,
locally and at national levels (Okereke and Coventry, 2016), uphold
human rights (Robinson and Shine, 2018), are socially desirable and
acceptable (von Stechow et al., 2016; Rosenbloom, 2017), address
values and beliefs (O'Brien, 2018), and overcome vested interests
(Normann, 2015; Patterson et al., 2016). Attention is often drawn to
huge disparities in the cost, benefits, opportunities and challenges
involved in transformation within and between countries, and the
fact that the suffering of already poor, vulnerable and disadvantaged
populations may be worsened, if care to protect them is not taken
(Holden et al., 2017; Klinsky and Winkler, 2018; Patterson et al., 2018).
Well-being for all (Dearing et al., 2014; Raworth, 2017) is at the
core of an ecologically safe and socially just space for humanity,
including health and housing, peace and justice, social equity, gender

equality and political voices (Raworth, 2017). It is in alignment with
transformative social development (UNRISD, 2016) and the 2030
Agenda of `leaving no one behind'. The social conditions to enable wellbeing for all are to reduce entrenched inequalities within and between
countries (Klinsky and Winkler, 2018); rethink prevailing values, ethics
and behaviours (Holden et al., 2017); allow people to live a life in
dignity while avoiding actions that undermine capabilities (Klinsky
and Golub, 2016); transform economies (Popescu and Ciurlau, 2016;
Tabara et al., 2018); overcome uneven consumption and production
patterns (Dearing et al., 2014; Hayha et al., 2016; Raworth, 2017) and
conceptualize development as well-being rather than mere economic
growth (medium evidence, high agreement) (Gupta and Pouw, 2017).

5.5.3.2 Development trajectories, sharing
of efforts and cooperation
The potential for pursuing sustainable and climate-resilient development
pathways towards a 1.5C warmer world differs between and within
nations, due to differential development achievements and trajectories,
and opportunities and challenges (very high confidence) (Figure 5.1).
There are clear differences between high-income countries where
social achievements are high, albeit often with negative effects on
the environment, and most developing nations where vulnerabilities
to climate change are high and social support and life satisfaction
are low, especially in the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) (Sachs et
al., 2017; O'Neill et al., 2018). Differential starting points for CRDPs
between and within countries, including path dependencies (Figure
5.5), call for sensitivity to context (Klinsky and Winkler, 2018). For the
developing world, limiting warming to 1.5C also means potentially
469

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

severely curtailed development prospects (Okereke and Coventry,
2016) and risks to human rights from both climate action and inaction
to achieve this goal (Robinson and Shine, 2018) (Section 5.2). Withincountry development differences remain, despite efforts to ensure
inclusive societies (Gupta and Arts, 2017; Gupta and Pouw, 2017). Cole
et al. (2017), for instance, show how differences between provinces in
South Africa constitute barriers to sustainable development trajectories
and for operationalising nation-level SDGs, across various dimensions
of social deprivation and environmental stress, reflecting historic
disadvantages.
Moreover, various equity and effort- or burden-sharing approaches to
climate stabilization in the literature describe how to sketch national
potentials for a 1.5C warmer world (e.g., Anand, 2004; CSO Equity
Review, 2015; Meinshausen et al., 2015; Okereke and Coventry, 2016;
Bexell and Jonsson, 2017; Otto et al., 2017; Pan et al., 2017; Robiou du
Pont et al., 2017; Holz et al., 2018; Kartha et al., 2018; Winkler et al.,
2018;). Many approaches build on the AR5 `responsibility - capacity -
need' assessment (Clarke et al., 2014), complement other proposed
national-level metrics for capabilities, equity and fairness (Heyward
and Roser, 2016; Klinsky et al., 2017a), or fall under the wider umbrella
of fair share debates on responsibility, capability and the right to
development in climate policy (Fuglestvedt and Kallbekken, 2016).
Importantly, different principles and methodologies generate different
calculated contributions, responsibilities and capacities (Skeie et al.,
2017).

5

The notion of nation-level fair shares is now also discussed in the
context of limiting global warming to 1.5C and the Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) (see Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box
11 in Chapter 4) (CSO Equity Review, 2015; Mace, 2016; Pan et al.,
2017; Robiou du Pont et al., 2017; Holz et al., 2018; Kartha et al., 2018;
Winkler et al., 2018). A study by Pan et al. (2017) concluded that all
countries would need to contribute to ambitious emissions reductions
and that current pledges for 2030 by seven out of eight high-emitting
countries would be insufficient to meet 1.5C. Emerging literature on
justice-centred pathways to 1.5C points towards ambitious emissions
reductions domestically and committed cooperation internationally
whereby wealthier countries support poorer ones, technologically,
financially and otherwise to enhance capacities (Okereke and Coventry,
2016; Holz et al., 2018; Robinson and Shine, 2018; Shue, 2018). These
findings suggest that equitable and 1.5C-compatible pathways would
require fast action across all countries at all levels of development
rather than late accession of developing countries (as assumed under
SSP3, see Chapter 2), with external support for prompt mitigation and
resilience-building efforts in the latter (medium evidence, medium
agreement).
Scientific advances since the AR5 now also make it possible to determine
contributions to climate change for non-state actors (see Chapter 4,
Section 4.4.1) and their potential to contribute to CRDPs (medium
evidence, medium agreement). These non-state actors includes cities
(Bulkeley et al., 2013, 2014; Byrne et al., 2016), businesses (Heede,
2014; Frumhoff et al., 2015; Shue, 2017), transnational initiatives
(Castro, 2016; Andonova et al., 2017) and industries. Recent work
demonstrates the contributions of 90 industrial carbon producers to
global temperature and sea level rise, and their responsibilities to
470

contribute to investments in and support for mitigation and adaptation
(Heede, 2014; Ekwurzel et al., 2017; Shue, 2017) (Sections 5.6.1 and
5.6.2).
At the level of groups and individuals, equity in pursuing climate
resilience for a 1.5C warmer world means addressing disadvantage,
inequities and empowerment that shape transformative processes
and pathways (Fazey et al., 2018), and deliberate efforts to strengthen
the capabilities, capacities and well-being of poor, marginalized and
vulnerable people (Byrnes, 2014; Tokar, 2014; Harris et al., 2017;
Klinsky et al., 2017a; Klinsky and Winkler, 2018). Community-driven
CRDPs can flag potential negative impacts of national trajectories on
disadvantaged groups, such as low-income families and communities
of colour (Rao, 2014). They emphasize social equity, participatory
governance, social inclusion and human rights, as well as innovation,
experimentation and social learning (see Glossary) (medium evidence,
high agreement) (Sections 5.5.3.3 and 5.6).

5.5.3.3 Country and community strategies and experiences
There are many possible pathways towards climate-resilient futures
(O'Brien, 2018; Tabara et al., 2018). Literature depicting different
sustainable development trajectories in line with CRDPs is growing, with
some of it being specific to 1.5C global warming. Most experiences
to date are at local and sub-national levels (Cross-Chapter Box 13 in
this chapter), while state-level efforts align largely with green economy
trajectories or planning for climate resilience (Box 5.3). Due to the fact
that these strategies are context-specific, the literature is scarce on
comparisons, efforts to scale up and systematic monitoring.
States can play an enabling or hindering role in a transition to a 1.5C
warmer world (Patterson et al., 2018). The literature on strategies to
reconcile low-carbon trajectories with sustainable development and
ecological sustainability through green growth, inclusive growth,
de-growth, post-growth and development as well-being shows low
agreement (see Chapter 4, Section 4.5). Efforts that align best with
CRDPs are described as `transformational' and `strong' (Ferguson,
2015). Some view `thick green' perspectives as enabling equity,
democracy and agency building (Lorek and Spangenberg, 2014; Stirling,
2014; Ehresman and Okereke, 2015; Buch-Hansen, 2018), others show
how green economy and sustainable development pathways can align
(Brown et al., 2014; Georgeson et al., 2017b), and how a green economy
can help link the SDGs with NDCs, for instance in Mongolia, Kenya and
Sweden (Shine, 2017). Others still critique the continuous reliance on
market mechanisms (Wanner, 2014; Brockington and Ponte, 2015) and
disregard for equity and distributional and procedural justice (Stirling,
2014; Bell, 2015).
Country-level pathways and achievements vary significantly (robust
evidence, medium agreement). For instance, the Scandinavian countries
rank at the top of the Global Green Economy Index (Dual Citizen LLC,
2016), although they also tend to show high spill-over effects (Holz et al.,
2018) and transgress their biophysical boundaries (O'Neill et al., 2018).
State-driven efforts in non-member countries of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development include Ethiopia's `Climateresilient Green Economy Strategy', Mozambique's `Green Economy
Action Plan' and Costa Rica's ecosystem- and conservation-driven

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

green transition paths. China and India have adopted technology and
renewables pathways (Brown et al., 2014; Death, 2014, 2015, 2016;
Khanna et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015; Kim and Thurbon, 2015; Wang
et al., 2015; Weng et al., 2015). Brazil promotes low per capita GHG
emissions, clean energy sources, green jobs, renewables and sustainable
transportation, while slowing rates of deforestation (see Chapter 4, Box
4.7) (Brown et al., 2014; La Rovere, 2017). Yet concerns remain regarding
persistent inequalities, ecosystem monetization, lack of participation
in green-style projects (Brown et al., 2014) and labour conditions and
risk of displacement in the sugarcane ethanol sector (McKay et al.,
2016). Experiences with low-carbon development pathways in LDCs
highlight the crucial role of identifying synergies across scale, removing
institutional barriers and ensuring equity and fairness in distributing
benefits as part of the right to development (Rai and Fisher, 2017).
In small islands states, for many of which climate change hazards and
impacts at 1.5C pose significant risks to sustainable development (see

Chapter 5

Chapter 3 Box 3.5, Chapter 4 Box 4.3, Box 5.3), examples of CRDPs
have emerged since the AR5. This includes the SAMOA Pathway: SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (see Chapter 4, Box 4.3) (UNGA, 2014;
Government of Kiribati, 2016; Steering Committee on Partnerships for
SIDS and UN DESA, 2016; Lefale et al., 2017) and the Framework for
Resilient Development in the Pacific, a leading example of integrated
regional climate change adaptation planning for mitigation and
sustainable development, disaster risk management and low-carbon
economies (SPC, 2016). Small islands of the Pacific vary significantly
in their capacity and resources to support effective integrated planning
(McCubbin et al., 2015; Barnett and Walters, 2016; Cvitanovic et al.,
2016; Hemstock et al., 2017; Robinson and Dornan, 2017). Vanuatu (Box
5.3) has developed a significant coordinated national adaptation plan
to advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, respond to
the Paris Agreement and reduce the risk of disasters in line with the
Sendai targets (UNDP, 2016; Republic of Vanuatu, 2017).

Box 5.3 | Republic of Vanuatu - National Planning for Development and Climate Resilience
The Republic of Vanuatu is leading Pacific Small Island Developing States (SIDS) to develop a nationally coordinated plan for climateresilient development in the context of high exposure to hazard risk (MoCC, 2016; UNU-EHS, 2016). The majority of the population
depends on subsistence, rain-fed agriculture and coastal fisheries for food security (Sovacool et al., 2017). Sea level rise, increased
prolonged drought, water shortages, intense storms, cyclone events and degraded coral reef environments threaten human security
in a 1.5C warmer world (see Chapter 3, Box 3.5) (SPC, 2015; Aipira et al., 2017). Given Vanuatu's long history of climate hazards
and disasters, local adaptive capacity is relatively high, despite barriers to the use of local knowledge and technology, and low rates
of literacy and women's participation (McNamara and Prasad, 2014; Aipira et al., 2017; Granderson, 2017). However, the adaptive
capacity of Vanuatu and other SIDS is increasingly constrained due to more frequent severe weather events (see Chapter 3, Box
3.5, Chapter 4, Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 4) (Gero et al., 2013; Kuruppu and Willie, 2015; SPC, 2015; Sovacool et al., 2017).
Vanuatu has developed a national sustainable development plan for 2016-2030: the People's Plan (Republic of Vanuatu, 2016).
This coordinated, inclusive plan of action on economy, environment and society aims to strengthen adaptive capacity and resilience
to climate change and disasters. It emphasizes rights of all Ni-Vanuatu, including women, youth, the elderly and vulnerable groups
(Nalau et al., 2016). Vanuatu has also developed a Coastal Adaptation Plan (Republic of Vanuatu, 2016), an integrated Climate
Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy (2016-2030) (SPC, 2015) and the first South Pacific National Advisory Board on Climate
Change & Disaster Risk Reduction (SPC, 2015; UNDP, 2016).

5

Vanuatu aims to integrate planning at multiple scales, and increase climate resilience by supporting local coping capacities and
iterative processes of planning for sustainable development and integrated risk assessment (Aipira et al., 2017; Eriksson et al.,
2017; Granderson, 2017). Climate-resilient development is also supported by non-state partnerships, for example, the `Yumi stap
redi long climate change'-the Vanuatu non-governmental organization Climate Change Adaptation Program (Maclellan, 2015).
This programme focuses on equitable governance, with particular attention to supporting women's voices in decision-making
through allied programmes addressing domestic violence, and rights-based education to reduce social marginalization; alongside
institutional reforms for greater transparency, accountability and community participation in decision-making (Davies, 2015;
Maclellan, 2015; Sterrett, 2015; Ensor, 2016; UN Women, 2016).
Power imbalances embedded in the political economy of development (Nunn et al., 2014), gender discrimination (Aipira et al., 2017)
and the priorities of climate finance (Cabezon et al., 2016) may marginalize the priorities of local communities and influence how
local risks are understood, prioritised and managed (Kuruppu and Willie, 2015; Baldacchino, 2017; Sovacool et al., 2017). However,
the experience of the low death toll after Cyclone Pam suggests effective use of local knowledge in planning and early warning may
support resilience at least in the absence of storm surge flooding (Handmer and Iveson, 2017; Nalau et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the
very severe infrastructure damage of Cyclone Pam 2015 highlights the limits of individual Pacific SIDS efforts and the need for global
and regional responses to a 1.5C warmer world (see Chapter 3, Box 3.5, Chapter 4, Box 4.3) (Dilling et al., 2015; Ensor, 2016; Shultz
et al., 2016; Rey et al., 2017).

471

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Communities, towns and cities also contribute to low-carbon pathways,
sustainable development and fair and equitable climate resilience,
often focused on processes of power, learning and contestation as entry
points to more localised CRDPs (medium evidence, high agreement)
(Cross-Chapter Box 13 in this chapter, Box 5.2). In the Scottish Borders
Climate Resilient Communities Project (United Kingdom), local flood
management is linked with national policies to foster cross-scalar
and inclusive governance, with attention to systemic disadvantages,
shocks and stressors, capacity building, learning for change and climate
narratives to inspire hope and action, all of which are essential for
community resilience in a 1.5C warmer world (Fazey et al., 2018).
Narratives and storytelling are vital for realizing place-based 1.5C
futures as they create space for agency, deliberation, co-constructing
meaning, imagination and desirable and dignified pathways (Veland
et al., 2018). Engagement with possible futures, identity and selfreliance is also documented for Alaska, where warming has already
exceeded 1.5C and indigenous communities invest in renewable
energy, greenhouses for food security and new fishing practices to
overcome loss of sea ice, flooding and erosion (Chapin et al., 2016;
Fazey et al., 2018). The Asian Cities Climate Change Resilience Network
facilitates shared learning dialogues, risk-to-resilience workshops, and

iterative, consultative planning in flood-prone cities in India; vulnerable
communities, municipal governmental agents, entrepreneurs and
technical experts negotiate different visions, trade-offs and local politics
to identify desirable pathways (Harris et al., 2017).
Transforming our societies and systems to limit global warming to
1.5C and ensuring equity and well-being for human populations
and ecosystems in a 1.5C warmer world would require ambitious
and well-integrated adaptation-mitigation-development pathways
that deviate fundamentally from high-carbon, business-as-usual
futures (Okereke and Coventry, 2016; Arts, 2017; Gupta and Arts,
2017; Sealey-Huggins, 2017). Identifying and negotiating socially
acceptable, inclusive and equitable pathways towards climateresilient futures is a challenging, yet important, endeavour, fraught
with complex moral, practical and political difficulties and inevitable
trade-offs (very high confidence). The ultimate questions are: what
futures do we want (Bai et al., 2016; Tabara et al., 2017; Klinsky and
Winkler, 2018; O'Brien, 2018; Veland et al., 2018), whose resilience
matters, for what, where, when and why (Meerow and Newell, 2016),
and `whose vision ... is being pursued and along which pathways'
(Gillard et al., 2016).

Cross-Chapter Box 13 | Cities and Urban Transformation
Lead Authors:
Fernando Aragon-Durand (Mexico), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Anton Cartwright (South Africa), Francois Engelbrecht (South Africa),
Bronwyn Hayward (New Zealand), Daniela Jacob (Germany), Debora Ley (Guatemala/Mexico), Shagun Mehrotra (USA/India), Peter
Newman (Australia), Aromar Revi (India), Seth Schultz (USA), William Solecki (USA), Petra Tschakert (Australia/Austria)

Contributor:
Peter Marcotullio (USA)

Global Urbanization in a 1.5C Warmer World
The concentration of economic activity, dense social networks, human resource capacity, investment in infrastructure and buildings,
relatively nimble local governments, close connection to surrounding rural and natural environments, and a tradition of innovation
provide urban areas with transformational potential (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.3) (Castan Broto, 2017). In this sense, the urbanization
megatrend that will take place over the next three decades, and add approximately 2 billion people to the global urban population
(UN, 2014), offers opportunities for efforts to limit warming to 1.5C.

5

Cities can also, however, concentrate the risks of flooding, landslides, fire and infectious and parasitic disease that are expected to
heighten in a 1.5C warmer world (Chapter 3). In African and Asian countries where urbanization rates are highest, these risks could
expose and amplify pre-existing stresses related to poverty, exclusion, and governance (Gore, 2015; Dodman et al., 2017; Jiang and
O'Neill, 2017; Pelling et al., 2018; Solecki et al., 2018). Through its impact on economic development and investment, urbanization
often leads to increased consumption and environmental degradation and enhanced vulnerability and risk (Rosenzweig et al., 2018).
In the absence of innovation, the combination of urbanization and urban economic development could contribute 226 GtCO2 in
emissions by 2050 (Bai et al., 2018). At the same time, some new urban developments are demonstrating combined carbon and
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) benefits (Wiktorowicz et al., 2018), and it is in towns and cities that building renovation rates
can be most easily accelerated to support the transition to 1.5C pathways (Kuramochi et al., 2018), including through voluntary
programmes (Van der Heijden, 2018).

Urban transformations and emerging climate-resilient development pathways
The 1.5C pathways require action in all cities and urban contexts. Recent literature emphasizes the need to deliberate and negotiate
how resilience and climate-resilient pathways can be fostered in the context of people's daily lives, including the failings of everyday
development such as unemployment, inadequate housing and a growing informal sector and settlements (informality), in order

472

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Cross-Chapter Box 13 (continued)

to acknowledge local priorities and foster transformative learning (Vale, 2014; Shi et al., 2016; Harris et al., 2017; Ziervogel et al.,
2017; Fazey et al., 2018; Macintyre et al., 2018). Enhancing deliberate transformative capacities in urban contexts also entails new
and relational forms of envisioning agency, equity, resilience, social cohesion and well-being (Section 5.5.3) (Gillard et al., 2016;
Ziervogel et al., 2016). Two examples of urban transformation are explored here.
The built environment, spatial planning, infrastructure, energy services, mobility and urban-rural linkages necessary in rapidly
growing cities in South Asia and Africa in the next three decades present mitigation, adaptation and development opportunities
that are crucial for a 1.5C world (Newman et al., 2017; Lwasa et al., 2018; Teferi and Newman, 2018). Realizing these opportunities
would require the structural challenges of poverty, weak and contested local governance, and low levels of local government
investment to be addressed on an unprecedented scale (Wachsmuth et al., 2016; Chu et al., 2017; van Noorloos and Kloosterboer,
2017; Pelling et al., 2018).
Urban governance is critical to ensuring that the necessary urban transitions deliver economic growth and equity (Hughes et al.,
2018). The proximity of local governments to citizens and their needs can make them powerful agents of climate action (Melica et
al., 2018), but urban governance is enhanced when it involves multiple actors (Ziervogel et al., 2016; Pelling et al., 2018), supportive
national governments (Tait and Euston-Brown, 2017), and sub-national climate networks (see Chapter 4, Section 4.4.1). Governance
is complicated for the urban population currently living in informality. This population is expected to triple, to three billion, by
2050 (Satterthwaite et al., 2018), placing a significant portion of the world's population beyond the direct reach of formal climate
mitigation and adaptation policies (Revi et al., 2014). How to address the co-evolved and structural conditions that lead to urban
informality and associated vulnerability to 1.5C of warming is a central question for this report. Brown and McGranahan (2016)
cite evidence that the informal urban `green economy' that has emerged out of necessity in the absence of formal service provisions
is frequently low-carbon and resource-efficient.
Realising the potential for low carbon transitions in informal urban settlements would require an express recognition of the unpaidfor contributions of women in the informal economy, and new partnerships between the state and communities (Ziervogel et al.,
2017; Pelling et al., 2018; Satterthwaite et al., 2018). There is no guarantee that these partnerships will evolve or cohere into the
type of service delivery and climate governance system that could steer the change on a scale required to limit to warming to 1.5C
(Jaglin, 2014). However, work by transnational networks, such as Shack/Slum Dwellers International, C40, the Global Covenant
of Mayors, and the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives, as well as efforts to combine in-country planning for
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) (Andonova et al., 2017; Fuhr et al., 2018) with those taking place to support the New
Urban Agenda and National Urban Policies, represent one step towards realizing the potential (Tait and Euston-Brown, 2017).
So too do `old urban agendas', such as slum upgrading and universal water and sanitation provision (McGranahan et al., 2016;
Satterthwaite, 2016; Satterthwaite et al., 2018).
Transition Towns (TTs) are a type of urban transformation that have emerged mainly in high-income countries. The grassroots TT
movement (origin in the United Kingdom) combines adaptation, mitigation and just transitions, mainly at the level of communities
and small towns. It now has more than 1,300 registered local initiatives in more than 40 countries (Grossmann and Creamer,
2017), many of them in the United Kingdom, the United States, and other high-income countries. TTs are described as `progressive
localism' (Cretney et al., 2016), aiming to foster a `communitarian ecological citizenship' that goes beyond changes in consumption
and lifestyle (Kenis, 2016). They aspire to promote equitable communities resilient to the impacts of climate change, peak oil and
unstable global markets; re-localization of production and consumption; and transition pathways to a post-carbon future (Feola and
Nunes, 2014; Evans and Phelan, 2016; Grossmann and Creamer, 2017).

5

TT initiatives typically pursue lifestyle-related low-carbon living and economies, food self-sufficiency, energy efficiency through
renewables, construction with locally sourced material and cottage industries (Barnes, 2015; Staggenborg and Ogrodnik, 2015;
Taylor Aiken, 2016). Social and iterative learning through the collective involves dialogue, deliberation, capacity building, citizen
science engagements, technical re-skilling to increase self-reliance, for example canning and preserving food and permaculture,
future visioning and emotional training to share difficulties and loss (Feola and Nunes, 2014; Barnes, 2015; Boke, 2015; Taylor Aiken,
2015; Kenis, 2016; Mehmood, 2016; Grossmann and Creamer, 2017).
Important conditions for successful transition groups include flexibility, participatory democracy, care ethics, inclusiveness and
consensus-building, assuming bridging or brokering roles, and community alliances and partnerships (Feola and Nunes, 2014;
Mehmood, 2016; Taylor Aiken, 2016; Grossmann and Creamer, 2017). Smaller scale rural initiatives allow for more experimentation

473

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Cross-Chapter Box 13 (continued)

(Cretney et al., 2016), while those in urban centres benefit from stronger networks and proximity to power structures (North and
Longhurst, 2013; Nicolosi and Feola, 2016). Increasingly, TTs recognize the need to participate in policymaking (Kenis and Mathijs,
2014; Barnes, 2015).
Despite high self-ratings of success, some TT initiatives are too inwardly focused and geographically isolated (Feola and Nunes,
2014), while others have difficulties in engaging marginalized, non-white, non-middle-class community members (Evans and
Phelan, 2016; Nicolosi and Feola, 2016; Grossmann and Creamer, 2017). In the United Kingdom, expectations of innovations
growing in scale (Taylor Aiken, 2015) and carbon accounting methods required by funding bodies (Taylor Aiken, 2016)
undermine local resilience building. Tension between explicit engagements with climate change action and efforts to appeal
to more people have resulted in difficult trade-offs and strained member relations (Grossmann and Creamer, 2017) though the
contribution to changing an urban culture that prioritizes climate change is sometimes underestimated (Wiktorowicz et al., 2018).
Urban actions that can highlight the 1.5C agenda include individual actions within homes (Werfel, 2017; Buntaine and Prather,
2018); demonstration zero carbon developments (Wiktorowicz et al., 2018); new partnerships between communities, government
and business to build mass transit and electrify transport (Glazebrook and Newman, 2018); city plans to include climate outcomes
(Millard-Ball, 2013); and support for transformative change across political, professional and sectoral divides (Bai et al., 2018).

5.6

Conditions for Achieving Sustainable
Development, Eradicating Poverty
and Reducing Inequalities in
1.5C Warmer Worlds

This chapter has described the fundamental, urgent and systemic
transformations that would be needed to achieve sustainable
development, eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities in a 1.5C
warmer world, in various contexts and across scales. In particular, it
has highlighted the societal dimensions, putting at the centre people's
needs and aspirations in their specific contexts. Here we synthesize
some of the most pertinent enabling conditions (see Glossary) to
support these profound transformations. These conditions are closely
interlinked and connected by the overarching concept of governance,
which broadly includes institutional, socio-economic, cultural and
technological elements (see Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter Box 4 in
Chapter 1).

5

5.6.1

Finance and Technology Aligned with Local Needs

Significant gaps in green investment constrain transitions to a lowcarbon economy aligned with development objectives (Volz et al.,
2015; Campiglio, 2016). Hence, unlocking new forms of public, private
and public-private financing is essential to support environmental
sustainability of the economic system (Croce et al., 2011; Blyth et al.,
2015; Falcone et al., 2018) (see Chapter 4, Section 4.4.5). To avoid risks
of undesirable trade-offs with the SDGs caused by national budget
constraints, improved access to international climate finance is essential
for supporting adaptation, mitigation and sustainable development,
especially for LDCs and SIDS (medium evidence, high agreement)
(Shine and Campillo, 2016; Wood, 2017). Care needs to be taken when
international donors or partnership arrangements influence project
financing structures (Kongsager and Corbera, 2015; Purdon, 2015;
Phillips et al., 2017; Ficklin et al., 2018). Conventional climate funding
schemes, especially the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), have
474

shown positive effects on sustainable development but also adverse
consequences, for example, on adaptive capacities of rural households
and uneven distribution of costs and benefits, often exacerbating
inequalities (robust evidence, high agreement) (Aggarwal, 2014;
Brohe, 2014; He et al., 2014; Schade and Obergassel, 2014; Smits and
Middleton, 2014; Wood et al., 2016a; Horstmann and Hein, 2017;
Kreibich et al., 2017). Close consideration of recipients' contextspecific needs when designing financial support helps to overcome
these limitations as it better aligns community needs, national policy
objectives and donors' priorities; puts the emphasis on the increase of
transparency and predictability of support; and fosters local capacity
building (medium evidence, high agreement) (Barrett, 2013; Boyle et
al., 2013; Shine and Campillo, 2016; Ley, 2017; Sanchez and Izzo, 2017).
The development and transfer of technologies is another enabler for
developing countries to contribute to the requirements of the 1.5C
objective while achieving climate resilience and their socio-economic
development goals (see Chapter 4, Section 4.4.4). Internationallevel governance would be needed to boost domestic innovation
and the deployment of new technologies, such as negative emission
technologies, towards the 1.5C objective (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.7),
but the alignment with local needs depends on close consideration
of the specificities of the domestic context in countries at all levels
of development (de Coninck and Sagar, 2015; IEA, 2015; Parikh et al.,
2018). Technology transfer supporting development in developing
countries would require an understanding of local and national actors
and institutions (de Coninck and Puig, 2015; de Coninck and Sagar,
2017; Michaelowa et al., 2018), careful attention to the capacities in
the entire innovation chain (Khosla et al., 2017; Olawuyi, 2017) and
transfer of not only equipment but also knowledge (medium evidence,
high agreement) (Murphy et al., 2015).

5.6.2

Integration of Institutions

Multilevel governance in climate change has emerged as a key enabler
for systemic transformation and effective governance (see Chapter 4,

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Section 4.4.1). On the one hand, low-carbon and climate-resilient
development actions are often well aligned at the lowest scale
possible (Suckall et al., 2015; Sanchez and Izzo, 2017), and informal,
local institutions are critical in enhancing the adaptive capacity
of countries and marginalized communities (Yaro et al., 2015). On
the other hand, international and national institutions can provide
incentives for projects to harness synergies and avoid trade-offs
(Kongsager et al., 2016).

al., 2014; Fazey et al., 2016; Tschakert et al., 2016; Winkler and Dubash,
2016; Wood et al., 2016b; Karlsson et al., 2017; Quan et al., 2017;
Tanner et al., 2017). Each development pathway, including legacies and
path dependencies, creates its own set of opportunities and challenges
and winners and losers, both within and across countries (Figure 5.5)
(robust evidence, high agreement) (Mathur et al., 2014; Phillips et al.,
2017; Stringer et al., 2017; Wood, 2017; Ficklin et al., 2018; Gajjar et
al., 2018).

Governance approaches that coordinate and monitor multiscale
policy actions and trade-offs across sectoral, local, national, regional
and international levels are therefore best suited to implement goals
towards 1.5C warmer conditions and sustainable development (Ayers
et al., 2014; Stringer et al., 2014; von Stechow et al., 2016; Gwimbi,
2017; Hayward, 2017; Maor et al., 2017; Roger et al., 2017; Michaelowa
et al., 2018). Vertical and horizontal policy integration and coordination
is essential to take into account the interplay and trade-offs between
sectors and spatial scales (Duguma et al., 2014; Naess et al., 2015; von
Stechow et al., 2015; Antwi-Agyei et al., 2017a; Di Gregorio et al., 2017;
Runhaar et al., 2018), enable the dialogue between local communities
and institutional bodies (Colenbrander et al., 2016), and involve nonstate actors such as business, local governments and civil society
operating across different scales (robust evidence, high agreement)
(Hajer et al., 2015; Labriet et al., 2015; Hale, 2016; Pelling et al., 2016;
Kalafatis, 2017; Lyon, 2018).

Addressing the uneven distribution of power is critical to ensure
that societal transformation towards a 1.5C warmer world does
not exacerbate poverty and vulnerability or create new injustices but
rather encourages equitable transformational change (Patterson et
al., 2018). Equitable outcomes are enhanced when they pay attention
to just outcomes for those negatively affected by change (Newell et
al., 2014; Dilling et al., 2015; Naess et al., 2015; Sovacool et al., 2015;
Cervigni and Morris, 2016; Keohane and Victor, 2016) and promote
human rights, increase equality and reduce power asymmetries within
societies (robust evidence, high agreement) (UNRISD, 2016; Robinson
and Shine, 2018).

5.6.3

Inclusive Processes

Inclusive governance processes are critical for preparing for a 1.5C
warmer world (Fazey et al., 2018; O'Brien, 2018; Patterson et al., 2018).
These processes have been shown to serve the interests of diverse
groups of people and enhance empowerment of often excluded
stakeholders, notably women and youth (MRFCJ, 2015a; Dumont et
al., 2017). They also enhance social- and co-learning which, in turn,
facilitates accelerated and adaptive management and the scaling up
of capacities for resilience building (Ensor and Harvey, 2015; Reij and
Winterbottom, 2015; Tschakert et al., 2016; Binam et al., 2017; Dumont
et al., 2017; Fazey et al., 2018; Lyon, 2018; O'Brien, 2018), and provides
opportunities to blend indigenous, local and scientific knowledge
(robust evidence, high agreement) (see Chapter 4, Section 4.3.5.5,
Box 4.3, Section 5.3) (Antwi-Agyei et al., 2017a; Coe et al., 2017;
Thornton and Comberti, 2017) . Such co-learning has been effective
in improving deliberative decision-making processes that incorporate
different values and world views (Cundill et al., 2014; C. Butler et al.,
2016; Ensor, 2016; Fazey et al., 2016; Gorddard et al., 2016; Aipira et
al., 2017; Chung Tiam Fook, 2017; Maor et al., 2017), and create space
for negotiating diverse interests and preferences (robust evidence, high
agreement) (O'Brien et al., 2015; Gillard et al., 2016; DeCaro et al.,
2017; Harris et al., 2017; Lahn, 2018).

5.6.4

Attention to Issues of Power and Inequality

Societal transformations to limit global warming to 1.5C and strive
for equity and well-being for all are not power neutral (Section 5.5.3).
Development preferences are often shaped by powerful interests that
determine the direction and pace of change, anticipated benefits and
beneficiaries, and acceptable and unacceptable trade-offs (Newell et

5.6.5

Reconsidering Values

The profound transformations that would be needed to integrate
sustainable development and 1.5C-compatible pathways call for
examining the values, ethics, attitudes and behaviours that underpin
societies (Hartzell-Nichols, 2017; O'Brien, 2018; Patterson et al., 2018).
Infusing values that promote sustainable development (Holden et al.,
2017), overcome individual economic interests and go beyond economic
growth (Hackmann, 2016), encourage desirable and transformative
visions (Tabara et al., 2018), and care for the less fortunate (Howell
and Allen, 2017) is part and parcel of climate-resilient and sustainable
development pathways. This entails helping societies and individuals
to strive for sufficiency in resource consumption within planetary
boundaries alongside sustainable and equitable well-being (O'Neill
et al., 2018). Navigating 1.5C societal transformations, characterized
by action from local to global, stresses the core commitment to
social justice, solidarity and cooperation, particularly regarding the
distribution of responsibilities, rights and mutual obligations between
nations (medium evidence, high agreement) (Patterson et al., 2018;
Robinson and Shine, 2018).

5.7

Synthesis and Research Gaps

The assessment in Chapter 5 illustrates that limiting global warming
to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels is fundamentally connected with
achieving sustainable development, poverty eradication and reducing
inequalities. It shows that avoided impacts between 1.5C and 2C
temperature stabilization would make it easier to achieve many aspects
of sustainable development, although important risks would remain
at 1.5C (Section 5.2). Synergies between adaptation and mitigation
response measures with sustainable development and the SDGs can
often be enhanced when attention is paid to well-being and equity
while, when unaddressed, poverty and inequalities may be exacerbated
(Section 5.3 and 5.4). Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs)
475

5

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

open up routes towards socially desirable futures that are sustainable
and liveable, but concrete evidence reveals complex trade-offs along
a continuum of different pathways, highlighting the role of societal
values, internal contestations and political dynamics (Section 5.5). The
transformations towards sustainable development in a 1.5C warmer
world, in all contexts, involve fundamental societal and systemic
changes over time and across scale, and a set of enabling conditions
without which the dual goal is difficult if not impossible to achieve
(Sections 5.5 and 5.6).
This assessment is supported by growing knowledge on the linkages
between a 1.5C warmer world and different dimensions of sustainable
development. However, several gaps in the literature remain:
Limited evidence exists that explicitly examines the real-world
implications of a 1.5C warmer world (and overshoots) as well as
avoided impacts between 1.5C versus 2C for the SDGs and sustainable
development more broadly. Few projections are available for
households, livelihoods and communities. And literature on differential
localized impacts and their cross-sector interacting and cascading
effects with multidimensional patterns of societal vulnerability, poverty
and inequalities remains scarce. Hence, caution is needed when globallevel conclusions about adaptation and mitigation measures in a 1.5C
warmer world are applied to sustainable development in local, national
and regional settings.
Limited literature has systematically evaluated context-specific
synergies and trade-offs between and across adaptation and mitigation
response measures in 1.5C-compatible pathways and the SDGs. This

5

476

hampers the ability to inform decision-making and fair and robust policy
packages adapted to different local, regional or national circumstances.
More research is required to understand how trade-offs and synergies
will intensify or decrease, differentially across geographic regions and
time, in a 1.5C warmer world and as compared to higher temperatures.
Limited availability of interdisciplinary studies also poses a challenge
for connecting the socio-economic transformations and the governance
aspects of low emissions, climate-resilient transformations. For
example, it remains unclear how governance structures enable or
hinder different groups of people and countries to negotiate pathway
options, values and priorities.
The literature does not demonstrate the existence of 1.5C-compatible
pathways achieving the `universal and indivisible' agenda of the
17 SDGs, and hence does not show whether and how the nature
and pace of changes that would be required to meet 1.5C climate
stabilization could be fully synergetic with all the SDGs.
The literature on low emissions and CRDPs in local, regional and national
contexts is growing. Yet the lack of standard indicators to monitor such
pathways makes it difficult to compare evidence grounded in specific
contexts with differential circumstances, and therefore to derive
generic lessons on the outcome of decisions on specific indicators. This
knowledge gap poses a challenge for connecting local-level visions
with global-level trajectories to better understand key conditions for
societal and systems transformations that reconcile urgent climate
action with well-being for all.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 5.1 | What are the Connections between Sustainable Development and Limiting Global
Warming to 1.5C above Pre-Industrial Levels?
Summary: Sustainable development seeks to meet the needs of people living today without compromising the
needs of future generations, while balancing social, economic and environmental considerations. The 17 UN
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) include targets for eradicating poverty; ensuring health, energy and food
security; reducing inequality; protecting ecosystems; pursuing sustainable cities and economies; and a goal for
climate action (SDG 13). Climate change affects the ability to achieve sustainable development goals, and limiting
warming to 1.5C will help meet some sustainable development targets. Pursuing sustainable development will
influence emissions, impacts and vulnerabilities. Responses to climate change in the form of adaptation and
mitigation will also interact with sustainable development with positive effects, known as synergies, or negative
effects, known as trade-offs. Responses to climate change can be planned to maximize synergies and limit tradeoffs with sustainable development.
For more than 25 years, the United Nations (UN) and other international organizations have embraced the
concept of sustainable development to promote well-being and meet the needs of today's population without
compromising the needs of future generations. This concept spans economic, social and environmental objectives
including poverty and hunger alleviation, equitable economic growth, access to resources, and the protection of
water, air and ecosystems. Between 1990 and 2015, the UN monitored a set of eight Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). They reported progress in reducing poverty, easing hunger and child mortality, and improving
access to clean water and sanitation. But with millions remaining in poor health, living in poverty and facing
serious problems associated with climate change, pollution and land-use change, the UN decided that more
needed to be done. In 2015, the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were endorsed as part of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The 17 SDGs (Figure FAQ 5.1) apply to all countries and have a timeline
for success by 2030. The SDGs seek to eliminate extreme poverty and hunger; ensure health, education, peace,
safe water and clean energy for all; promote inclusive and sustainable consumption, cities, infrastructure and
economic growth; reduce inequality including gender inequality; combat climate change and protect oceans and
terrestrial ecosystems.
Climate change and sustainable development are fundamentally connected. Previous IPCC reports found that
climate change can undermine sustainable development, and that well-designed mitigation and adaptation
responses can support poverty alleviation, food security, healthy ecosystems, equality and other dimensions of
sustainable development. Limiting global warming to 1.5C would require mitigation actions and adaptation
measures to be taken at all levels. These adaptation and mitigation actions would include reducing emissions and
increasing resilience through technology and infrastructure choices, as well as changing behaviour and policy.
These actions can interact with sustainable development objectives in positive ways that strengthen sustainable
development, known as synergies. Or they can interact in negative ways, where sustainable development is
hindered or reversed, known as trade-offs.

5

An example of a synergy is sustainable forest management, which can prevent emissions from deforestation
and take up carbon to reduce warming at reasonable cost. It can work synergistically with other dimensions of
sustainable development by providing food (SDG 2) and clean water (SDG 6) and protecting ecosystems (SDG 15).
Other examples of synergies are when climate adaptation measures, such as coastal or agricultural projects,
empower women and benefit local incomes, health and ecosystems.
An example of a trade-off can occur if ambitious climate change mitigation compatible with 1.5C changes
land use in ways that have negative impacts on sustainable development. An example could be turning natural
forests, agricultural areas, or land under indigenous or local ownership to plantations for bioenergy production.
If not managed carefully, such changes could undermine dimensions of sustainable development by threatening
food and water security, creating conflict over land rights and causing biodiversity loss. Another trade-off could
occur for some countries, assets, workers and infrastructure already in place if a switch is made from fossil fuels to
other energy sources without adequate planning for such a transition. Trade-offs can be minimized if effectively
managed, as when care is taken to improve bioenergy crop yields to reduce harmful land-use change or where
workers are retrained for employment in lower carbon sectors.
(continued on next page)

477

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

FAQ 5.1 (continued)

Limiting temperature increase to 1.5C can make it much easier to achieve the SDGs, but it is also possible that
pursuing the SDGs could result in trade-offs with efforts to limit climate change. There are trade-offs when
people escaping from poverty and hunger consume more energy or land and thus increase emissions, or if
goals for economic growth and industrialization increase fossil fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.
Conversely, efforts to reduce poverty and gender inequalities and to enhance food, health and water security can
reduce vulnerability to climate change. Other synergies can occur when coastal and ocean ecosystem protection
reduces the impacts of climate change on these systems. The sustainable development goal of affordable and
clean energy (SDG 7) specifically targets access to renewable energy and energy efficiency, which are important
to ambitious mitigation and limiting warming to 1.5C.
The link between sustainable development and limiting global warming to 1.5C is recognized by the SDG for
climate action (SDG 13), which seeks to combat climate change and its impacts while acknowledging that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the primary international, intergovernmental
forum for negotiating the global response to climate change.
The challenge is to put in place sustainable development policies and actions that reduce deprivation, alleviate
poverty and ease ecosystem degradation while also lowering emissions, reducing climate change impacts and
facilitating adaptation. It is important to strengthen synergies and minimize trade-offs when planning climate
change adaptation and mitigation actions. Unfortunately, not all trade-offs can be avoided or minimized, but
careful planning and implementation can build the enabling conditions for long-term sustainable development.

5

FAQ 5.1, Figure 1 | Climate change action is one of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and is connected to sustainable development
more broadly. Actions to reduce climate risk can interact with other sustainable development objectives in positive ways (synergies) and negative ways (trade-offs).

478

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 5.2 | What are the Pathways to Achieving Poverty Reduction and Reducing Inequalities
while Reaching a 1.5C World?
Summary: There are ways to limit global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Of the pathways that
exist, some simultaneously achieve sustainable development. They entail a mix of measures that lower emissions
and reduce the impacts of climate change, while contributing to poverty eradication and reducing inequalities.
Which pathways are possible and desirable will differ between and within regions and nations. This is due to
the fact that development progress to date has been uneven and climate-related risks are unevenly distributed.
Flexible governance would be needed to ensure that such pathways are inclusive, fair and equitable to avoid
poor and disadvantaged populations becoming worse off. Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) offer
possibilities to achieve both equitable and low-carbon futures.
Issues of equity and fairness have long been central to climate change and sustainable development. Equity,
like equality, aims to promote justness and fairness for all. This is not necessarily the same as treating everyone
equally, since not everyone comes from the same starting point. Often used interchangeably with fairness and
justice, equity implies implementing different actions in different places, all with a view to creating an equal
world that is fair for all and where no one is left behind.
The Paris Agreement states that it `will be implemented to reflect equity... in the light of different national
circumstances' and calls for `rapid reductions' of greenhouse gases to be achieved `on the basis of equity, and in
the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty'. Similarly, the UN SDGs include targets
to reduce poverty and inequalities, and to ensure equitable and affordable access to health, water and energy
for all.
Equity and fairness are important for considering pathways that limit warming to 1.5C in a way that is liveable
for every person and species. They recognize the uneven development status between richer and poorer nations,
the uneven distribution of climate impacts (including on future generations) and the uneven capacity of different
nations and people to respond to climate risks. This is particularly true for those who are highly vulnerable to
climate change, such as indigenous communities in the Arctic, people whose livelihoods depend on agriculture
or coastal and marine ecosystems, and inhabitants of small island developing states. The poorest people will
continue to experience climate change through the loss of income and livelihood opportunities, hunger, adverse
health effects and displacement.
Well-planned adaptation and mitigation measures are essential to avoid exacerbating inequalities or creating
new injustices. Pathways that are compatible with limiting warming to 1.5C and aligned with the SDGs consider
mitigation and adaptation options that reduce inequalities in terms of who benefits, who pays the costs and who
is affected by possible negative consequences. Attention to equity ensures that disadvantaged people can secure
their livelihoods and live in dignity, and that those who experience mitigation or adaptation costs have financial
and technical support to enable fair transitions.

5

CRDPs describe trajectories that pursue the dual goal of limiting warming to 1.5C while strengthening sustainable
development. This includes eradicating poverty as well as reducing vulnerabilities and inequalities for regions,
countries, communities, businesses and cities. These trajectories entail a mix of adaptation and mitigation
measures consistent with profound societal and systems transformations. The goals are to meet the short-term
SDGs, achieve longer-term sustainable development, reduce emissions towards net zero around the middle of
the century, build resilience and enhance human capacities to adapt, all while paying close attention to equity
and well-being for all.
The characteristics of CRDPs will differ across communities and nations, and will be based on deliberations with
a diverse range of people, including those most affected by climate change and by possible routes towards
transformation. For this reason, there are no standard methods for designing CRDPs or for monitoring their
progress towards climate-resilient futures. However, examples from around the world demonstrate that flexible
and inclusive governance structures and broad participation often help support iterative decision-making,
continuous learning and experimentation. Such inclusive processes can also help to overcome weak institutional
arrangements and power structures that may further exacerbate inequalities.
(continued on next page)

479

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

FAQ 5.2 (continued)

FAQ 5.2, Figure 1 | Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) describe trajectories that pursue the dual goals of limiting warming to 1.5C while
strengthening sustainable development. Decision-making that achieves the SDGs, lowers greenhouse gas emissions and limits global warming could help lead to
a climate-resilient world, within the context of enhancing adaptation.

Ambitious actions already underway around the world can offer insight into CRDPs for limiting warming to 1.5C.
For example, some countries have adopted clean energy and sustainable transport while creating environmentally
friendly jobs and supporting social welfare programmes to reduce domestic poverty. Other examples teach us
about different ways to promote development through practices inspired by community values. For instance,
Buen Vivir, a Latin American concept based on indigenous ideas of communities living in harmony with nature,
is aligned with peace; diversity; solidarity; rights to education, health, and safe food, water, and energy; and
well-being and justice for all. The Transition Movement, with origins in Europe, promotes equitable and resilient
communities through low-carbon living, food self-sufficiency and citizen science. Such examples indicate that
pathways that reduce poverty and inequalities while limiting warming to 1.5C are possible and that they can
provide guidance on pathways towards socially desirable, equitable and low-carbon futures.

5

480

Decarbonization/CCS/CCU

Low-carbon Fuel Switch

Industry

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement

[+2]







Evidence
Agreement
Reduces Poverty


Confidence

Altieri et al., 2016

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

% of people living below poverty line declines from 49% to 18% in
South African context.

Score

Interaction

Table 5.2 | Mitigation - SDG table
Social-Demand

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[+2]








[+1]







Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Technical Education, Vocational Training, Education for
Sustainability (4.3/4.4/4.5/4.7)

[+2]







Technical Education, Vocational Training, Education for
Sustainability (4.b/4.7)

[+1]




[1]







Wang and Jaffe, 2004; Hertwich et al., 2008; Apps et al., 2010; Veltman
et al., 2010; Koornneef et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2011; Siirila et al.,
2012; Atchley et al., 2013; Corsten et al., 2013; IPCC, 2014

There is a risk of CO2 leakage both from geological formations as well
as from the transportation infrastructure from source to sequestration
locations.



Disease and Mortality (3.1/3.2/3.3/3.4)

Vassolo and Doll, 2005; Nguyen et al., 2014; Holland et al., 2015;
Karner et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016

[0]
No direct interaction

Apeaning and Thollander, 2013; Fernando and Evans, 2015; Roy et al.,
2018

Industries are becoming suppliers of energy, waste heat, water and roof New technology deployment creates demand for awareness and
tops for solar energy generation, and hence helping to improve air and knowledge with technical and managerial capability; otherwise acts as
barrier for rapid expansion.
water quality.



Water and Air Pollution Reduction and Better Health (3.9)

Vassolo and Doll, 2005; Xi et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2014; Holland et Apeaning and Thollander, 2013; Fernando and Evans, 2015; Roy et al.,
al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016
2018

People living in deprived communities feel positive and predict
Awareness, knowledge, technical and managerial capability are closely
considerable financial savings. Efficiency changes in the industrial sector linked, energy audit, information for trade unions, product/appliance
that lead to reduced energy demand can lead to reduced requirements labeling help in sustainability education.
on energy supply. As water is used to convert energy into useful forms,
the reduction in industrial demand is anticipated to reduce water
consumption and wastewater, resulting in more clean water for other
sectors and the environment. In extractive industries there are trade-off
unless strategically managed. Behavioural changes in the industrial
sector that lead to reduced energy demand can lead to reduced
requirements on energy supply. As water is used to convert energy into
useful forms, the reduction in industrial demand is anticipated to reduce
water consumption and wastewater, resulting in more clean water for
other sectors and the environment.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Air, Water Pollution Reduction and Better Health (3.9)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

481

Evidence

Agreement

[+2]









[+2]


Food Security (2.1)




Confidence



[0,1]






Food Security and Agricultural Productivity (2.1/2.4)
~ /

[+2]






Confidence

Interaction

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[+2]





Disease and Mortality (3.1/3.2/3.3/3.4)

Access to modern energy services can contribute to fewer injuries and
diseases related to traditional solid fuel collection and burning, as well
as utilization of kerosene lanterns. Access to modern energy services
can facilitate improved health care provision, medicine and vaccine
storage, utilization of powered medical equipment, and dissemination of
health-related information and education. Such services can also enable
thermal comfort in homes and contribute to food preservation and
safety. (Quote from McCollum et al., 2018)



[+1]







Lipscomb et al., 2013; van de Walle et al., 2013; McCollum et al., 2018

Access to modern energy is necessary for schools to have quality
lighting and thermal comfort, as well as modern information and
communication technologies. Access to modern lighting and energy
allows for studying after sundown and frees constraints on time
management that allow for higher school enrolment rates and better
literacy outcomes. (Quote from McCollum et al., 2018)



Equal Access to Educational Institutions (4.1/4.2/4.3/4.5)

Djamila et al., 2013; Huebner et al., 2013; Yue et al., 2013; Bhojvaid et Maidment et al., 2014
al., 2014; Derbez et al., 2014; Maidment et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2014;
Cameron et al., 2015; Liddell and Guiney, 2015; Sharpe et al., 2015;
Wells et al., 2015; Willand et al., 2015; Berrueta et al., 2017; Zhao et
al., 2017

Huebner et al., 2013; Yue et al., 2013; Scott et al., 2014; Zhao et al.,
2017
Equal Access to Educational Institutions (4.1/4.2/4.3/4.5)
Healthy Lives and Well-being for All at All Ages (3.2/3.9)


[+2]



[+2]




Efficient stoves improve health, especially for indigenous and poor rural Household energy efficiency measures reduce school absences for
communities. Household energy efficiency has positive health impacts children with asthma due to indoor pollution.
on children's respiratory health, weight and susceptibility to illness, and
the mental health of adults. Household energy efficiency improves
winter warmth, lowers relative humidity with benefits for cardiovascular
and respiratory health. Further improved indoor air quality by thermal
regulation and occupant comfort are realised. However, in one instance,
negative health impacts (asthma) of increased household energy
efficiency were also noted when housing upgrades took place without
changes in occupant behaviours. Home occupants reported warmth as
the most important aspect of comfort which was largely temperaturerelated and low in energy costs. Residents living in the deprived areas
expect improved warmth in their properties after energy efficiency
measures are employed.

Cabraal et al., 2005; Tilman et al., 2009; van Vuuren et al., 2009;
Lam et al., 2012; Lim et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2013; Aranda et al.,
Asaduzzaman et al., 2010; Finco and Doppler, 2010; Msangi et al.,
2014; McCollum et al., 2018
2010; Smith et al., 2013, 2014; Lotze-Campen et al., 2014; Hasegawa et
al., 2015; Sola et al., 2016; McCollum et al., 2018



Agreement

Kirubi et al., 2009; Casillas and Kammen, 2010; Cook, 2011; Pachauri et
al., 2012; Pode, 2013; Pueyo et al., 2013; Zulu and Richardson, 2013;
Bonan et al., 2014; Rao et al., 2014; Burlig and Preonas, 2016;
McCollum et al., 2018



Evidence

Modern energy access is critical to enhance agricultural
yields/productivity, decrease post-harvest losses and mechanize agriprocessing - all of which can aid food security. However, large-scale
bioenergy and food production may compete for scarce land and other
inputs (e.g., water, fertilizers), depending on how and where biomass
supplies are grown and the indirect land use change impacts that result.
If not implemented thoughtfully, this could lead to higher food prices
globally, and thus reduce access to affordable food for the poor.
Enhanced agricultural productivities can ameliorate the situation by
allowing as much bioenergy to be produced on as little land as possible.

[+2]

Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)

Score
Improved Warmth and Comforts

Home occupants reported warmth as the most important aspect of
comfort which was largely temperature-related and low in energy costs.
Residents living in deprived areas expect improved warmth in their
properties after energy efficiency measures are employed.



Interaction

Access to modern energy forms (electricity, clean stoves, high-quality
lighting) is fundamental to human development since the energy
services made possible by them help alleviate chronic and persistent
poverty. Strength of the impact varies in the literature. (Quote from
McCollum et al., 2018)



Berrueta et al., 2017



Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Casillas and Kammen, 2012; Hirth and Ueckerdt, 2013; Jakob and
Steckel, 2014; Maidment et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2014; Fay et al.,
2015; Cameron et al., 2016; Hallegatte et al., 2016b; Berrueta et al.,
2017; McCollum et al., 2018



[0]

Score

Using the improved stoves supports local food security and has
significantly impacted on food security. By making fuel last longer, the
improved stoves help improve food security and also provide a better
buffer against fuel shortages induced by climate change-related events
such as droughts, floods or hurricanes (Berrueta et al. 2017).

[+2,1]

Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)

Interaction

Energy efficiency interventions lead to cost savings which are realized
due to reduced energy bills that further lead to poverty reduction.
Participants with low incomes experience greater benefits. 'Energy
efficiency and biomass strategies benefitted the poor more than wind
and solar, whose benefits are captured by industry. Carbon mitigation
can increase or decrease inequalities. The distributional costs of new
energy policies (e.g., supporting renewables and energy efficiency) are
dependent on instrument design. If costs fall disproportionately on the
poor, then this could impair progress towards universal energy access
and, by extension, counteract the fight to eliminate poverty. (Quote from
McCollum et al., 2018).

/

Scott et al., 2014



Confidence

People living in deprived communities feel positive and predict
considerable financial savings.



Score

Poverty Reduction via Financial Savings (1.1)

Interaction

Social-Demand (continued)

Buildings

Behavioural Response

482

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement

5

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to Modern Lowcarbon Energy

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to Modern Lowcarbon Energy

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement

Transport

Behavioural Response





/

[+2,1]








[+1]







[+2,1]







[+2]









Increasingly volatile global oil prices have raised concerns for the
vulnerability of households to fuel price increases. Pricing measures as a
key component of sustainable transport policy need to consider equity.
Pro-poor mitigation policies are needed to reduce climate impact and
reduce threat; for example, investing more and better in infrastructure
by leveraging private resources and using designs that account for
future climate change and the related uncertainty. Communities in poor
areas cope with and adapt to multiple-stressors including climate
change. Coping strategies provide short-term relief but in the long-term
may negatively affect development goals. And responses generate a
trade-off between adaptation, mitigation and development. For African
cities with slums, due to high commuting costs, many walk to work
places which limit access. In Latin America triple informality leading to
low productivity and living standards.
Dodson and Sipe, 2008; Suckall et al., 2014; Hallegatte et al., 2016a;
Klausbruckner et al., 2016; CAF, 2017; Lall et al., 2017



[+2]







Ajanovic, 2015; SLoCaT, 2017



SLoCaT, 2017



Projects aiming at resilient transport infrastructure development (e.g.,
C40 Cities Clean Bus Declaration, UITP Declaration on Climate
Leadership, Cycling Delivers on the Global Goals, Global Sidewalk
Challenge) are targeted at reducing air pollution; electric vehicles using
electricity from renewables or low carbon sources combined with emobility options such as trolley buses, metros, trams and electro buses,
as well as promoting walking and biking, especially for short distances,
need consideration.



21 projects aiming at resilient transport infrastructure development to
improve access (e.g., C40 Cities Clean Bus Declaration, UITP Declaration
on Climate Leadership, Cycling Delivers on the Global Goals, Global
Sidewalk Challenge) do not substantially contribute to realizing the
(indirect) transport targets with mostly a rural focus: agricultural
productivity (SDG 2) and access to safe drinking water (SDG 6).

[0]

Reduce Illnesses from Hazardous Air Pollution (3.9)





[+2,1]

Ensure Access to Food Security (2.1/2.3/2.a/2.b/2.c)

Figueroa et al., 2014; Schucht et al., 2015; Klausbruckner et al., 2016;
Peng et al., 2017

~

No direct interaction



Locally relevant policies targeting traffic reductions and ambitious
diffusion of electric vehicles results in measured changes in non-climatic
exposure for population, including ambient air pollution, physical
activity and noise. The transition to low-carbon equitable and
sustainable transport can be fostered by numerous short- and mediumterm strategies that would benefit energy security, health, productivity
and sustainability. An evidence-based approach that takes into account
GHG emissions, ambient air pollutants, economic factors (affordability,
cost optimization), social factors (poverty alleviations, public health
benefits) and political acceptability is needed to tackle these challenges.

End Poverty in all its Forms Everywhere (1.1/1.4/1.a/1.b)

[0]

Reduce Illnesses from Hazardous Air, Water and Soil Pollution
(3.9)

/

Xylia and Silveira, 2017

Decarbonization of public buses in Sweden is receiving attention more
than efficiency improvement. With more electrification, electricity prices
go up and affordability can worsen for the poor unless redistributive
policies are in place.

/

End Poverty in all its Forms Everywhere (1.1/1.4/1.a/1.b)

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Yu, 2015



Woodcock et al., 2009; Creutzig et al., 2012; Haines and Dora, 2012;
Saunders et al., 2013; Shaw et al., 2014, 2017; Chakrabarti and Shin,
2017; Hwang et al., 2017; McCollum et al., 2018

[+2]

Clifton, 2004; Hillier, 2011; Krukowski et al., 2013; LeDoux and
Vojnovic, 2013; Ghosh-Dastidar et al., 2014; Zenk et al., 2015; Lowery
et al., 2016



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Equal Safe Access to Educational Institutions (4.1/4.2/4.3/4.5)

Dodson et al., 2004; Cascajo et al., 2017



Confidence

Poor road quality affects school travel safety, so collaborative efforts
need to address safety issues from a dual perspective, first by working
to change the existing infrastructure and use of roads to better address
the traffic problems that children currently face walking to school, and
then to better situate schools and control the roadways and land uses
around them in the future.



Score
Evidence
Agreement
Road Traffic Accidents (3.4/3.6)

Active travel modes, such as walking and cycling, represent strategies
not only for boosting energy efficiency but also, potentially, for
improving health and well-being (e.g., lowering rates of diabetes,
obesity, heart disease, dementia and some cancers). However, a risk
associated with these measures is that they could increase rates of road
traffic accidents, if the existing infrastructure is unsatisfactory. Overall
health effects will depend on the severity of the injuries sustained from
these potential accidents relative to the health benefits accruing from
increased exercise (McCollum et al., 2018).



Interaction

Low-income community residents (non-white) who lack local access to
affordable, quality sources of nutrition have to travel outside their
immediate neighbourhood to find better sources of food to feed
themselves and their families. Lack of locally available healthy food
often exacerbates the rates of obesity in many of these communities
since it is often difficult or expensive to travel long distances on a
regular basis to shop for food.

[+2,1]

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Ensure Access to Safe Nutritious Food (2.1/2.2)

The costs of daily mobility can have important economic stress impacts,
not only impacting carless families with low-mobility, but in countries
with high
levels of car dependence, the costs of motoring can be burdensome,
raising questions of affordability for households with limited economic
resources. During economic crisis, public transport authorities may react
by reducing levels of service and increasing fares, likely exacerbating the
situation for low-income households.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Equal Right to Economic Resources Access Basic Services
(1.1/1.4/1.a/1.b)

Social-Demand (continued)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

483



[+2]







Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)



/

[+2,2]






Balishter and Singh, 1991; Gohin, 2008; de Moraes et al., 2010; van der
Horst and Vermeylen, 2011; Corbera and Pascual, 2012; Rud, 2012;
Creutzig et al., 2013; Davis et al., 2013; Satolo and Bacchi, 2013; Muys
et al., 2014; Ertem et al., 2017; McCollum et al., 2018



Confidence

Balishter and Singh, 1991; Gohin, 2008; de Moraes et al., 2010; van der
Horst and Vermeylen, 2011; Corbera and Pascual, 2012; Rud, 2012;
Creutzig et al., 2013; Davis et al., 2013; Satolo and Bacchi, 2013; Muys
et al., 2014; Ertem et al., 2017; McCollum et al., 2018



Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Farm Employment and Incomes (2.3)

[0]

Score

Large-scale bioenergy production could lead to the creation of
agricultural jobs, as well as higher farm wages and more diversified
income streams for farmers. Modern energy access can make marginal
lands more cultivable, thus potentially generating on-farm jobs and
incomes; on the other hand, greater farm mechanization can also
displace labour. However, large-scale bioenergy production could alter
the structure of global agricultural markets in a way that is, potentially,
unfavourable to small-scale food producers. The distributional effects of
bioenergy production are underexplored in the literature (McCollum et
al., 2018).

[+2,2]

Interaction

Large-scale bioenergy production could lead to the creation of
agricultural jobs, as well as higher farm wages and more diversified
income streams for farmers. Modern energy access can make marginal
lands more cultivable, thus potentially generating on-farm jobs and
incomes; on the other hand, greater farm mechanization can also
displace labour. However, large-scale bioenergy production could alter
the structure of global agricultural markets in a way that is, potentially,
unfavourable to small-scale food producers. See SDG2 (McCollum et al.,
2018).

/

Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)

Riahi et al., 2012; IPCC, 2014; Hallegatte et al., 2016b; McCollum et al.,
2018

Deployment of renewable energy and improvements in energy efficiency
globally will aid climate change mitigation efforts, and this, in turn, can
help to reduce the exposure of the world's poor to climate-related
extreme events, negative health impacts and other environmental
shocks (McCollum et al., 2018).

Social-Supply

Replacing Coal

484

Non-biomass Renewables - solar, wind, hydro

5

Increased Use of Biomass

[+2]

Score




Evidence
Agreement
Air Pollution (3.9)


Confidence


[+1]







Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Vocational Trainig, Education for Sustainability (4.b/4.7)

[+2]







IPCC, 2005, 2014; Miller et al., 2007; Hertwich et al., 2008; de BestWaldhober et al., 2009; Shackley et al., 2009; Wallquist et al., 2009,
2010; Wong-Parodi and Ray, 2009; Chan and Griffiths, 2010; Veltman et
al., 2010; Epstein et al., 2011; Koornneef et al., 2011; Reiner and
Nuttall, 2011; Singh et al., 2011; Ashworth et al., 2012; Burgherr et al.,
2012; Chen et al., 2012; Asfaw et al., 2013; Corsten et al., 2013;
Einsiedel et al., 2013

Replacing coal by biomass can reduce adverse impacts of upstream
supply-chain activities, in particular local air and water pollution, and
prevent coal mining accidents. Improvements to local air pollution in
power generation compared to coal-fired power plants depend on the
technology and fuel of biomass power plants, but could be significant
when switching from outdated coal combustion technologies to state-ofthe-art biogas power generation.



Disease and Mortality (3.1/3.2/3.3/3.4), Air Pollution (3.9)
[0]

Haines et al., 2007; Nemet et al., 2010; Kaygusuz, 2011; Riahi et al.,
Anderson et al., 2017
2012; van Vliet et al., 2012; Anenberg et al., 2013; Rafaj et al., 2013;
Rao et al., 2013, 2016; West et al., 2013; Chaturvedi and Shukla, 2014;
Rose et al., 2014; Smith and Sagar, 2014; IEA, 2016; McCollum et al.,
2018

No direct interaction

Promoting most types of renewables and boosting efficiency greatly aids Decentralized renewable energy systems (e.g., home- or village-scale
the achievement of targets to reduce local air pollution and improve air solar power) can support education and vocational training.
quality; however, the order of magnitude of the effects, both in terms of
avoided emissions and monetary valuation, varies significantly between
different parts of the world. Benefits would especially accrue to those
living in the dense urban centres of rapidly developing countries.
Utilization of biomass and biofuels might not lead to any air pollution
benefits, however, depending on the control measures applied. In
addition, household air quality can be significantly improved through
lowered particulate emissions from access to modern energy services
(McCollum et al., 2018).



Interaction

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

CCS: Bioenergy

CCS: Fossil

Replacing Coal

Advanced Coal

Nuclear/Advanced Nuclear

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

[+2,2]



[0]

No direct interaction





Confidence

Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)

[0]

Score

See effects of increased bioenergy use.

/

Interaction

Social-Supply (continued)

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence









/

[+2,1]





Disease and Mortality (3.1/3.2/3.3/3.4)


Abdelouas, 2006; Cardis et al., 2006; Kaatsch et al., 2008; Al-Zoughool
and Krewski, 2009; Heinavaara et al., 2010; Schnelzer et al., 2010;
Brugge and Buchner, 2011; Moller and Mousseau, 2011; Moller et al.,
2011, 2012; Moomaw et al., 2011; UNSCEAR, 2011; Sermage-Faure et
al., 2012; Ten Hoeve and Jacobson, 2012; Tirmarche et al., 2012;
Hiyama et al., 2013; Mousseau and Moller, 2013; Smith et al., 2013;
WHO, 2013; IPCC, 2014; von Stechow et al., 2016

[0]

No direct interaction

[1]







Wang and Jaffe, 2004; Hertwich et al., 2008; Apps et al., 2010; Veltman
et al., 2010; Koornneef et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2011; Siirila et al.,
2012; Atchley et al., 2013; Corsten et al., 2013; IPCC, 2014

The use of fossil CCS implies continued adverse impacts of upstream
supply-chain activities in the coal sector, and because of lower efficiency
of CCS coal power plants, upstream impacts and local air pollution are
likely to be exacerbated. Furthermore, there is a non-negligible risk of
CO2 leakage from geological storage or the CO2 transport infrastructure
from source to sequestration location.



Disease and Mortality (3.1/3.2/3.3/3.4)

Wang and Jaffe, 2004; Hertwich et al., 2008; Apps et al., 2010; Veltman
et al., 2010; Koornneef et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2011; Siirila et al.,
2012; Atchley et al., 2013; Corsten et al., 2013; IPCC, 2014



[1]

Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Disease and Mortality (3.1/3.2/3.3/3.4)

In spite of the industry's overall safety track record, a non-negligible risk
for accidents in nuclear power plants and waste treatment facilities
remains. The long-term storage of nuclear waste is a politically fraught
subject, with no large-scale long-term storage operational worldwide.
Negative impacts from upstream uranium mining and milling are
comparable to those of coal, hence replacing fossil fuel combustion by
nuclear power would be neutral in that aspect. Increased occurrence of
childhood leukaemia in populations living within 5 km of nuclear power
plants was identified by some studies, even though a direct causal
relation to ionizing radiation could not be established and other studies
could not confirm any correlation (low evidence/agreement on this
issue).



Interaction

See literature on increased biomass use: IPCC, 2014; Muratori et al.,
2016; Dooley and Kartha, 2018



Confidence

See positive impacts of increased biomass use. At the same time, there
is a non-negligible risk of CO2 leakage both from geological formations
as well as from the transportation infrastructure from source to
sequestration locations.

[+1,2]

Farm Employment and Incomes (2.3)

[0]

Score

See increased use of biomass effects. In addition, the concern that more
bioenergy (for BECCS) necessarily leads to unacceptably high food prices
is not founded on large agreement in the literature. AR5, for example,
finds a significantly lower effect of large-scale bioenergy deployment on
food prices by mid-century than the effect of climate change on crop
yields. Also, Muratori et al. (2016) show that BECCS reduces the upward
pressure on food crop prices by lowering carbon prices and lowering the
total biomass demand in climate change mitigation scenarios. On the
other hand, competition for land use may increase food prices and
thereby increase risk of hunger. Use of agricultural residue for bioenergy
can reduce soil carbon, thereby threatening agricultural productivity.

/

Interaction

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

485

Social-Other

Agriculture and Livestock

Behavioural Response: Sustainable
Healthy Diets and Reduced Food Waste

486

Land-based GHG Reduction and Soil Carbon Sequestration

[0,1]










[+2]

Safe application of biotechnology, both conventional and modern
methods, can help to improve agricultural productivity, improving crop
adaptability and thereby catering to food security. Reducing tillage,
eliminating fallow and keeping the soil covered with residue, cover
crops or perennial vegetation helps prevent soil erosion and has the
potential to increase soil organic matter. Efficient land-management
techniques can help in increasing crop yields, and so food security issues
can be addressed. Yield projections are actually higher for developing
countries than for developed countries, reflecting the fact that they have
more 'catch-up' potential (Evenson, 1999). Action is needed throughout
the food system on moderating demand, reducing waste, improving
governance and producing more food (Godfray and Garnett, 2014).
Improving cropland management is the key to increase crop productivity
without further degrading soil and water resources (Branca et al., 2011).
CSA practices increase productivity and prioritize food security.

[+1]


[+2]

&

J



Sansoucy, 1995

With mixed-farming systems farmers can not only mitigate risks by
producing a multitude of commodities, but they can also increase the
productivity of both crops and animals in a more profitable and
sustainable way.



Poverty Reduction and Minimize Exposure to Risk (1.5)
[+2]

&&&&

JJJJ



Fostering transitions towards more productive livestock production
systems targeting land-use change appears to be the most efficient lever
to deliver food availability outcomes. Genomic selection should be able
to at least double the rate of genetic gain in the dairy industry. Given
the prevalence of mixed crop-livestock systems in many parts of the
world, closer integration of crops and livestock in such systems can give
rise to increased productivity and increased soil fertility (Thornton,
2010). Managing the indirect effects of livestock systems intensification
is critical for the sustainability of the global food system: such as
improving productivity and the close link to land sparing (Herrero and
Thornton, 2013). In East Africa pastoralists have shifted from cows to
camels, which are better adapted to survive periods of water scarcity
and able to consistently provide more milk (Steenwerth et al., 2014).
Scenarios where zero human-edible concentrate feed is used for
livestock, soil erosion potential reduces by 12%.
Thornton, 2010, 2013; Herrero and Thornton, 2013; Havlik et al., 2014;
Steenwerth et al., 2014; Schader et al., 2015



Food Security, Promoting Sustainable Agriculture (2.1/2.4/2a)



Score
Evidence
Agreement
Tobacco Control (3.a/3.a.1)


Confidence

[+2,2]






&&

JJ

Ensure Healthy Lives (3.c)
[+2,-2]

Sansoucy, 1995; Burton, 2007

Biodigestion, which has positive public health aspects, particularly
where toilets are coupled with the biodigester; anaerobic conditions kill
pathogenic organisms as well as digestive toxins. Separation processes
can improve or worsen health risks related to food crops or to livestock.

/



Growing crops such as cassava, sorghum and millet, even in harsh
conditions, is important to the diets of very poor people. Policy
scenarios show that reduced research support, delayed industrialization,
delayed biotechnology and climate change will delay progress in
reducing childhood malnutrition. The global effects are small, but local
effects for some countries, e.g., Bangladesh and Nigeria, are significant
(Evenson, 1999).

/

Ensure Healthy Lives (3.c)

Garnett, 2011; Bustamante et al., 2014

Consume fewer foods with low nutritional value, e.g., alcohol (Garnett,
2011). Demand-side measures aimed at reducing the proportion of
livestock products in human diets, where the consumption of animal
products is higher than recommended, are associated with multiple
health benefits, especially in industrialized countries (Bustamante et al.,
2014).



Interaction

Branca et al., 2011; Bogdanski, 2012; Scherr et al., 2012; Vermeulen et Evenson, 1999; West and Post, 2002; Johnson et al., 2007; Branca et al., Evenson, 1999; Godfray and Garnett, 2014
al., 2012; Campbell et al., 2014; Lipper et al., 2014; Mbow et al., 2014; 2011; McCarthy et al., 2011; Behnassi et al., 2014; Campbell et al.,
Steenwerth et al., 2014; Hammond et al., 2017
2014; Godfray and Garnett, 2014; Harvey et al., 2014; Lipper et al.,
2014

Food Security, Promoting Sustainable Agriculture (2.1/2.4/2a)



[+2]



Many CSA interventions aim to improve rural livelihoods, thereby
contributing to poverty alleviation. Agroforestry or integrated
crop-livestock-biogas systems can substitute costly, external inputs,
saving on household expenditures - or even lead to the selling of some
of the products, providing the farmer with extra income, leading to
increased adaptive capacity (Bogdanski, 2012).

[+2]





Curbing consumer waste of major food crops (i.e., wheat, rice and
vegetables) and meats (i.e., beef, pork and poultry) in China, USA and
India alone could feed ~413 million people per year (West et al., 2014).
One billion extra people could be fed if food crop losses could be halved
(Kummu et al., 2012). Reducing waste, especially from meat and dairy,
could play a role in delivering food security and reduce the need for
sustainable intensification (Smith, 2013). Dietary change toward global
healthy diets could improve nutritional health, food security and reduce
emissions.
Garnett, 2011; Beddington et al., 2012; Kummu et al., 2012; Smith,
2013; Bajelj et al., 2014; Tilman and Clark, 2014; West et al., 2014;
Lamb et al., 2016


Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)

IPCC, 2014

Cutting livestock consumption can increase food security for some if
land grows food not feed, but can also undermine livelihoods and
culture where livestock has long been the best use of land, such as in
parts of Sub-Saharan Africa.

~ /

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)
Food Security, Promoting Sustainable Agriculture (2.1/2.4/2a)

5

Greenhouse Gas Reduction from Improved Livestock
Production and Manure Management Systems

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

/

[+2,2]





[0]

No direct interaction

Steenwerth et al., 2014; Lamb et al., 2016

Science-based action within CSA is required to integrate data sets and
sound metrics for testing hypotheses about feedback regarding climate,
weather data products and agricultural productivity, such as the
nonlinearity of temperature effects on crop yield and the assessment of
trade-offs and synergies that arise from different agricultural
intensification strategies (Steenwerth et al., 2014). Low commodity
prices have led to declining investment in research and development,
farmer education, etc. (Lamb et al., 2016).



Confidence

Ensure Inclusive and Quality Education (4.4/4.7)

Interaction

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

[+2]





Score
Evidence
Agreement
Poverty Reduction (1.5)


Confidence

/

[+1,2]






Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Food Security, Promoting Sustainable Agriculture (2.1/2.4/2a)

[+2,2]





Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.3/1.4)


/

[+1,1]


Food Security (2.1)




Turpie et al., 2015; Epstein and Theuer, 2017; Katila et al., 2017; Dooley
and Kartha, 2018









[+3]




Food Production (2.3/2.4)


Lampitt et al., 2008; Smetacek and Naqvi, 2008; Williamson et al., 2012

[0]

No direct interaction

[0]
No direct interaction

Brander et al., 2012; Ahmed et al., 2017a, 2017b; Duarte et al., 2017;
Sondak et al., 2017; Vierros, 2017; Zhang et al., 2017





Zomer et al., 2008; Schirmer and Bull, 2014; Lamb et al., 2016



[+1,1]

Food Security (2.2/2.3)

No direct interaction

OIF can have different implications on fish stocks and aquaculture, and
it might actually increase food availability for fish stocks (increasing
yields); but potentially at the cost of reducing the yields of fisheries
outside the enhancement region by depleting other nutrients.

/

[0]

Avoiding loss of mangroves and maintaining the 2000 stock could save
a value of ecosystem services from mangroves in South East Asia
including fisheries; seaweed aquaculture will provide employment;
traditional management systems provide livelihoods for local
communities; greening of aquaculture can increase income and wellbeing; and mariculture is a promising approach for China.

[+3]

Poverty and Development (1.1/1.2/1.5)

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Avoiding loss of mangroves and maintaining the 2000 stock could save
a value of ecosystem services from mangroves in South East Asia of
approximately 2.16 billion USD until 2050 (2007 prices), with a 95%
prediction interval of 1.58-2.76 billion USD (case study area South East
Asia); seaweed aquaculture will enhance carbon uptake and provide
employment; traditional management systems provide benefits for blue
carbon and support livelihoods for local communities; greening of
aquaculture can significantly enhance carbon storage; PES schemes
could help capture the benefits derived from multiple ecosystem services
beyond carbon sequestration.



[0]

[0]

Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) can have different implications CDM can have different implications on local to regional food security
on local community livelihoods. For example, willingness to adopt
and local community livelihoods.
afforestation is influenced in particular by Australian landholder's
perceptions of its potential to provide a diversified income stream, and
its impacts on flexibility of land management ; land sparing would have
far reaching implications for the UK countryside and would affect
landowners and rural communities ; and livelihoods could be threatened
if subsistence agriculture is targeted .
Zomer et al., 2008; Schirmer and Bull, 2014; Lamb et al., 2016; Dooley Zomer et al., 2008; Dooley and Kartha, 2018
and Kartha, 2018

/

Katila et al., 2017

Partnerships between local forest managers, community enterprises and Food security may lead to the conversion of productive land under
private sector companies can support local economies and livelihoods, forest, including community forests, into agricultural production. In a
and boost regional and national economic growth.
similar fashion, the production of biomass for energy purposes (SDG 7)
may reduce land available for food production and/or for community
forest activities . Efforts by the Government of Zambia to reduce
emissions by REDD+ have contributed erosion control, ecotourism and
pollination valued at 2.5% of the country's GDP.



Interaction

Social-Other (continued)

Forest

Oceans

Reduced Deforestation, REDD+

Afforestation and Reforestation

Behavioural
Response
(Responsible

Ocean Iron Fertilization

Blue Carbon

Enhanced
Weathering

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence











[1]







Promote Knowledge and Skill to Promote SD (4.7)

Katila et al., 2017

[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Schirmer and Bull, 2014



[+1]

Local forest users learn to understand laws, regulations and policies
which facilitate their participation in society. Education and capacity
building provide technical skill and knowledge (Katila et al., 2017).



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Ensure Inclusive and Quality Education (4.4/4.7)

Jones and McDermott, 2018



Confidence

Most landholders reported having low levels of knowledge about tree
planting for carbon sequestration - particularly available programmes,
prices and markets, and government rules and regulations .

[+1]

Ensure Healthy Lives (3.c)

[0]

Score

Urban trees are increasingly seen as a way to reduce harmful air
pollutants and therefore improve cardio-respiratory health.



Interaction

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

487

Interaction

Social 2-Demand

Industry

Accelerating Energy
Efficiency Improvement

488

Low-carbon Fuel
Switch

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence
[+1]





[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Apeaning and Thollander, 2013; Johansson and Thollander, 2018

There is need for skill in managing in-house energy efficiency.
Sometimes ESCOs also help. Energy audits, but many times absence of
skill acts as barrier for energy efficiency improvement. In many
countries, especially developing countries, these act as barriers.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Knowledge and Skills Needed to Promote SD (4.7)

5

Decarbonization/CCS/CCU

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence
[+2]





Score
Evidence
Agreement
Global Partnership (17.6/17.7)



Confidence

[+2]





Global Partnership (17.6/17.7)


[+2]





Global Partnership (17.6/17.7)


Wesseling et al., 2017; Griffin et al., 2018

EPI plants are capital intensive and are mostly operated by
multinationals with long investment cycles. In developed countries new
innovation investments are happening in brown fields. Such large
innovation investments need strong collaboration among
partners/competitors which can be facilitated by public funds. They
happen at national and supranational scales and across sectors, needs
fresh revisit at Intellectual Property Rights issues. Global production of
bio-based polymers increasingly need public support and incentives to
push forward.



Abdul Quader et al., 2016

Ultra-low carbon steel making and breakthrough technologies are under
trial across many countries and helping in enhancing the learning.



Thollander, 2018; Lawrence et al., 2018

A driving force for energy efficiency is collaboration among companies,
networks, experience sharing and management tools. Sharing among
countries can help accelerate managerial action. Absence of
information, budgetary funding, lack of access to capital, etc. are
i
t t and
b iThollander,
t
ti 2013;
C Griffin
ti et al.,
t 2018;
i
lJohansson
l
l
Apeaning
and



Interaction

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to Modern Lowcarbon Energy

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement

Buildings

Behavioural Response

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[1,1]












[+2]






Capacity and Accountability (16.1/16.3/16.5/16.6/16.7/16.8)

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence



[+2]







Enhance Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development
(17.4)

Interaction

Chowdhury, 2010; Dinkelman, 2011; Kaygusuz, 2011; Kohlin et al.,
2011; Clancy et al., 2012; Haves, 2012; Matinga, 2012; Anenberg et al.,
2013; Pachauri and Rao, 2013; Burney et al., 2017; McCollum et al.,
2018

Improved access to electric lighting can improve women's safety and
girls' school enrolment. Cleaner cooking fuel and lighting access can
reduce health risks and drudgery, which women disproportionately face.
Access to modern energy services has the potential to empower women
by improving their income-earning and entrepreneurial opportunities
and reducing drudgery. Participating in energy supply chains can
increase women's opportunities and agency and improve business
outcomes.

Women's Safety and Worth (5.1/5.2/5.4)/Opportunities for
Women (5.1/5.5)

[+1]



[0]

No direct interaction

[+2]









[+2]







Promote Transfer and Diffusion of Technology (17.6/17.7)

Acemoglu, 2009; Tabellini, 2010; Acemoglu et al., 2014; ICSU and ISSC, Kim and Sun, 2017
2015; McCollum et al., 2018

Institutions that are effective, accountable and transparent are needed Green building technology in Kazakhstan was based on transfer of
at all levels of government (local to national to international) for
knowledge among various parties.
providing energy access, promoting modern renewables and boosting
efficiency. Strengthening the participation of developing countries in
international institutions (e.g., international energy agencies, UN
organizations, WTO, regional development banks and beyond) will be
important for issues related to energy trade, foreign direct investment,
labour migration, and knowledge and technology transfer. Reducing
corruption, where it exists, will help these bodies and related domestic
institutions maximize their societal impacts. Limiting armed conflict and
violence will aid most efforts related to sustainable development,
including progress in the energy dimension.



Capacity and Accountability (16.1/16.3/16.5/16.6/16.7/16.8)

Acemoglu, 2009; Tabellini, 2010; Acemoglu et al., 2014; ICSU and ISSC, Shah et al., 2015
2015; McCollum et al., 2018

/



Confidence

Dinkelman, 2011; Casillas and Kammen, 2012; Pachauri et al., 2012;
Cayla and Osso, 2013; Hirth and Ueckerdt, 2013; Pueyo et al., 2013;
Jakob and Steckel, 2014; Fay et al., 2015; Cameron et al., 2016;
Hallegatte et al., 2016b; McCollum et al., 2018



[+2]

Score
Evidence
Agreement
Environmental Justice (16.7)

Consumption perspectives strengthen environmental justice discourse
(as it claims to be a more just way of calculating global and local
environmental effects) while possibly also increasing the participatory
environmental discourse.
Hult and Larsson, 2016



Interaction

Bhojvaid et al., 2014; Berrueta et al., 2017



Confidence

Institutions that are effective, accountable and transparent are needed Implementing refrigerant transition and energy efficiency improvement
policies in parallel for room ACs, roughly doubles the benefit of either
at all levels of government (local to national to international) for
policy implemented in isolation.
providing energy access, promoting modern renewables and boosting
efficiency. Strengthening the participation of developing countries in
international institutions (e.g., international energy agencies, UN
organizations, WTO, regional development banks and beyond) will be
important for issues related to energy trade, foreign direct investment,
labour migration and knowledge and technology transfer. Reducing
corruption, where it exists, will help these bodies and related domestic
institutions maximize their societal impacts. Limiting armed conflict and
violence will aid most efforts related to sustainable development,
including progress in the energy dimension.



Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Energy efficiency measures and the provision of energy access can free
up resources that can then be put towards other productive uses (e.g.,
educational and employment opportunities), especially for women and
children in poor, rural areas. The distributional costs of new energy
policies are dependent on instrument design. If costs fall
disproportionately on the poor, then this could work against the
promotion of social, economic and political equality for all. The impacts
of energy efficiency measures and policies on inequality can be both
positive, if they reduce energy costs, or negative, if mandatory standards
increase the need for purchasing more expensive equipment and
appliances.

[+1]

[0]

Score

Empowerment and Inclusion (10.1/10.2/10.3/10.4)

Interaction

Efficient stoves lead to empowerment of rural and indigenous women.



Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment (5.1/5.4)

Interaction

Social 2-Demand (continued)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

489

[+1]







[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Crane, 2007; Rogalsky, 2010

The woman's average trip to work differs markedly from the man's
average trip. Working-poor women rely on extensive social networks
creating communities of spatial necessity, bartering for basic needs to
overcome transportation constraints. Women earn lower wages and so
are less likely to justify longer commutes. Many women need to manage
dual roles as workers and mothers. Women tend to perform multipurpose commuting, combining both work and household needs .



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Recognize Women's Unpaid Work (5.1/5.4)/Opportunities for
Women (5.1/5.5)

Social 2-Demand (continued)

Transport

Behavioural response

490

Accelerating Energy Efficiency
Improvement

[+2]




Score
Evidence
Agreement
Reduce Inequality (10.2)


Confidence











[+2]







Help Promote Global Partnership (17.1/17.3/17.5/17.6/17.7)

SLoCaT, 2017

/

[+1, 1]







Responsive, Inclusive, Participatory Decision-making (16.7)

[+2]







SLoCaT, 2017

Projects aiming at resilient transport infrastructure development (e.g.
C40 Cities Clean Bus Declaration, UITP Declaration on Climate
Leadership, Cycling Delivers on the Global Goals, Global Sidewalk
Challenge) are happening through multi-stakeholder coalitions.



Help Promote Global Partnership (17.1/17.3/17.5/17.6/17.7)

SLoCaT, 2017





Aggarwal, 2017; AlSabbagh et al., 2017





Projects aiming at resilient transport infrastructure development and
technology adoption (e.g. C40 Cities Clean Bus Declaration, UITP
Declaration on Climate Leadership, Cycling Delivers on the Global
Goals, Global Sidewalk Challenge) are happening through multistakeholder coalitions.

[+2]

[+2]

Projects aiming at resilient transport infrastructure development (e.g.,
C40 Cities Clean Bus Declaration, UITP Declaration on Climate
Leadership, Cycling Delivers on the Global Goals, Global Sidewalk
Challenge) are happening through multi-stakeholder coalitions.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Help Promote Global Partnership (17.1/17.3/17.5/17.6/17.7)

In transport mitigation it is necessary to conduct needs assessments and
stakeholder consultation to determine plausible challenges, prior to
introducing desired planning reforms. Further, the involved personnel
should actively engage transport-based stakeholders during policy
identification and its implementation to achieve the desired results. User
behaviour and stakeholder integration are key for successful transport
policy implementation.



Responsive, Inclusive, Participatory Decision-making (16.7)

CAF, 2017; SLoCaT, 2017

Colenbrander et al., 2016





Figueroa et al., 2014; Lucas and Pangbourne, 2014





Formal transport infrastructure improvement in many cities in
developing countries leads to eviction from informal settlements; need
for appropriate redistributive policies and cooperation and partnerships
with all stakeholders.

[+2]

[+1, 1]

With behavioural change towards walking for short distances,
pedestrian safety on the road might reduce, unless public policy is
appropriately formulated. Prevalence of high levels of triple forms of
informality, in jobs, housing and transportation, are responsible for low
productivity and low standards of living, and are a major challenge for
policies targeting urban growth in Latin America.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Accountable and Transparent Institutions at All Levels
(16.6/16.8)

The equity impacts of climate change mitigation measures for transport,
and indeed of transport policy intervention overall, are poorly
understood by policymakers. This is in large part because standard
assessment of these impacts is not a statutory requirement of current
policymaking. Managing transport energy demand growth will have to
be advanced alongside efforts in passenger travel towards reducing the
deep inequalities in access to transport services that currently affect the
poor worldwide.



No direct interaction

Reduce Inequality (10.2)

[0]

The equity impacts of climate change mitigation measures for transport,
and indeed of transport policy intervention overall, are poorly
understood by policymakers. This is in large part because standard
assessment of these impacts is not a statutory requirement of current
policymaking. Managing transport energy demand growth will have to
be advanced alongside efforts in passenger travel towards reducing the
deep inequalities in access to transport services that currently affect the
poor worldwide. Free provision of roads and parking spaces converts
vast amounts of public land and capital into under-priced space for cars,
in extreme cases like Los Angeles, USA, roads and streets free for
parking and driving are 20% of land area; as governments give drivers
free land, people drive more than they would otherwise. High levels of
car dependence and the costs of motoring can be burdensome, and lead
to increasing debt, raising questions of affordability for households with
limited resources, particularly low-income houses located in suburban
areas
Figueroa et al., 2014; Lucas and Pangbourne, 2014; Walks, 2015;
Manville, 2017; Belton Chevallier et al., 2018



Interaction

5

Improved Access and Fuel Switch
to Modern Low-carbon Energy

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

CCS: Fossil

Replacing Coal

Advanced Coal

CCS:
Bioenergy

Nuclear/Advance
d Nuclear

Increased use
of Biomass

Non-biomass Renewables - solar, wind, hydro





[+2]








/~

[+2,0]







[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

[1]





Reduce Illicit Arms Trade (16.4)

No direct interaction



[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Adamantiades and Kessides, 2009; Rogner, 2010; Sagan, 2011; von
Hippel et al., 2011, 2012; Yim and Li, 2013; IPCC, 2014

Continued use of nuclear power poses a constant risk of proliferation.



[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

UN, 1989; Ramaker et al., 2003; Clarke et al., 2009; NCE, 2015; Riahi et
al., 2015, 2017; Eis et al., 2016; O'Neill et al., 2017; McCollum et al.,
2018



Islar et al., 2017

[+1]

Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
International Cooperation (All Goals)

Walker and Devine-Wright, 2008; Cass et al., 2010; Cumbers, 2012;
Kunze and Becker, 2015; McCollum et al., 2018



Interaction

Schwerhoff and Sy, 2017



Confidence

International cooperation (in policy) and collaboration (in science) is
required for the protection of shared resources. Fragmented approaches
have been shown to be more costly. Specific to SDG7, to achieve the
targets for energy access, renewables and efficiency, it will be critical
that all countries: (i) are able to mobilize the necessary financial
resources (e.g., via taxes on fossil energy, sustainable financing, foreign
direct investment, financial transfers from industrialized to developing
countries); (ii) are willing to disseminate knowledge and share
innovative technologies between each other; (iii) follow recognized
international trade rules while at the same time ensuring that the least
developed countries are able to take part in that trade; (iv) respect each
other's policy space and decisions; (v) forge new partnerships between
their public and private entities and within civil society; and (vi) support
the collection of high-quality, timely and reliable data relevant to
furthering their missions. There is some disagreement in the literature
on the effect of some of the above strategies, such as free trade.
Regarding international agreements, 'no-regrets options', where all
sides gain through cooperation, are seen as particularly beneficial (e.g.,
nuclear test ban treaties) (McCollum et al., 2018).



Evidence
Agreement
Energy Justice

The energy justice framework serves as an important decision-making
tool in order to understand how different principles of justice can inform
energy systems and policies. Islar et al. (2017) state that off-grid and
micro-scale energy development offers an alternative path to fossil-fuel
use and top-down resource management as they democratize the grid
and increase marginalized communities' access to renewable energy,
education and health care.



Score

Interaction

Decentralized renewable energy systems (e.g., home- or village-scale
solar power) can enable a more participatory, democratic process for
managing energy-related decisions within communities.

[+1]

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Empowerment and Inclusion (10.1/10.2/10.3/10.4)

Decentralized renewable energy systems (e.g., home- or village-scale
solar power) can reduce the burden on girls and women of procuring
traditional biomass.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment (5.1/5.4)

Social 2-Supply

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

491

Interaction
[0]

Score

Evidence

Agreement

Confidence





/~

[+1,0]








/~

[+1,0]






Patel et al., 2016



Patel et al., 2016



Livestock ownership is increasing women's decision-making and
economic power within both the household and the community. Access
to and control and management of small ruminants, grazing areas and
feed resources empower women and lead to an overall positive impact
on the welfare of the household.

[+2,0]

Most of the animal farming activities such as fodder collection and
feeding are performed by women. Alongside the considerable
involvement and contribution of women, gender inequalities are
pervasive in Indian villages in terms of accessing natural resources,
extension services, marketing opportunities and financial services as
well as in exercising their decision-making powers. Therefore, there is a
need to correct gender bias in the farming sector. Efforts are needed to
increase the capacity of women to negotiate with confidence and meet
their strategic needs. Access to and control and management of small
ruminants, grazing areas and feed resources empower women and lead
to an overall positive impact on the welfare of the household.

/~

Equal Access to Economic Resources, Promote Empowerment Empower Economic and Political Inclusion of All, Irrespective
of Women (5.5/5.a/5.b)
of Sex (10.2)

Nelson et al., 2002; Demetriades and Esplen, 2009; Terry, 2009



Denton, 2002; Nelson et al., 2002; Morton, 2007; Demetriades and
Esplen, 2009; Terry, 2009; Bernier et al., 2013; Jost et al., 2016

[+2,0]
In many rural societies women are side-lined from decisions regarding
agriculture even when male household heads are absent, and they often
lack access to important inputs such as irrigation water, credit, tools
and fertilizer. To be effective, agricultural mitigation strategies need to
take these and other aspects of local gender relations into account
(Terry, 2009). Women's key role in maintaining biodiversity, through
conserving and domesticating wild edible plant seed, and in food crop
breeding, is not sufficiently recognized in agricultural and economic
policymaking; nor is the importance of biodiversity to sustainable rural
livelihoods in the face of predicted climate changes (Nelson et al.,
2002).

/~

Confidence

Empower Economic and Political Inclusion of All, Irrespective
of Sex (10.2)

Agreement

Equal Access, Empowerment of Women (5.5)

Evidence

No direct interaction

[0]

Score

No direct interaction

Interaction

Many programmes for CSA have been used to empower women and to
improve gender equality. Women often have an especially important
role to play in adaptation, because of their gendered indigenous
knowledge on matters such as agriculture (Terry, 2009). Without access
to land, credit and agricultural technologies, women farmers face major
constraints in their capacity to diversify into alternative livelihoods
(Demetriades and Esplen, 2008).

Social 2-Other

Agriculture and Livestock

Behavioural Response: Sustainable Healthy
Diets and Reduced Food Waste

492

Land-based Greenhouse Gas Reduction and Soil
Carbon Sequestration

5

Greenhouse Gas Reduction from Improved
Livestock Production and Manure
Management Systems

Evidence

Agreement
p

[+1,1]



making (16.6/16.7/16.a)

Score


Confidence

Decision makers should try to integrate agricultural, environmental and
nutritional objectives through appropriate policy measures to achieve
sustainable healthy diets coupled with reduction in food waste. It is
surprising that politicians and policymakers demonstrate little regarding
the need to have strategies to reduce meat consumption and to
encourage more sustainable eating practices .

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Resource Mobilization and Strengthen Partnership
(17 1/17 14)
/
[+1,1]




[0,1]













[+2]







Improve Domestic Capacity for Tax Collection (17.1)

Behnassi et al., 2014; Lipper et al., 2014; Steenwerth et al., 2014

Herrero and Thornton, 2013; Havlik et al., 2014





Havlik et al., 2014





The role of livestock system transitions in emission reductions depends
on the level of the carbon price and which emissions sector is targeted
by the policies (Havlik et al., 2014). Mechanisms for affecting
behavioural change in livestock systems need to be better understood by
implementing combinations of incentives and taxes simultaneously in
different parts of the world (Herrero and Thornton, 2013).

[+1]

[+2]

CSA requires more careful adjustment of agricultural practices to natural
conditions, a knowledge-intensive approach, huge financial investment
and policy and institutional innovation, etc. Besides private investment,
quality of public investment is also important (Behnass et al., 2014).
Sources of climate finance for CSA in developing countries include
bilateral donors and multilateral financial institutions, besides public
sector finance. CSA is committed to new ways of engaging in
participatory research and partnerships with producers (Steenwerth et
al., 2014).



Resource Mobilization and Strengthen Multi-stakeholder
Partnership
(17.1/ 17.3/17.5/17.17)

To minimize the economic and social cost, policies should target
emissions at their source--on the supply side--rather than on the
demand side as supply-side policies have lower calorie cost than
demand-side policies. The role of livestock system transitions in
emission reductions depends on the level of the carbon price and which
emissions sector is targeted by the policies.



Responsible Decision-making (16.7)

Behnassi et al., 2014; Bustamante et al., 2014; Godfray and Garnett,
2014; Lipper et al., 2014; Steenwerth et al., 2014

Action is needed throughout the food system for improving governance
and producing more food (Godfray and Garnett, 2014). CSA requires
policy intervention for careful adjustment of agricultural practices to
natural conditions, a knowledge-intensive approach, huge financial
investment, etc., so having strong institutional frameworks is very
important. The main source of climate finance for CSA in developing
countries is the public sector. Lack of institutional capacity (as a means
for securing creation of equal institutions among social groups and
individuals) can reduce feasibility of AFOLU mitigation measures in the
near future, especially in areas where small-scale farmers or forest users
are the main stakeholders (Bustamante et al., 2014).

~ /

Build Effective, Accountable and Inclusive Institutions
(16.6/16.7/16.8)

Garnett, 2011; Dagevos and Voordouw, 2013; Bajelj et al., 2014; Lamb Garnett, 2011; Dagevos and Voordouw, 2013
et al., 2016

Appropriate incentives to reduce food waste may require some policy
innovation and experimentation, but a strong commitment for devising
and monitoring them seems essential.
A financial incentive to minimize waste could be created through
effective taxation (e.g., by taxing foods with the highest wastage rates,
or by increasing taxes on waste disposal). Decision makers should try to
integrate agricultural, environmental and nutritional objectives through
appropriate policy measures to achieve sustainable healthy diets
coupled with reduction in food waste. It is surprising that politicians and
policymakers demonstrate little regarding the need to have strategies to
reduce meat consumption and to encourage more sustainable eating
practices.

/

Interaction
g

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Behavioural Response (Responsible
Sourcing)

Afforestation and Reforestation

Forest

Reduced Deforestation, REDD+

[+2]








[+2]






[+1]









[+1]






Empower Economic and Political Inclusion of All, Irrespective
of Sex (10.2)

[0]

UN-Women et al., 2015

No direct interaction

[0]

UN-Women et al., 2015

No direct interaction

Many women in developing countries are already prominently engaged Women's participation in the decision-making process of forest
in economic sectors related to climate adaptation and mitigation efforts management, for example, has been shown to increase rates of
such as agriculture, renewable energy and forest management and are reforestation while decreasing the illegal extraction of forest products.
important drivers and leaders in climate responses that are innovative
and effective, benefitting not only their families but also their wider
communities. Women's participation in the decision-making process of
forest management, for example, has been shown to increase rates of
reforestation while decreasing the illegal extraction of forest products.



Opportunities for Women (5.1/5.5)







[+2]







Resource Mobilization and Strengthen Partnership
(17.1/17.14)

Miles and Kapos, 2008; Bustamante et al., 2014; Andrew, 2017; Bastos
Lima et al., 2017; Katila et al., 2017

[+1]






Indonesian factories may seek advantages through non-price
competition--perhaps by highlighting decent working conditions or the
existence of a union--or to see trade associations or government
agencies promoting the country as a responsible sourcing location
(Bartley, 2010). In the absence of domestic legal instruments providing
incentives to improve sustainability of sourcing, it appears that
initiatives to engage the major importing enterprises in developing
responsible sourcing practices and policies is a practical approach.
Unless initiatives involve all the major importers, they are unlikely to be
successful since the high costs associated with accreditation would
increase production costs for these firms relative to their competitors
(Huang et al., 2013).
Bartley, 2010; Huang et al., 2013



Epstein and Theuer, 2017

[+1]







Huang et al., 2013; Sikkema et al., 2014

Private certification initiatives for wood product and biomass sourcing
may extend their schemes with criteria for 'leakage' (external GHG
effects). Also recycling of waste wood in pellets is not yet practiced, due
to unclear rules in the EU Waste Directive about overseas shipping
(Sikkema et al., 2014). Engagement of Chinese government and private
sector stakeholders in supply-country sustainability initiatives may be
the best way to support this gradual process of improvement. Although
carrying out due diligence in timber sourcing can require considerable
internal resources, it may be substantially less of a financial burden than
the potential fines and reputational damage resulting from sourcing
unknown or controversial timber (Huang et al., 2013).



Finance and Trade (17.1/17.10)





Responsible Decision-making (16.7)





Financing at the national and international level is required to grow
more seedlings/sapling, restore land, create awareness and education
factsheets, provide training to local communities regarding the benefits
of afforestation and reforestation. Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol
further sets a Clean Development Mechanism through which countries
in Annex I earn `certified emissions reductions' through projects
implemented in developing countries (Montanarella and Alva, 2015).
Afforestation and reforestation in India are being carried out under
various programmes, namely social forestry initiated in the early 1980s,
the Joint Forest Management Programme initiated in 1990, afforestation
under National Afforestation and Eco-development Board programmes
since 1992, and private farmer and industry initiated plantation forestry.
If the current rate of afforestation and reforestation is assumed to
continue, the carbon stock could increase by 11% by 2030
(Ravindranath et al 2008)
Ravindranath et al., 2008; Kibria, 2015; Montanarella and Alva, 2015

[+1]

[+1,1]

To provide finance and technology to developing countries to support
emissions reductions. Be supported by adequate and predictable
financial and technology support, including support for capacity building
. Partnerships in the form of significant aid money from, e.g., Norway,
other bilateral donors and the World Bank's Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (FCPF) are forthcoming . Estimates of opportunity cost for
REDD+ are very low. Lower costs and/or higher carbon prices could
combine to protect more forests, including those with lower carbon
content. Conversely, where the cost of action is high, a large amount of
additional funding would be required for the forest to be protected
(Miles and Kapos, 2008). Forest governance is another central aspect in
recent studies, including debate on decentralization of forest
management, logging concessions in public-owned commercially
valuable forests and timber certification, primarily in temperate forests .
Partnerships between local forest managers, community enterprises and
private sector companies can support local economies and livelihoods
and boost regional and national economic growth .

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Resource Mobilization and Strengthen Multi-stakeholder
Partnership
(17.1/ 17.3/17.5/17.17)

Land-related mitigation, such as biofuel production, as well as
conservation and reforestation action can increase competition for land
and natural resources, so these measures should be accompanied by
complementary policies. (Quoted from Epstein and Theur, 2017)



Responsible Decision-making (16.7)

Bustamante et al., 2014; Bastos Lima et al., 2015, 2017



Bastos Lima et al., 2017; Katila et al., 2017



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement
Confidence
g
p
Build Effective, Accountable and Inclusive Institutions,
Responsible Decision-making (16.6/16.7/16.8)

Brown, 2011; Larson et al., 2014; Katila et al., 2017



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Reduced Inequality, Empowerment and Inclusion
(10.1/10.2/10.3/10.4)

Institutional building (National Forest Monitoring Systems, Safeguard
Information Systems, etc.), with full and effective participation of all
relevant countries . REDD+ actions also deliver non-carbon benefits (e.g.
local socioeconomic benefits, governance improvements). Forest
governance is another central aspect in recent studies, including the
debate on decentralization of forest management, logging concessions
in public-owned commercially valuable forests and timber certification,
primarily in temperate forests .



Confidence

Urges developed countries to support, through multilateral and bilateral
channels, the development of REDD+ national strategies or action plans
and implementation . Girls and women have an important role in
forestry activities, related to fuel-wood, forest-food and medicine. Their
empowerment contributes to sustainable forestry as well as reducing
inequality .

[+1,1]

Score
Evidence
Agreement
Opportunities for Women (5.1/5.5)

Women have been less involved in REDD+ initiative (pilot project)
design decisions and processes than men. Girls and women have an
important role in forestry activities, related to fuel-wood, forest-food
and pharmaceutical. Their empowerment contributes to sustainable
forestry as well as reducing inequality .

/

Interaction

Social 2-Other (continued)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

493

Blue Carbon

Oceans

494

Enhanced
Weathering

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Interaction

5

Ocean Iron
Fertilization

Social 2-Other (continued)

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Interaction
g

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement
p

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Decarbonisation/CCS/CCU

Low-carbon Fuel Switch

Industry

Accelerating Energy Efficiency
Improvement

[+2,1]






[+1]













[+2]








[1]







Griffin et al., 2018

Wesseling et al., 2017



No direct interaction

Confidence

Conserve and Sustainably Use Ocean (14.1/14.5)

[0]

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Meldrum et al., 2013; Byers et al., 2016; Fricko et al., 2016; Brandl et
al., 2017



Sustainable Production and Consumption (12.1/12.6/12.a)

Liu and Bai, 2014; Lieder and Rashid, 2016; Stahel, 2016; Supino et al.,
2016; Fan et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2017; Zeng et al., 2017

[+2]

[0]

Score

EPI plants are capital intensive and are mostly operated by
CCU/S in the chemical industry faces challenges for transport costs and
multinationals with long investment cycles. In developed countries new storage. In the UK cluster region have been identified for storage under
investments are happening in brown fields, while in developing
sea.
countries these are in green fields. Collaboration among partners and
user demand change, policy change is essential for encouraging these
large risky investments.

[+1,1]

Sustainable Production (12.2/12.3/12.a)




A circular economy instead of linear global economy can achieve
climate goals and can help in economic growth through industrialization
which saves on resources, the environment and supports small, medium
and even large industries, and can lead to employment generation. So
new regulations, incentives and a tax regime can help in achieving the
goal, especially in newly emerging developing countries - although also
applicable for large industrialized countries.


Interaction

CCU/S requires access to water for cooling and processing which could
contribute to localized water stress. CCS/U processes can potentially be
configured for increased water efficiency compared to a system without
carbon capture via process integration.

/

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Hejazi et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Song et al., 2016

A switch to low-carbon fuels can lead to a reduction in water demand
and waste water if the existing higher-carbon fuel is associated with a
higher water intensity than the lower-carbon fuel. However, in some
situations the switch to a low-carbon fuel such as, for example, biofuel
could increase water use compared to existing conditions if the biofuel
comes from a water-intensive feedstock.

[+2,2]

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

/



Once started leads to chain of actions within the sector and policy space
to sustain the effort. Helps in expansion of sustainable industrial
production (Ghana).



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Sustainable and Efficient Resource (12.2/12.5/12.6/12.7/12.a)

Vassolo and Doll, 2005; Nguyen et al., 2014; Holland et al., 2015; Fricko Apeaning and Thollander, 2013; Fernando et al., 2017
et al., 2016

Efficiency and behavioural changes in the industrial sector that lead to
reduced energy demand can lead to reduced requirements on energy
supply. As water is used to convert energy into useful forms, the
reduction in industrial demand is anticipated to reduce water
consumption and waste water, resulting in more clean water for other
sectors and the environment. Likewise, reducing material inputs for
industrial processes through efficiency and behavioural changes will
reduce water inputs in the material supply chains. In extractive
industries there can be a trade-off with production unless strategically
managed.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environment-Demand

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

[+1,1]







Confidence

Sustainable Production (15.1/15.5/15.9/15.10)

[0]

Score

Shi et al., 2017

[0]

No direct interaction

A circular economy help in managing local biodiversity better by having
less resource use footprint



Interaction

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

495





[+2]






Agreement

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

[+1]






Stefan and Paul, 2008; ECF, 2014; CDP, 2015; Khan et al., 2015; NCE,
2015; McCollum et al., 2018



Bilton et al., 2011; Scott, 2011; Kumar et al., 2012; Meldrum et al.,
2013; Bartos and Chester, 2014; Hendrickson and Horvath, 2014; Kern
et al., 2014; Holland et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017


Sustainable practices adopted by public and private bodies in their
operations (e.g., for goods procurement, supply chain management and
accounting) create an enabling environment in which renewable energy
and energy efficiency measures may gain greater traction (McCollum et
al., 2018).



Efficiency changes in the residential sector that lead to reduced energy
demand can lead to reduced requirements on energy supply. As water is
used to convert energy into useful forms, the reduction in residential
demand is anticipated to reduce water consumption and waste water,
resulting in more clean water for other sectors and the environment. A
switch to low-carbon fuels in the residential sector can lead to a
reduction in water demand and waste water if the existing highercarbon fuel is associated with a higher water intensity than the lowercarbon fuel. However, in some situations the switch to a low-carbon fuel
such as, for example, biofuel could increase water use compared to
existing conditions if the biofuel comes from a water-intensive
feedstock. As water is used to convert energy into useful forms, energy
efficiency is anticipated to reduce water consumption and waste water,
resulting in more clean water for other sectors and the environment.
Subsidies for renewables are anticipated to lead to the benefits and
trade-offs outlined when deploying renewables. Subsidies for
renewables could lead to improved water access and treatment if
subsidies support projects that provide both water and energy services
(e.g., solar desalination).

[+2]



Bhojvaid et al., 2014



Confidence

Improved stoves has helped halt deforestation in rural India.



[+2]



Interaction

Reduced Deforestation (15.2)

Confidence

Sustainable Practices and Lifestyles (12.6/12.7/12.8)

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence



[0]

[0]

Score



Interaction

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Sweeney et al., 2013; Webb et al., 2013; Allen et al., 2015; Echegaray
(2015); He et al., 2016; Hult and Larsson, 2016; Isenhour and Feng,
2016; van Sluisveld et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017;
Sommerfeld et al., 2017



Bartos and Chester (2014); Fricko et al. (2016); Holland et al. (2016)


Technological improvements alone are not sufficient to increase energy
savings. Zhao et al. (2017) found that building technology and occupant
behaviours interact with each other and finally affect energy
consumption from home. They found that occupant habits could not
take advantage of more than 50% of energy efficiency potential allowed
by an efficient building. In the electronic segment, product obsolescence
represents a key challenge for sustainability. Echegaray (2016) discusses
the dissonance between consumers' product durability experience,
orientations to replace devices before terminal technical failure, and
perceptions of industry responsibility and performance. The results from
their urban sample survey indicate that technical failure is far surpassed
by subjective obsolescence as a cause for fast product replacement. At
the same time Liu et al. (2017) suggest that we need to go beyond
individualist and structuralist perspectives to analyse sustainable
consumption (i.e., combines both human agency paradigm and social
structural perspective).

[+2]

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Responsible and Sustainable Consumption

Behavioural changes in the residential sector that lead to reduced
energy demand can lead to reduced requirements on energy supply. As
water is used to convert energy into useful forms, the reduction in
residential demand is anticipated to reduce water consumption and
waste water, resulting in more clean water for other sectors and the
environment.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environment-Demand (continued)

Buildings

496

Behavioural Response

5

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement

Buildings

Transport

Behavioural Response

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to Modern
Low-carbon Energy



/

[+2,1]






[+2]







[+2]




[+2]






[+2]




Sustainable Consumption (12.2/12.8)


Relational complex transport behaviour resulting in significant growth in
energy-inefficient car choices, as well as differences in mobility patterns
(distances driven, driving styles) and actual fuel consumption between
different car segments all affect non-progress on transport
decarbonization. Consumption choices and individual lifestyles are
situated and tied to the form of the surrounding urbanization. Major
behavioural changes and emissions reductions require understanding of
this relational complexity, consideration of potential interactions with
other policies, and the local context and implementation of both
command-and-control as well as market-based measures.



Vidic et al., 2013; Holland et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Tiedeman et Stanley et al., 2011; Gallego et al., 2013; Heinonen et al., 2013; Aamaas
al., 2016
and Peters, 2017; Azevedo and Leal, 2017; Gossling and Metzler, 2017

Similar to behavioural changes, efficiency measures in the transport
sector that lead to reduced transport demand can lead to reduced
transport energy supply. As water is used to produce a number of
important transport fuels, the reduction in transport demand is
anticipated to reduce water consumption and waste water, resulting in
more clean water for other sectors and the environment.



Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)



Urban carbon mitigation must consider the supply chain management of
imported goods, the production efficiency within the city, the
consumption patterns of urban consumers, and the responsibility of the
ultimate consumers outside the city. Important for climate policy of
monitoring the CO2 clusters that dominate CO2 emissions in global
supply chains, because they offer insights on where climate policy can
be effectively directed.



Ensure Sustainable Consumption amd Production Patterns
(12.3)

Vidic et al., 2013; Holland et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Tiedeman et Kagawa et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2015; Creutzig et al., 2016
al., 2016

Behavioural changes in the transport sector that lead to reduced
transport demand can lead to reduced transport energy supply. As water
is used to produce a number of important transport fuels, the reduction
in transport demand is anticipated to reduce water consumption and
waste water, resulting in more clean water for other sectors and the
environment.



Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Hejazi et al., 2015; Cibin et al., 2016; Fricko et al., 2016; Song et al.,
2016; Rao and Pachauri, 2017



Hejazi et al., 2015; Cibin et al., 2016; Fricko et al., 2016; Song et al.,
2016; Rao and Pachauri, 2017


A switch to low-carbon fuels in the residential sector can lead to a
reduction in water demand and waste water if the existing highercarbon fuel is associated with a higher water intensity than the lowercarbon fuel. However, in some situations the switch to a low-carbon fuel
such as, for example, biofuel could increase water use compared to
existing conditions if the biofuel comes from a water-intensive
feedstock. Improved access to energy can support clean water and
sanitation technologies. If energy access is supported with waterintensive energy sources, there could be trade-offs with water efficiency
targets.

[+2,1]

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Sustainable Use and Management of Natural Resource (12.2)

A switch to low-carbon fuels in the residential sector can lead to a
reduction in water demand and waste water if the existing highercarbon fuel is associated with a higher water intensity than the lowercarbon fuel. However, in some situations the switch to a low-carbon fuel
such as, for example, biofuel could increase water use compared to
existing conditions if the biofuel comes from a water-intensive
feedstock. Improved access to energy can support clean water and
sanitation technologies. If energy access is supported with waterintensive energy sources, there could be trade-offs with water efficiency
targets.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Access to Improved Water and Sanitation (6.1/6.2), Water
Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environment-Demand (continued)

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[+2]







[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Bazilian et al., 2011; Karekezi et al., 2012; Bailis et al., 2015; Winter et
al., 2015; McCollum et al., 2018

Ensuring that the world's poor have access to modern energy services
would reinforce the objective of halting deforestation, since firewood
taken from forests is a commonly used energy resource among the poor
(McCollum et al., 2018).



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Healthy Terrestrial Ecosystems (15.1/15.2/15.4/15.5/15.8)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

497

498

Transport





[+2]






Figueroa et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014; Pietzcker et al., 2014; Creutzig et al.,
2015



Hejazi et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Song et al., 2016


Due to persistent reliance on fossil fuels, it is posited that transport is
more difficult to decarbonize than other sectors. This study partially
confirms that transport is less reactive to a given carbon tax than the
non-transport sectors: in the first half of the century, transport
mitigation is delayed by 10-30 years compared to non-transport
mitigation. The extent to which earlier mitigation is possible strongly
depends on implemented technologies and model structures.

[+2,1]

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Ensure Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns
(12.3)

A switch to low-carbon fuels in the transport sector can lead to a
reduction in water demand and waste water if the existing highercarbon fuel is associated with a higher water intensity than the lowercarbon fuel. However, in some situations the switch to a low-carbon fuel
such as, for example, biofuel could increase water use compared to
existing conditions if the biofuel comes from a water-intensive
feedstock. Transport electrification could lead to trade-offs with water
use if the electricity is provided with water intensive power generation.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

5

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to
Modern Low-carbon Energy

Environment-Demand (continued)

Interaction

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Interaction

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Increased Use of Biomass

Non-biomass Renewables - solar, wind hydro

Replacing Coal



[+2]






Hejazi et al., 2015; Bonsch et al., 2016; Cibin et al., 2016; Song et al.,
2016; Gao and Bryan, 2017; Griffiths et al., 2017; Ha and Wu, 2017;
Taniwaki et al., 2017; Woodbury et al., 2018

/

[2,1]






Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Marine Economies (14.7)/ Marine Protection
(14.1/14.2/14.4/14.5)


[1]







Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Healthy Terrestrial Ecosystems (15.1/15.2/15.4/15.5/15.8)

Natural Resource Protection (12.2/12.3/12.4/12.5)

Banerjee et al., 2012; Riahi et al., 2012; Schwanitz et al., 2014;
Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; Cameron et al., 2016; McCollum et al., 2018

[0]

No direct interaction

[+1,2]







Smith et al., 2010, 2014; Acheampong et al., 2017; McCollum et al.,
2018

Protecting terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably managing forests, halting
deforestation, preventing biodiversity loss and controlling invasive alien
species could potentially clash with renewable energy expansion, if that
would mean constraining large-scale utilization of bioenergy or
hydropower. Good governance, cross-jurisdictional coordination and
sound implementation practices are critical for minimizing trade-offs
(McCollum et al., 2018).

/

Healthy Terrestrial Ecosystems (15.1/15.2/15.4/15.5/15.8)

Banerjee et al., 2012; Riahi et al., 2012; Schwanitz et al., 2014;
Inger et al., 2009; Michler-Cieluch et al., 2009; Buck and Krause, 2012; Alho, 2011; Garvin et al., 2011; Grodsky et al., 2011; Jain et al., 2011;
Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; Cameron et al., 2016; McCollum et al., 2018 WBGU, 2013; Cooke et al., 2016; Matthews and McCartney, 2018;
Kumar et al., 2011; Kunz et al., 2011; Wiser et al., 2011; Dahl et al.,
McCollum et al., 2018
2012; de Lucas et al., 2012; Ziv et al., 2012; Lovich and Ennen, 2013;
Smith et al., 2013; Matthews and McCartney, 2018

Ocean-based energy from renewable sources (e.g., offshore wind farms, Landscape and wildlife impact for wind; habitat impact for hydropower.
Renewable energy and energy efficiency slow the depletion of several
types of natural resources, namely coal, oil, natural gas and uranium. In wave and tidal power) are potentially significant energy resource bases
for island countries and countries situated along coastlines. Multi-use
addition, the phasing-out of fossil fuel subsidies encourages less
platforms combining renewable energy generation, aqua-culture,
wasteful energy consumption; but if that is done, then the policies
implemented must take care to minimize any counteracting adverse side- transport services and leisure activities can lay the groundwork for more
effects on the poor (e.g., fuel price rises). (Quote from McCollum et al., diversified marine economies. Depending on the local context and
2018)
prevailing regulations, ocean-based energy installations could either
induce spatial competition with other marine activities, such as tourism,
shipping, resources exploitation, and marine and coastal habitats and
protected areas, or provide further grounds for protecting those exact
habitats, therefore enabling marine protection. (Quote from McCollum
et al., 2018) Hydropower disrupts the integrity and connectivity of
aquatic habitats and impacts the productivity of inland waters and their
fisheries.


/
[+1,2]



[+2]




Biomass expansion could lead to increased water stress when irrigated Switching to renewable energy reduces the depletion of finite natural
feedstocks and water-intensive processing steps are used. Bioenergy
resources.
crops can alter flow over land and through soils as well as require
fertilizer, and this can reduce water availability and quality. Planting
bioenergy crops on marginal lands or in some situations to replace
existing crops can lead to reductions in soil erosion and fertilizer inputs,
improving water quality.

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Bilton et al., 2011; Scott et al., 2011; Kumar et al., 2012; Ziv et al.,
2012; Meldrum et al., 2013; Kern et al., 2014; Grill et al., 2015; Fricko
et al., 2016; Grubert, 2016; De Stefano et al., 2017


/
[+2,2]



Wind/solar renewable energy technologies are associated with very low
water requirements compared to existing thermal power plant
technologies. Widespread deployment is therefore anticipated to lead to
improved water efficiency and avoided thermal pollution. However,
managing wind and solar variability can increase water use at thermal
power plants and can cause poor water quality downstream from
hydropower plants. Access to distributed renewables can provide power
to improve water access, but could also lead to increased groundwater
pumping and stress if mismanaged. Developing dams to support reliable
hydropower production can fragment rivers and alter natural flows
reducing water and ecosystem quality. Developing dams to support
reliable hydropower production can result in disputes for water in basins
with up- and down-stream users. Storing water in reservoirs increases
evaporation, which could offset water conservation targets and reduce
availability of water downstream. However, hydropower plays an
important role in energy access for water supply in developing regions,
can support water security, and has the potential to reduce water
demands if used without reservoir storage to displace other water
intensive energy processes.

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)/ Access
Natural Resource Protection (12.2/12.3/12.4/12.5)
to Improved Water and Sanitation (6.1/6.2)

Environement-Supply

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

499

[+2,-1]

&&&

JJJ







[+1]






Natural Resource Protection (12.2/12.3/12.4/12.5)

Confidence

[+1,2]







Meldrum et al., 2013; Byers et al., 2016; Fricko et al., 2016; Brandl et
al., 2017

CCU/S requires access to water for cooling and processing which could
contribute to localized water stress. However, CCS/U processes can
potentially be configured for increased water efficiency compared to a
system without carbon capture via process integration. Coal mining to
support clean coal CCS will negatively impact water resources due to
the associated water demands, waste water and land-use requirements.

/

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)
[0]

No direct interaction

Banerjee et al., 2012; Riahi et al., 2012; Schwanitz et al., 2014;
Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; Cameron et al., 2016; McCollum et al., 2018



Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Meldrum et al., 2013; Byers et al., 2016; Fricko et al., 2016; Brandl et
al., 2017; Dooley and Kartha, 2018



[0]

Score

Switching to renewable energy reduces the depletion of finite natural
resources. On the other hand, the availability of underground storage is
limited and therefore reduces the benefits of switching from finite
resources to bioenergy.

[+1,2]

Interaction

CCU/S requires access to water for cooling and processing which could
contribute to localized water stress. However, CCS/U processes can
potentially be configured for increased water efficiency compared to a
system without carbon capture via process integration. The bioenergy
component adds the additional trade-offs associated with bioenergy
use. Large-scale bioenergy increases input demand, resulting in
environmental degradation and water stress.

/

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Webster et al., 2013; Holland et al., 2015; Fricko et al., 2016; Raptis et
al., 2016

Nuclear power generation requires water for cooling which can lead to
localized water stress and the resulting cooling effluents can cause
thermal pollution in rivers and oceans.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environement-Supply (continued)

Replacing Coal

Advanced Coal

Nuclear/Advanced
Nuclear

500

CCS: Bioenergy

5

CCS: Fossil

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence
[-1]

&&

JJ



[+1,2]







[0]

No direct interaction

Smith et al., 2010, 2014; Acheampong et al., 2017; Dooley and Kartha,
2018, McCollum et al., 2018)

Protecting terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably managing forests, halting
deforestation, preventing biodiversity loss and controlling invasive alien
species could potentially clash with renewable energy expansion, if that
would mean constraining large-scale utilization of bioenergy or
hydropower. Good governance, cross-jurisdictional coordination and
sound implementation practices are critical for minimizing trade-offs
(McCollum et al., 2018). Large-scale bioenergy increases input demand,
resulting in environmental degradation and water stress.

/

Healthy Terrestrial Ecosystems (15.1/15.2/15.4/15.5/15.8)

Bickerstaff et al., 2008; Sjoberg and Sjoberg, 2009; Ahearne, 2011;
Corner et al., 2011; Visschers and Siegrist, 2012; IPCC, 2014

Safety and waste concerns from uranium mining and milling.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Healthy Terrestrial Ecosystems (15.1/15.2/15.4/15.5/15.8)

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Land-based Greenhouse Gas Reduction and Soil Carbon
Sequestration

Behavioural Response: Sustainable Healthy Diets and Reduced Food Waste

Agriculture and Livestock





[+1]




Campbell et al., 2014; Lakshmi et al., 2015



Behnassi et al., 2014; Bustamante et al., 2014; P. Smith et al., 2016b


Millet or sorghum yield can double as compared with unimproved land
by more than 1 tonne per hectare due to sustainable intensification. An
integrated approach to safe applications of both conventional and
modern agricultural biotechnologies will contribute to increased yield
(Lakshmi et al., 2015).

[+1,1]

Ensure Sustainable Production Patterns (12.3)

Soil carbon sequestration can alter the capacity of soils to store water,
which impacts the hydrological cycle and could be positive or negative
from a water perspective, dependent on existing conditions. CSA enrich
linkages across sectors including management of water resources.
Minimum tillage systems have been reported to reduce water erosion
and thus sedimentation of water courses (Bustamante et al., 2014).

/

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)


Stehfest et al., 2009; Steinfeld and Gerber, 2010; Garnett, 2011; Ingram,
2011; Beddington et al., 2012; Kummu et al., 2012; Bellarby et al.,
2013; Dagevos and Voordouw, 2013; Smith, 2013; Bajelj et al., 2014;
Hedenus et al., 2014; Tilman and Clark, 2014; West et al., 2014; Hic et
al., 2016; Lamb et al., 2016

[+2]

Khan et al., 2009; Ingram, 2011; Kummu et al., 2012; Haileselassie et
al., 2013; Bajelj et al., 2014; Tilman and Clark, 2014; Walker et al.,
2014; Ran et al., 2016







Reduce loss and waste in food systems, processing, distribution and by
changing household habits. To reduce environmental impact of livestock
both production and consumption trends in this sector should be traced.
Livestock production needs to be intensified in a responsible way (i.e.,
be made more efficient in the way that it uses natural resources).
Wasted food represents a waste of all the emissions generated during
the course of producing and distributing that food. Mitigation measures
include: eat no more than needed to maintain a healthy body weight;
eat seasonal, robust, field-grown vegetables rather than protected,
fragile foods prone to spoilage and requiring heating and lighting in
their cultivation, refrigeration stage; consume fewer foods with low
nutritional value e.g., alcohol, tea, coffee, chocolate and bottled water
(these foods are not needed in our diet and need not be produced); shop
on foot or over the Internet (reduced energy use). Reduction in food
waste will not only pave the path for sustainable production but will
also help in achieving sustainable consumption (Garnett, 2011). Reduce
meat consumption to encourage more sustainable eating practices.

[+2,1]





Reduced food waste avoids direct water demand and waste water for
crops and food processing, and avoids water used for energy supply by
reducing agricultural, food processing and waste management energy
inputs. Healthy diets will support water efficiency targets if the shift
towards healthy foods results in food supply chains that are less water
intensive than the supply chains supporting the historical dietary
pattern.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Ensure Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns,
Sustainable Practices and Lifestyle (12.3/12.4/12.6/12.7/12.8)

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environement-Other

Interaction

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[+1]







[+1,1]







Lybbert and Sumner, 2010; Behnassi et al., 2014; Harvey et al., 2014;
IPCC, 2014; Lamb et al., 2016)

Agricultural intensification can promote conservation of biological
diversity by reducing deforestation, and by rehabilitation and restoration
of biodiverse communities on previously developed farm or pasture
land. However, planting monocultures on biodiversity hot spots can
have adverse side-effects, reducing biodiversity. Genetically modified
crops reduce demand for cultivated land. Adaptation of integrated
landscape approaches can provide various ecosystem services. CSA
enrich linkages across sectors including management of land and bioresources. Land sparing has the potential to be beneficial for
biodiversity, including for many species of conservation concern, but
benefits will depend strongly on the use of spared land. In addition,
high yield farming involves trade-offs and is likely to be detrimental for
wild species associated with farm land (Lamb et al., 2016).

/

Conservation of Biodiversity and Restoration of Land
(15.1/15.5/15.9)

Stehfest et al., 2009; Kummu et al., 2012

Reducing food waste has secondary benefits like protecting soil from
degradation, and decreasing pressure for land conversion into
agriculture and thereby protecting biodiversity.
The agricultural area that becomes redundant through the dietary
transitions can be used for other agricultural purposes such as energy
crop production, or will revert to natural vegetation. A global food
transition to less meat, or even a complete switch to plant-based protein
food, could have a dramatic effect on land use. Up to 2,700 Mha of
pasture and 100 Mha of crop land could be abandoned (Quoted from
Stehfest et al., 2009)



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Conservation of Biodiversity and Restoration of Land (15.1/
15.5/15.9)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

501

[+2,1]







[+1]






In the future, many developed countries will see a continuing trend in
which livestock breeding focuses on other attributes in addition to
production and productivity, such as product quality, increasing animal
welfare, disease resistance (Thornton, 2010). Diet composition and
quality are key determinants of the productivity and feed-use efficiency
of farm animals (Herrero, et al., 2013). Mechanisms for effecting
behavioural change in livestock systems need to be better understood by
implementing combinations of incentives and taxes simultaneously in
different parts of the world (Herrero and Thornton, 2013). Reducing the
amount of human-edible crops that are fed to livestock represents a
reversal of the current trend of steep increases in livestock production,
and especially of monogastrics, so would require drastic changes in
production and consumption (Schader et al., 2015).



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Ensure Sustainable Production Patterns and Restructing
Taxation (12.3/12c)

[+1,1]









[+1]




Ensure Sustainable Consumption (12.3)


[+2,1]







Zomer et al., 2008; Bustamante et al., 2014; Kibria, 2015; Lamb et al.,
2016; Dooley and Kartha, 2018

Similar to REDD+, forest management alters the hydrological cycle
which could be positive or negative from a water perspective and is
dependent on existing conditions. Forest landscape restoration can have
a large impact on water cycles. Strategic placement of tree belts in lands
affected by dryland salinity can remediate the affected lands by
modifying landscape water balances. Watershed scale reforestation can
result in the restoration of water quality. Fast-growing species can
increase nutrient input and water inputs that can cause ecological
damage and alter local hydrological patterns. Reforestation of mixed
native species and in carefully chosen sites could increase biodiversity
and restore waterways, reducing run-off and erosion (Dooley and
Kartha, 2018).

/

Enhance Water Quality (6.3)

Zomer et al., 2008; Kibria, 2015; Bonsch et al., 2016; Gao and Bryan,
2017; Griffiths et al., 2017; Katila et al., 2017

[0]

Bastos Lima et al., 2017

No direct interaction

Forest management alters the hydrological cycle which could be positive Reduce the human pressure on forests, including actions to address
or negative from a water perspective and is dependent on existing
drivers of deforestation.
conditions. Conservation of ecosystem services indirectly could help
countries maintain watershed integrity. Forests provide sustainable and
regulated provision and help in water purification.

/

Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Haileselassie et al., 2013; Schader et al., 2015; Kong et al., 2016; Ran et Thornton, 2010; Herrero and Thornton, 2013; Herrero et al., 2013;
al., 2016
Schader et al., 2015

Livestock efficiency measures are expected to reduce water required for
livestock systems as well as associated livestock waste water flows.
However, efficiency measures that include agricultural intensification
could increase water demands locally, leading to increased water stress
if the intensification is mismanaged. In scenarios where zero humanedible concentrate feed is used for livestock, freshwater use reduces by
21%.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environement-Other (continued)

Agriculture and Livestock

Forest

Greenhouse Gas Reduction from Improved Livestock
Production and Manure Management Systems

502

Reduced Deforestation, REDD+

5

Afforestation and Reforestation

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[+2]







Kibria, 2015

Mangroves would help to enhance fisheries and tourism businesses.



Marine Economies (14.7)/Marine Protection and Income
Generation (14.1/14.2/14.4/14.5)

Interaction

[+1]





Score
Evidence
Agreement
Restoration of Land (15.1)



Confidence

[+1]











[+2]

Identified large amounts of land (749 Mha) globally as biophysically
suitable and meeting the CDM eligibility criteria . Forest landscape
restoration can conserve biodiversity and reduce land degradation.
Mangroves reduce impacts of disasters (cyclones/storms/floods) acting
as live seawalls and enhance forest resources/biodiversity. Forest goal
can conserve/restore 3.9-8.8 m ha/year average, 77.2-176.9 m ha in
total and 7.7-17.7 m ha /year in 2030 of forest area by 2030 (Wolosin,
2014). Forest and biodiversity conservation, protected area formation
and forestry-based afforestation are practices that enhance resilience of
forest ecosystems to climate change (IPCC, 2014). Strategic placement
of tree belts in lands affected by dryland salinity can remediate the
affected lands by modifying landscape water balances and protect
livestock. It can restore biologically diverse communities on previously
developed farmland . Large-scale restoration is likely to benefit
ecosystem service provision, including recreation, biodiversity,
conservation and flood mitigation. Reforestation of mixed native species
and in carefully chosen sites could increase biodiversity, reducing run-off
and erosion .
Zomer et al., 2008; Bustamante et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014; Kibria, 2015;
Lamb et al., 2016; Epstein and Theuer, 2017; Dooley and Kartha, 2018

Conservation of Biodiversity and Restoration of Land
(15.1/15.5/15.9)

Miles and Kapos, 2008; IPCC, 2014; Bastos Lima et al., 2015; Turpie et
al., 2015; Epstein and Theuer, 2017; Katila et al., 2017

Policies and programmes for reducing deforestation and forest
degradation for rehabilitation and restoration of degraded lands can
promote conservation of biological diversity. Reduce the human
pressure on forests, including actions to address drivers of deforestation.
Efforts by the Government of Zambia to reduce emissions by REDD+
have contributed erosion control, ecotourism and pollination valued at
2.5% of the country's GDP.



Conservation of Biodiversity, Sustainability of Terrestrial
Ecosystems (15.2/15.3/15.4/15.5/15.9)

Herrero et al., 2013; Schader et al., 2015

Grasslands are valuable, but improved management is required as grass
accounts for close to 50% of feed use in livestock systems . The scenario
with 100% reduction of food-competing-feedstuffs resulted in a 335
Mha decrease in arable land area, which corresponds to a decrease of
22% in arable and 7% in the total agricultural area .



Interaction

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Enhanced Weathering

Blue Carbon

Forest

Oceans

Ocean Iron Fertilization

Behavioural Response
(Responsible Sourcing)

[+2,1]









[+1]






Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Ensure Sustainable Production Patterns (12.3)

No direct interaction

[+2]







Vierros et al., 2015

[0]

No direct interaction

Development of blue carbon resources (coastal and marine vegetated
ecosystems) can lead to coordinated management of water in coastal
areas.



Integrated Water Resources Management (6.3/6.5)

[0]

van Oel and Hoekstra, 2012; Launiainen et al., 2014; Hontelez, 2016

Hontelez, 2016

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

At local levels, forest certification programmes and practicing
Responsible sourcing will have co-benefits for water efficiency and
pollution prevention if the sourcing strategies incorporate water metrics. sustainable forest management provide the provision of raw materials
There is a risk that shifting supply sources could lead to increased water for a `low ecological footprint' economy.
use in another part of the economy. At local levels, forest certification
programmes and practicing sustainable forest management provide
freshwater supplies.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Water Efficiency and Pollution Prevention (6.3/6.4/6.6)

Environement-Other (continued)

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[+1,2]










No direct interaction



[+3]







Conservation of Biodiversity and Restoration of Land
(15.1/15.2/15.3/15.4/15.9)

[0]

Bartley, 2010; Hontelez, 2016

[+2,1]






Enhanced weathering (either by spreading lime or quicklime, in
combination with CCS, over the ocean or olivine at beaches or the
catchment area of rivers) opposes ocean acidification. "End-of-century
ocean acidification is reversed under RCP4.5 and reduced by about twothirds under RCP8.5; additionally, surface ocean aragonite saturation
state, a key control on coral calcification rates, is maintained above 3.5
throughout the low latitudes, thereby helping maintain the viability of
tropical coral reef ecosystems ." However, marine biology would also be
affected, in particular if spreading olivine is used, which works like
ocean (iron) fertilization.
Kohler et al., 2010, 2013; Hartmann et al., 2013; Paquay and Zeebe,
2013; P. Smith et al., 2016a; Taylor et al., 2016

/

Ocean Acidification, Nutrient Pollution (14.3/14.1)

[2]





Protect Inland Freshwater Systems (14.1)


Hartmann et al., 2013

Olivine can contain toxic metals such as nickel which could accumulate
in the environment or disrupt the local ecosystem by changing the pH of
the water (in case of spreading in the catchment area of rivers).



Alongi, 2012; Potouroglou et al., 2017





Pettit et al., 2015; Sippo et al., 2016





Average difference of 31 mm per year in elevation rates between areas
with seagrass and unvegetated areas (case study areas: Scotland,
Kenya, Tanzania and Saudi Arabia); mangroves fostering sediment
accretion of about 5mm a year.

[+2,0]

[+1,1]

At the macro level, forest certification has done little to stem the tide of
forest degradation, conversion of forest land to agriculture, and illegal
logging--all of which remain serious threats to Indonesian forests
(Bartley, 2010). At local levels, forest certification programmes and
practicing sustainable forest management help in biodiversity
protection.

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Sustainability and Conservation (15.1/15.2/15.3)

Mangroves could buffer acidification in their immediate vicinity;
seaweeds have not been able to mitigate the effect on ocean
foraminifera.

/~

Ocean Acidification, Nutrient Pollution (14.3/14.1)

Gnanadesikan et al., 2003; Jin and Gruber, 2003; Denman, 2008;
Lampitt et al., 2008; Smetacek and Naqvi, 2008; Gussow et al., 2010;
Oschlies et al., 2010; Trick et al., 2010; Williamson et al., 2012

OIF could exacerbate or reduce nutrient pollution, increase the
likelihood of mid-water deoxygenation, increase ocean acidification,
might contribute to the rebuilding of fish stocks in producing plankton,
therefore generating benefits for SISD, but might also be in conflict with
designing MPAs.

/

Nutrient Pollution, Ocean Acidification, Fish Stocks, MPAs,
SISD (14.1/14.3/14.4/14.5/14.7)

Interaction

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

503

Score
Evidence
Agreement
Energy Savings (7.1/7.3/7.a/7.b)

Confidence

[+2]

[+1]






[+1]






Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Infrastructure Renewal (9.1/9.3/9.5/9.a)





[+2]








[+2]







Denis-Ryan et al., 2016; Ahman et al., 2017; Wesseling et al., 2017

Denis-Ryan et al., 2016; Ahman et al., 2017; Wesseling et al., 2017;
Griffin et al., 2018



Griffin et al., 2017; Wesseling et al., 2017



Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

Deep decarbonization through radical technological change in EPI will
lead to radical innovations, for example, in completely changing
industries' innovation strategies, plants and equipment, skills,
production techniques, design, etc. Radical CCS will need new
infrastructure to transport CO2.

[+2,2]

Decouple Growth from Environmental Degradation
(8.1/8.2/8.4)

EPI s are important players for economic growth. Deep decarbonization
CCS for EPIs can be incremental, but need additional space and can
need additional energy, sometimes compensating for higher efficiency. of EPIs through radical innovation is consistent with well-below 2C
For example, recirculating blast R furnace and CCS for iron steel means scenarios.
high energy demand; electric melting in glass can mean higher
electricity prices; in the paper industry, new separation and drying
technologies are key to reducing the energy intensity, allowing for
carbon neutral operation in the future; bio-refineries can reduce petrorefineries; DRI in iron and steel with H2 encourages innovation in
hydrogen infrastructure; and the chemicals industry also encourage
renewable electricity and hydrogen as bio-based polymers can increase
biomass price.

/

Affordable and Sustainable Energy Sources

Stahel, 2013, 2017; Liu et al., 2014; Leider et al., 2015; Supino et al.,
2015; Zheng et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2017

Stahel, 2013, 2017; Liu et al., 2014; Leider et al., 2015; Supino et al.,
2015; Zheng et al., 2016; Fan et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2017

Karner et al., 2015; Griffin et al., 2018

Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.3/9.4/9.5/9.a)

Riahi et al., 2012; Apeaning and Thollander, 2013; Goldthau, 2014;
Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; Meltzer, 2016; McCollum et al., 2018

Transitioning to a more renewables-based energy system that is highly
energy efficient is well-aligned with the goal of upgrading energy
infrastructure and making the energy industry more sustainable. At the
same time, infrastructure upgrades in other parts of the economy, such
as modernized telecommunications networks, can create the conditions
for a successful expansion of renewable energy and energy efficiency
measures (e.g., smart metering and demand-side management;
McCollum et al., 2018).



Interaction





[+2]

A circular economy instead of linear global economy is helping new
innovation, and infrastructure can achieve climate goals and can help in
economic growth through industrialization which saves on resources
and the environment and supports small, medium and even large
industries, which can lead to employment generation. So new
regulations, incentives and revised tax regime can help in achieving the
goal.

Economic Growth with Decent Employment (8.1/8.2/8.3/8.4)

Altieri et al., 2016; Fernando et al., 2017; Johansson and Thollander,
2018

Unemployment rate reduction from 25% to 12% in South Africa.
Enhances firm productivity and technical and managerial capacity of the
employees. New jobs for managing energy efficiency opens up
opportunities in energy service delivery sector.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Reduces Unemployment (8.2/8.3/8.4/8.5/8.6)





[+2]




[+2]

Industries are becoming suppliers of energy, waste heat, water and roof The circular economy instead of linear global economy can achieve
tops used for solar energy generation, and therefore helping to reduce climate goals and can help in economic growth through
industrialization, which saves on resources and the environment and
primary energy demand. CHP in chemical industries can help in
supports small, medium and even large industries, which can lead to
providing surplus power in the grid.
employment generation. So new regulations, incentives and a revised
tax regime can help in achieving the goal.

Sustainable and Modern (7.2/7.a)

Apeaning and Thollander, 2013; Chakravarty et al., 2013; IPCC, 2014;
Karner et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Fernando et al.,
2017; Wesseling et al., 2017







Energy efficiency leads to reduced energy demand and hence energy
supply and energy security, reduces import. Positive rebound effect can
raise demand but to a very less extent due to low rebound effect in
industry sector in many countries and by appropriate mix of industries
(China) can maintain energy savings gain. Supplying surplus energy to
cities is also happening, proving maintenance culture, switching off idle
equipment helps in saving energy (e.g Ghana).

Interaction

Economic-Demand

Industry

Accelerating Energy Efficiency
Improvement

504

Low-Carbon Fuel Switch

5

Decarbonization/CCS/CCU

[+2]





Score
Evidence
Agreement
Sustainable Cities (15.6/15.8/15.9)



Confidence

[+2]







Karner et al., 2015

[0]

No direct interaction

Industries are becoming suppliers of energy, waste heat, water and roof
tops used for solar energy generation, and supply to neighbourial
human settlements, therefore reducing primary energy demand, which
also makes towns and cities grow sustainably.



Sustainable Cities (15.6/15.8/15.9)

Karner et al., 2015

Industries are becoming suppliers of energy, waste heat and water to
neighbourial human settlements, and therefore there is a reduced
primary energy demand, which also makes towns and cities grow
sustainably.



Interaction

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Behavioural Response

Buildings

Accelerating Energy Efficiency Improvement



/

[+2,1]










[+2]







Adoption of smart meters and smart grids following community-based
social marketing help in infrastructure expansion. Statutory norms to
enhance energy and resource efficiency in buildings is encouraging
green building projects.

Anda and Temmen, 2014; Roy et al., 2018
Babiker and Eckaus, 2007; Fankhauser and Tepic, 2007; Gohin, 2008;
Frondel et al., 2010; Dinkelman, 2011; Guivarch et al., 2011; Jackson
and Senker, 2011; Borenstein, 2012; Creutzig et al., 2013; Blyth et al.,
2014; Clarke et al., 2014; Dechezlepretre and Sato, 2014; Bertram et al.,
2015; Johnson et al., 2015; IRENA, 2016; A. Smith et al., 2016; Berrueta
et al., 2017; McCollum et al., 2018





Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

Anda and Temmen, 2014; Roy et al., 2018

McLeod et al., 2013; Noris et al., 2013; Bhojvaid et al., 2014;
Holopainen et al., 2014; Kwong et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2014; Cameron
et al., 2015; Liddell and Guiney, 2015; Shah et al., 2015; Berrueta et al.,
2017; Kim et al., 2017; Salvalai et al., 2017





Deploying renewables and energy efficient technologies, when
combined with other targeted monetary and fiscal policies, can help
spur innovation and reinforce local, regional and national industrial and
employment objectives. Gross employment effects seem likely to be
positive; however, uncertainty remains regarding the net employment
effects due to several uncertainties surrounding macro-economic
feedback loops playing out at the global level. Moreover, the
distributional effects experienced by individual actors may vary
significantly. Strategic measures may need to be taken to ensure that a
large-scale switch to renewable energy minimizes any negative impacts
on those currently engaged in the business of fossil fuels (e.g.,
government support could help businesses re-tool and workers re-train).
To support clean energy and energy efficiency efforts, strengthened
financial institutions in developing country communities are necessary
for providing capital, credit and insurance to local entrepreneurs
attempting to enact change (McCollum et al., 2018).

[+2]

Employment Opportunities (8.2/8.3/8.5/8.6)/Strong Financial
Institutions (8.10)

[+2]



Interaction

[+2]





Score
Evidence
Agreement
Sustainable Cities (15.6/15.8/15.9)



Confidence

[+2]







Creutzig et al., 2012; Kahn Ribeiro et al., 2012; Riahi et al., 2012;
Bongardt et al., 2013; Grubler and Fisk, 2013; Raji et al., 2015; Kim et
al., 2017; McCollum et al., 2018

Renewable energy technologies and energy efficient urban infrastructure
solutions (e.g., public transit) can also promote urban environmental
sustainability by improving air quality and reducing noise. Efficient
transportation technologies powered by renewably based energy carriers
will be a key building block of any sustainable transport system
(McCollum et al., 2018). Green buildings help in sustainable
construction.



Urban Environmental Sustainability (11.3/11.6/11.b/11.c)

Anda and Temmen, 2014; Roy et al., 2018

Adoption of smart meters and smart grids following community-based Behavioural change programmes help in making cities more sustainable.
social marketing help with infrastructure expansion. People are adopting
solar rooftops, white roof/vertical garden/green roofs at much faster
rates due to new innovations and regulations.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

There is high agreement among researchers based on a great deal of
evidence across various countries that energy efficiency improvement
reduces energy consumption and therefore leads to energy savings (e.g.,
efficient stoves save bioenergy). Countries with higher hours of use due
to higher ambient temperatures or more carbon intensive electricity
grids benefit more from available improvements in energy efficiency and
use of refrigerant transition.



Increase in Energy Savings (7.3)

Chakravarty et al., 2013; Gyamfi et al., 2013; Hori et al., 2013; Huebner Anda and Temmen, 2014
et al., 2013; Jain et al., 2013; Sweeney et al., 2013; Webb et al., 2013;
Yue et al., 2013; Anda and Temmen, 2014; Allen et al., 2015; Noonan
et al., 2015; de Koning et al., 2016; Isenhour and Feng, 2016; Santarius
et al., 2016; Song et al., 2016; van Sluisveld et al., 2016; Sommerfeld et
al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2017; Roy et al., 2018





[+2]




[+2]

Lifestyle change measures and adoption behaviour affect residential
Behavioural change programmes help in sustaining energy savings
energy use and implementation of efficient technologies as residential through new infrastructure developments.
HVAC systems. Also, social influence can drive energy savings in users
exposed to energy consumption feedback. Effect of autonomous
motivation on energy savings behaviour is greater than that of other
more established predictors, such as intentions, subjective norms,
perceived behavioural control and past behaviour. Use of a hybrid
engineering approach using social psychology and economic behaviour
models are suggested for residential peak electricity demand response.
However, some take-back in energy savings can happen due to rebound
effects unless managed appropriately or accounted for welfare
improvement. Adjusting thermostats helps in saving energy. Uptake of
energy efficient appliances by households with an introduction to
appliance standards, training, promotional material dissemination and
the desire to save on energy bills are helping to change acquisition
behaviour.

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Saving Energy, Improvement in Energy Efficiency (7.3/7.a/7.b) Progressively Improve Resource Efficiency (8.4), Employment
Opportunities (8.2/8.3/8.5/8.6)

Economic-Demand (continued)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

505

[+2]





Score
Evidence
Agreement
Meeting Energy Demand


Confidence
[+2]






Creutzig et al. (2014) assessed the potential for renewable energies in
the European region. They found that a European energy transition with
a high-level of renewable energy installations in the periphery could act
as an economic stimulus, decrease trade deficits and possibly have
positive employment effects. Provision of energy access can play a
critical enabling role for new productive activities, livelihoods and
employment. Reliable access to modern energy services can have an
important influence on productivity and earnings (McCollum et al.,
2018).



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Sustainable Economic Growth and Employment
[+2]


Promote Sustained, Inclusive Economic Growth (8.3)



Build Resilient Infrastructure (9.1)

[+3]

Score




Evidence
Agreement
Housing (11.1)



Confidence

Gouldson et al., 2015; Karkatsoulis et al., 2016

Promote Sustained, Inclusive Economic Growth (8.3)
Help Building Inclusive Infrastructure (9.1/9.a)
/
[+2,2]




[+2]



The decarbonization of the freight sector tends to occur in the second
Lack of appropriate infrastructure leads to limited access to jobs for the
part of the century, and the sector decarbonizes by a lower extent than urban poor (Africa, Latin America, India).
the rest of the economy. Decarbonizing road freight on a global scale
remains a challenge even when notable progress in biofuels and electric
vehicles has been accounted for.

Increase Share of Renewable (7.2)

[+2]



Biofuel increases share of the renewables but can perform poorly if too
many countries increase their use of biofuel, whereas electrification
performs best when many other countries implement this technology.
The strategies are not mutually exclusive and simultaneous
implementation of some provides synergies for national energy security.
Therefore, it is important to consider the results of material and
contextual factors that co-evolve. Electric vehicles using electricity from
renewables or low carbon sources combined with e-mobility options
such as trolley buses, metros, trams and electro buses, as well as
promote walking and biking, especially for short distances, need
consideration.

Ajanovic, 2015; Mansson, 2016; Alahakoon, 2017; Wolfram et al., 2017 IPCC, 2014; Creutzig et al., 2015; Carrara and Longden, 2017

Figueroa et al., 2013; Gouldson et al., 2015; Vasconcellos and
Mendonca, 2016; Lall et al., 2017

Figueroa et al., 2013; Gouldson et al., 2015; Vasconcellos and
Mendonca, 2016; Alahakoon, 2017

Make Cities and Human Settlements Inclusive, Safe, Resilient

[+2]



In rapidly growing cities, the carbon savings from investments at scale,
in cost-effective low-carbon measures, could be quickly overwhelmed -
in as little as 7 years - by the impacts of sustained population and
economic growth, highlighting the need to build capacities that enable
the exploitation not only of the economically attractive options in the
short term but also of those deeper and more structural changes that are
likely to be needed in the longer term. With hybrid electric vehicles and
plug-in electric vehicles, there is the emergence of new concepts in
transportation, such as electric highways.

Dulac, 2013; Aamaas and Peters, 2017; Martinez-Jaramillo et al., 2017; Song et al., 2016
Xylia and Silveira, 2017


[+2]



The two most important elements of making cities sustainable are
efficient buildings and transport (e.g., Macau).

Shukxin et al., 2016


[+2]



Combining promotion of mass transportation - train lines, tram lines,
BRTs, gondola lift systems, bicycle-sharing systems and hybrid buses -
and telecommuting reduces traffic and significantly contributes to
meeting climate targets. A comprehensive package of complementary
mitigation options is necessary for deep and sustained emissions
reductions. In Sweden, a public bus fleet is aiming more towards
decarbonization than efficiency.

/
[+2,2]



Significant opportunities to slow travel growth and improve efficiency
exist and, similarly, alternatives to petroleum exist but have different
characteristics in terms of availability, cost, distribution, infrastructure,
storage and public acceptability. Production of new technologies, fuels
and infrastructure can favour economic growth; however, efficient
financing of increased capital spending and infrastructure is critical.


[+2]



Accelerating efficiency in tourism transport reduces energy demand
(China).

Energy Savings ( 7.3/7.a/7.b)

Lucas and Pangbourne, 2014; Suckall et al., 2014; Klausbruckner et al., Dulac, 2013; Aamaas and Peters, 2017; Martinez-Jaramillo et al., 2017; Ahmad and Puppim de Oliveira, 2016; Hallegatte et al., 2016a
2016
Xylia and Silveira, 2017
Promote Sustained, Inclusive Economic Growth (8.3)
Build Resilient Infrastructure (9.1)
Make Cities Sustainable (11.2/11.3)


[+2]



Climate change threatens to worsen poverty, therefore pro-poor
mitigation policies are needed to reduce this threat; for example,
investing more and better in infrastructure by leveraging private
resources and using designs that account for future climate change and
the related uncertainty.

Make Cities and Human Settlements Inclusive, Safe, Resilient

Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; Song et al., 2016; UN, 2016; McCollum et
al., 2018; Roy et al., 2018

Ensuring access to basic housing services implies that households have
access to modern energy forms. (Quote from McCollum et al., 2018)
Solar roof tops in Macau make cities sustainable. Introduction of
incentives and norms for solar/white/green rooftops in cities are helping
to accelerate the expansion of the infrastructure.



Interaction

Figueroa and Ribeiro, 2013; Ahmad and Puppim de Oliveira, 2016


[+2]




[2]




[+2]



Behavioural responses will reduce the volume of transport needs and, by Policy contradictions (e.g., standards, efficient technologies leading to As people prefer more mass transportation - train lines, tram lines,
increased electricity prices leading the poor to switch away from
extension, energy demand.
BRTs, gondola lift systems, bicycle-sharing systems and hybrid buses -
clean(er) fuels) and unintended outcomes (e.g., redistribution of income and telecommuting, the need for new infrastructure increases.
generated by carbon taxes) results in contradictions of the primary aims
of (productive) job creation and poverty alleviation, and in trade-offs
between mitigation, adaptation and development policies. Detailed
assessments of mitigation policies consequences requires developing
methods and reliable evidence to enable policymakers to more
systematically identify how different social groups may be affected by
the different available policy options.

Energy Savings ( 7.3/7.a/7.b)



Adoption of smart meters and smart grids following community-based
social marketing help in infrastructure expansion. Statutory norms to
enhance energy and resource efficiency in buildings is encouraging
green building projects. Introduction of incentives and norms for solar
rooftops/white/green roofs in cities are helping to accelerate innovation
and the expansion of infrastructure.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

Li et al., 2013; Peng and Lu, 2013; Pietzcker, 2013; Pode, 2013; Yanine Grogan and Sadanand, 2013; Pueyo et al., 2013; Rao et al., 2013;
Roy et al., 2018; Anda and Temmen, 2014
Chakravorty et al., 2014; Creutzig et al., 2014; Ali et al., 2015; Bernard
and Sauma, 2013; Zulu and Richardson, 2013; Connolly et al., 2014;
Creutzig et al., 2014; Pietzcker et al., 2014; Ali et al., 2015; O'Mahony and Torero, 2015; Byravan et al., 2017; McCollum et al., 2018
and Dufour, 2015; Abanda et al., 2016; Mittlefehldt, 2016; Biligii et al.,
2017; Byravan et al., 2017; Islar et al., 2017; Ozturk et al., 2017

Renewable energies could potentially serve as the main source to meet
energy demand in rapidly growing developing country cities. Ali et al.
(2015) estimated the potential of solar, wind and biomass renewable
energy options to meet part of the electricity demand in Karachi,
Pakistan.



Interaction

Economic-Demand (continued)

Buildings

Transport

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to Modern
Low-carbon Energy

Behavioural Response

506

Accelerating Energy Efficiency
Improvement

5

Improved Access and Fuel Switch to
Modern Low-carbon Energy

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

CCS: Fossil

Replacing Coal

Advanced Coal

CCS: Bioenergy

Nuclear/Advanced
Nuclear

Increased Use of
Biomass

Non-biomass Renewables - solar,
wind, hydro

Score

Evidence

Agreement
~

[0]






Confidence
[0,1]






[+3]





Sustainable and Modern Energy (7.2/7.a)




[+1]






Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

[1]




Innovation and Growth (8.1/8.2/8.4)

[+2]





Sustainable and Modern Energy (7.2/7.a)


[+2]






[+1]




[1]




Innovation and Growth (8.1/8.2/8.4)



Innovation and Growth (8.1/8.2/8.4)
See positive impacts of bioenergy use.





IPCC, 2014

IPCC, 2005, 2014; Benson and Cole, 2008; Fankhaeser et al., 2008;
Vergragt et al., 2011; Markusson et al., 2012; Shackley and Thompson,
2012; Bertram et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2015

Advanced and cleaner fossil fuel technology is in line with the targets of Lock-in of human and physical capital in the fossil resources industry.
SDG7.



Ensure energy access and promote investment in new
technologies (7.1/7.b)

IPCC, 2014

Increased use of modern biomass will facilitate access to clean,
affordable and reliable energy.








[1]







Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

[+1]





Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

[+1]




See positive impacts of CCS/CCU in industrial demand.



Innovation and New Infrastructure (9.2/9.4/9.5)

See positive impacts of bioenergy use and CCS/CCU in industrial
demand.







Marra and Palmer, 2011; Greenberg et al., 2013; Schwenk-Ferrero,
2013; Skipperud et al., 2013; Tyler et al., 2013; IPCC, 2014



IPCC, 2014





IPCC, 2014





Legacy cost of waste and abandoned reactors.





Local employment impact and reduced price volatility.

[1]

Sustainable and Modern Energy (7.2/7.a)

[+1]

Innovation and Growth (8.1/8.2/8.4)

Decarbonization of the energy system through an upscaling of
Access to modern and sustainable energy will be critical to sustain
renewables will greatly facilitate access to clean, affordable and reliable economic growth.
energy.
Jingura and Kamusoko, 2016
Jingura and Kamusoko, 2016; Shahbaz et al., 2016



Increased use of nuclear power can provide stable baseload power
supply and reduce price volatility.



Increased use of modern biomass will facilitate access to clean,
affordable and reliable energy. This mitigation option is in line with the
targets of SDG7.
Rogelj et al., 2013; Cherian, 2015; Jingura and Kamusoko, 2016



A rapid upscaling of renewable energies could necessitate the early
retirement of fossil energy infrastructure (e.g., power plants, refineries,
pipelines) on a large scale. The implications of this could in some cases
be negative, unless targeted policies can help alleviate the burden on
industry (McCollum et al., 2018).

~ /

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Inclusive and Sustainable Industrialization (9.2/9.4)

Jackson and Senker, 2011; Bonan et al., 2014; Clarke et al., 2014; NCE, Fankhaeser et al., 2008; McCollum et al., 2008; Guivarch et al., 2011;
2014; OECD, 2017; York and McGee, 2017; McCollum et al., 2018
Bertram et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2015



Score
Evidence
Agreement
Innovation and Growth (8.1/8.2/8.4)

Rogelj et al., 2013; Cherian, 2015; Jingura and Kamusoko, 2016



Interaction

Decarbonization of the energy system through an upscaling of
renewables and energy efficiency is consistent with sustained economic
growth and resource decoupling. Long-term scenarios point towards
slight consumption losses caused by a rapid and pervasive expansion of
such energy solutions. Whether sustainable growth, as an overarching
concept, is attainable or not is more disputed in the literature. Existing
literature is also undecided as to whether or not access to modern
energy services causes economic growth (McCollum et al., 2018).

[+3]


Confidence

Sustainable and Modern Energy (7.2/7.a)

Decarbonization of the energy system through an upscaling of
renewables will greatly facilitate access to clean, affordable and reliable
energy. Hydropower plays an increasingly important role for the global
electricity supply. This mitigation option is in line with the targets of
SDG7 under the caveat of a transition to modern biomass.



Interaction

Economic-Supply

[+2]







[0]

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Tully, 2006; Riahi et al., 2012; Daut et al., 2013; IPCC, 2014; Hallegatte
et al., 2016b; McCollum et al., 2018

Deployment of renewable energy and improvements in energy efficiency
globally will aid climate change mitigation efforts, and this, in turn, can
help to reduce the exposure of people to certain types of disasters and
extreme events (McCollum et al., 2018).



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Disaster Preparedness and Prevention (11.5)

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

507









[+1]








/

[+2,1]










[+1]

&

J



Herrero and Thornton, 2013; Herrero et al., 2013

J

Schader et al., 2015

&

Exploiting the increasingly decoupled interactions between crops and
livestock could be beneficial for promoting structural changes in the
livestock sector and is a prerequisite for the sustainable growth of the
sector. (Quoted from Herrero et al., 2013)

[+1]

Scenarios where zero human-edible concentrate feed is used for
livestock, non-renewable energy use is reduced by 36%.



Sustainable Economic Growth (8.4)

Behnassi et al., 2014; Lamb et al., 2016



Johnson et al., 2007; Sarin et al., 2007; Treasury, 2009; Jain and
Sharma, 2010; Lybbert and Sumner, 2010; Mtui, 2011; Lakshmi et al.,
2015
Energy Efficiency (7.3)


Many developing countries including Gulf States will benefit from CSA
given the central role of agriculture in their economic and social
development. (Quoted from Behnassi et al. 2014). Low commodity
prices have reduced the incentive to invest in yield growth and have led
to declining farm labour and farm capital investment. (Quoted from
Lamb et al., 2016)

[+1]

Conventional agricultural biotechnology methods such as energy
efficient farming can help in sequestration of soil carbon. Modern
biotechnologies such as green energy and N-efficient GM crops can also
help in C-sequestration. Biotech crops allow farmers to use less - and
environmentally friendly - energy and practice soil carbon
sequestration. Biofuels, both from traditional and GMO crops, such as
sugar cane, oilseed, rapeseed and jatropha, can be produced. Green
energy programmes through plantations of perennial nonedible oilseed
producing plants and production of biodiesel for direct use in the energy
sector or blending biofuels with fossil fuels in certain proportions can
thereby minimize fossil fuel use. (Quoted from Lakshmi et al., 2015) GM
crops reduce demand for fossil fuel-based inputs.



Sustainable and Modern Energy (7.b)
[+2,2]






[+2]







Technological Upgradation and Innovation (9.2)

Complete genome maps for poultry and cattle now exist, and these
open up the way to possible advances in evolutionary biology, animal
breeding and animal models for human diseases. Genomic selection
should be able to at least double the rate of genetic gain in the dairy
industry. (Quoted from Thornton, 2010) Nanotechnology, biogas
technology and separation technologies are disruptive technologies that
enhance biogas production from anaerobic digesters or to reduce
odours
Sansoucy, 1995; Burton, 2007; Thornton, 2010



et al., 2015; Lamb et al., 2016; Long et al., 2016

Reduced research support and delayed industrialization will have an
adverse effect on food security and nourishment of children. Organic
farming technologies utilizing bio-based fertilizers (composted human
and animal manure) are some of the conventional biotechnological
options for reducing artificial fertilizer use (Lakshmi et al., 2015). CSA
requires huge financial investment and institutional innovation. CSA is
committed to new ways of engaging in participatory research and
partnerships with producers (Steenwerth et al., 2014). Technologies
used on-farm and during food processing to increase productivity which
also helps in adaptation and/or mitigation are new, so convincing
potential customers is difficult. Also, low-awareness of CSA,
inaccessible language, high costs, lack of verified impact of
technologies, hard to reach and train farmers, low consumer demand
and unequal distribution of costs/benefits across supply chains are
barriers to CSA technology adoption (Long et al., 2016). Low commodity
prices have reduced the incentive to invest in yield growth and have led
to declining investment in research and development (Lamb et al.,
2016) 1999; Behnassi et al., 2014; Steenwerth et al., 2014; Lakshmi
Evenson,

/

Infrastructure Building, Promotion of Inclusive
Industrialization and Innovation (9.1/9.2/9.5/9.b)

[+1]

Sustainable Growth (8.2)



Kummu et al., 2012; Hic et al., 2016



Kummu et al., 2012


By targeting infrastructure, processing and distribution losses, wastage
in food systems can be minimized. 23-24% of total cropland and
fertilizers are used to produce losses. So reduction in food losses will
help to diversify these valuable resources into other productive
activities.
Ingram, 2011; Beddington et al., 2012; Kummu et al., 2012; Hic et al.,
2016; Lamb et al., 2016



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Infrastructure Building and Promotion of Inclusive
Industrialization (9.1/9.2)

23-24% of total cropland and fertilizers are used to produce losses. So
reduction in food losses will help to diversify these valuable resources
into other productive activities.

[+1]

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Sustained and Inclusive Economic Growth (8.2)

Reducing global food supply chain losses have several important
secondary benefits like conserving energy.



Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Energy Efficiency, Universal Access (7.1/7.3)

Economic-Other

Agriculture and Livestock

Behavioural Response:
Sustainable Healthy Diets and
Reduced Food Waste

508

Land-based Greenhouse Gas Reduction and Soil Carbon
Sequestration

5

Greenhouse Gas Reduction
from Improved Livestock
Production and Manure

Interaction

[0]

[0]

[0]

Score

Agreement

No direct interaction

no direct interaction

No interaction

Evidence

Confidence

Chapter 5
Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities





[+1]




Score
Evidence
Agreement
Sustainable Economic Growth (8.4)


Confidence





[+2]






[+1]







[0]

[0]

[0]

Sikkema et al., 2014

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

The trade of wood pellets from clean wood waste should be facilitated
with less administrative import barriers by the EU, in order to have this
new option seriously accounted for as a future resource for energy.
(Quoted from Sikkema et al., 2014) Recommends further harmonization
of legal harvesting, sustainable sourcing and cascaded use requirements
for woody biomass for energy with the current requirements of
voluntary SFM certification schemes.



Universal Access (7.3)

[+2]






[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Some standards seek primarily to coordinate global trade, many purport
to promote ecological sustainability and social justice or to
institutionalize CSR, for example, labour standards developed in the
wake of sweatshops and child labour scandals. Environmental standards
for pollution control, etc. Indonesian factories may seek advantages
through non-price competition--perhaps by highlighting decent
working conditions or the existence of a union--or to see trade
associations or government promoting the country as a responsible
sourcing location.
Bartley, 2010



Decent Job Creation and Sustainable Economic Growth
(8.3/8.4)

Zomer et al., 2008; Kibria, 2015



Jones and McDermott, 2018


Many tree plantations worldwide have higher growth rates which can
provide higher rates of returns for investors. Agroforestry initiatives that
offer significant opportunities for projects to provide benefits to
smallholder farmers can also help address land degradation through
community-based efforts in more marginal areas. Mangroves reduce
impacts of disasters (cyclones/storms/floods) and enhance water quality,
fisheries, tourism businesses and livelihoods.

[+1]

Decent Job Creation and Sustainable Economic Growth
(8.3/8.4)

The US Forest Service estimates that an average NYC street tree (urban
afforestation) produces 209 USD in annual benefits, which is primarily
driven by aesthetic (90 USD per tree) and energy savings (from shade)
benefits (47.63 USD per tree).



Energy Conservation (7.3/7.b)

Turpie et al., 2015; Epstein and Theuer, 2017; Katila et al., 2017



Interaction

Bastos Lima et al., 2017; Katila et al., 2017



Confidence

Efforts by the Government of Zambia to reduce emissions by REDD+
have contributed to erosion control, ecotourism and pollination valued
at 2.5% of the country's GDP. Partnerships between local forest
managers, community enterprises and private sector companies can
support local economies and livelihoods, and boost regional and
national economic growth.

[+1,1]

Score
Evidence
Agreement
Energy Efficiency (7.3)

Consider the entire sinks and reservoirs of GHG while developing the
nationally appropriate mitigation actions. For countries with a
significant contribution of forest degradation (and GHG emissions) from
wood fuels, this should be considered. (Quoted from Bastos Lima et al.,
2017). Biomass for energy is recognized as often being inefficient, and is
often harvested in an unsustainable manner, but is a renewable energy
source.

/

Interaction

Economic-Other (continued)

Forest

Oceans

Reduced Deforestation, REDD+

Afforestation and Reforestation

Behavioural Response (Responsible
Sourcing)

Ocean Iron
Fertilization

Blue Carbon

Enhanced
Weathering

[+1,1]






No direct interaction

[+2]







[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Bartley, 2010; Huang et al., 2013

Capacity for processing certified timber is often underutilized, due to the
limited supply available. As a result, manufacturing firms that are
seeking to tap into green markets often turn to other sources of timber.
(Quoted from Bartley, 2010) Responsible sourcing, when integrated into
business practices, can enable retailers to better manage brand value
and reputation by avoiding negative public relations, as well as
maintaining and enhancing brand integrity (Huang et al., 2013).



Technological Upgradation and Innovation, Promotion of
Inclusive Industrialization (9.1/9.2/9.5)

[0]

Expanding road networks are recognized as one of the main drivers of
deforesting and forest degradation, diminishing forest benefits to
communities, On the other hand, roads can enhance market access,
thereby boosting local benefits (SDG 1) from the commercialization of
forest products. (Quoted from Katila et al., 2017). Efforts by the
Government of Zambia to reduce emissions by REDD+ have contributed
to erosion control, ecotourism and pollination valued at 2.5% of the
country's GDP
Turpie et al., 2015; Epstein and Theuer, 2017; Katila et al., 2017

/

Interaction
Score
Evidence
Agreement Confidence
Infrastructure, Promotion of Inclusive Industrialization
(9.1/9.2/9.5)

Agreement

No direct interaction

Evidence

Confidence

[0]

[0]

[0]

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

No direct interaction

Chen and Qi, 2018; Fu et al., 2018; Kowarik, 2018; McKinney and Ingo,
2018; McPherson et al., 2018; Pei et al., 2018





[+2]

Many urban tree plantations worldwide are created with a focus on
multiple benefits, like air quality improvement, cultural preference for
green nature, healthy community interaction as well as temperature
control and biodiversity enhancement goals. People's preference for
urban forest gardens are encouraging new urban green spaces, and tree
selection helps in building resilience to disaster.

Improving Air Quality, Green and Public Spaces, Peri-urban
Spaces (11.6/11.7/11.a/11.b)

Chen and Qi, 2018; Fu et al., 2018; Kowarik, 2018; McKinney and Ingo,
2018; McPherson et al., 2018; Pei et al., 2018

[+2]





Many urban tree plantations worldwide are created with a focus on
multiple benefits, like air quality improvement, cultural preference for
green nature, healthy community interaction as well as temperature
control and biodiversity enhancement goals.


[0]

Score

Improving Air Quality, Green and Public Spaces
(11.6/11.7/11.a/11.b)

Interaction

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities
Chapter 5

5

509

Chapter 5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

References
Note that this reference list does not account for the references in Table 5.2, for which a separate reference list is provided.

5

Abel, G.J., B. Barakat, S. KC, and W. Lutz, 2016: Meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals leads to lower world population growth. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 113(50), 14294-14299,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1611386113.
Absar, S.M. and B.L. Preston, 2015: Extending the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways
for sub-national impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability studies. Global
Environmental Change, 33, 83-96,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.04.004.
Adam, H.N., 2015: Mainstreaming adaptation in India - the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act and climate change. Climate and
Development, 7(2), 142-152, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.934772.
Adger, W.N. et al., 2014: Human security. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, pp. 755-791.
Aggarwal, A., 2014: How sustainable are forestry clean development mechanism
projects? A review of the selected projects from India. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change, 19(1), 73-91,
doi:10.1007/s11027-012-9427-x.
Agoramoorthy, G. and M.J. Hsu, 2016: Small dams revive dry rivers and mitigate
local climate change in India's drylands. International Journal of Climate Change
Strategies and Management, 8(2), 271-285,
doi:10.1108/ijccsm-12-2014-0141.
Agyeman, J., D. Schlosberg, L. Craven, and C. Matthews, 2016: Trends and
directions in environmental justice: from inequity to everyday life, community,
and just sustainabilities. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 41,
321-340, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-090052.
Aha, B. and J.Z. Ayitey, 2017: Biofuels and the hazards of land grabbing: tenure
(in)security and indigenous farmers' investment decisions in Ghana. Land Use
Policy, 60, 48-59, doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.10.012.
Ahmed, N., W.W.L. Cheung, S. Thompson, and M. Glaser, 2017a: Solutions to blue
carbon emissions: Shrimp cultivation, mangrove deforestation and climate
change in coastal Bangladesh. Marine Policy, 82, 68-75,
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.007.
Ahmed, N., S.W. Bunting, M. Glaser, M.S. Flaherty, and J.S. Diana, 2017b: Can
greening of aquaculture sequester blue carbon? Ambio, 46(4), 468-477,
doi:10.1007/s13280-016-0849-7.
Aipira, C., A. Kidd, and K. Morioka, 2017: Climate Change Adaptation in Pacific
Countries: Fostering Resilience Through Gender Equality. In: Climate Change
Adaptation in Pacific Countries: Fostering Resilience and Improving the Quality
of Life [Leal Filho, W. (ed.)]. Springer International Publishing AG, Cham,
Switzerland, pp. 225-239, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-50094-2_13.
Ajanovic, A., 2015: The future of electric vehicles: prospects and impediments.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment, 4(6), 521-536,
doi:10.1002/wene.160.
Al Ansari, M.S., 2013: Climate change policies and the potential for energy
efficiency in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Economy. Environment and
Natural Resources Research, 3(4), 106-117, doi:10.5539/enrr.v3n4p106.
Albert, S. et al., 2017: Heading for the hills: climate-driven community relocations
in the Solomon Islands and Alaska provide insight for a 1.5C future. Regional
Environmental Change, 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1256-8.
Ali, A. and O. Erenstein, 2017: Assessing farmer use of climate change adaptation
practices and impacts on food security and poverty in Pakistan. Climate Risk
Management, 16, 183-194, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2016.12.001.
Al-Maamary, H.M.S., H.A. Kazem, and M.T. Chaichan, 2016: Changing the Energy
Profile of the GCC States: A Review. International Journal of Applied Engineering
Research, 11(3), 1980-1988,
www.ripublication.com/volume/ijaerv11n3.htm.
Al-Maamary, H.M.S., H.A. Kazem, and M.T. Chaichan, 2017: The impact of oil price
fluctuations on common renewable energies in GCC countries. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 75, 989-1007,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.079.

510

Alshehry, A.S. and M. Belloumi, 2015: Energy consumption, carbon dioxide
emissions and economic growth: the case of Saudi Arabia. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 41, 237-247, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.08.004.
Alsheyab, M.A.T., 2017: Qatar's effort for the deployment of Carbon Capture and
Storage. Global Nest Journal, 19(3), 453-457, https://journal.gnest.org/sites/
default/files/submissions/gnest_02269/gnest_02269_published.pdf.
Altieri, K.E. et al., 2016: Achieving development and mitigation objectives through
a decarbonization development pathway in South Africa. Climate Policy,
16(sup1), S78-S91, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1150250.
Amann, M. et al., 2011: Cost-effective control of air quality and greenhouse
gases in Europe: Modeling and policy applications. Environmental Modelling &
Software, 26(12), 1489-1501, doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2011.07.012.
Anand, R., 2004: International environmental justice: A North-South Dimension.
Routledge, London, UK, 161 pp.
Andonova, L.B., T.N. Hale, and C.B. Roger, 2017: National policy and transnational
governance of climate change: substitutes or complements? International
Studies Quarterly, 61(2), 253-268, doi:10.1093/isq/sqx014.
Ansuategi, A. et al., 2015: The impact of climate change on the achievement of the
post-2015 sustainable development goals. Metroeconomica, HR Wallingford
and CDKN, 84 pp.
Antwi-Agyei, P., A.J. Dougill, and L.C. Stringer, 2015: Impacts of land tenure
arrangements on the adaptive capacity of marginalized groups: The case of
Ghana's Ejura Sekyedumase and Bongo districts. Land Use Policy, 49, 203-212,
doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2015.08.007.
Antwi-Agyei, P., A. Dougill, and L. Stringer, 2017a: Assessing Coherence between
Sector Policies and Climate Compatible Development: Opportunities for Triple
Wins. Sustainability, 9(11), 2130, doi:10.3390/su9112130.
Antwi-Agyei, P., A.J. Dougill, L.C. Stringer, and S.N.A. Codjoe, 2018: Adaptation
opportunities and maladaptive outcomes in climate vulnerability hotspots of
northern Ghana. Climate Risk Management, 19, 83-93,
doi:10.1016/j.crm.2017.11.003.
Antwi-Agyei, P. et al., 2017b: Perceived stressors of climate vulnerability across
scales in the Savannah zone of Ghana: a participatory approach. Regional
Environmental Change, 17(1), 213-227, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-0993-4.
Apgar, M.J., W. Allen, K. Moore, and J. Ataria, 2015: Understanding adaptation and
transformation through indigenous practice: the case of the Guna of Panama.
Ecology and Society, 20(1), 45, doi:10.5751/es-07314-200145.
Arakelyan, I., D. Moran, and A. Wreford, 2017: Climate smart agriculture: a critical
review. In: Making Climate Compatible Development Happen [Nunan, F. (ed.)].
Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 66-86.
Arbuthnott, K., S. Hajat, C. Heaviside, and S. Vardoulakis, 2016: Changes in
population susceptibility to heat and cold over time: assessing adaptation to
climate change. Environmental Health, 15(S1), S33,
doi:10.1186/s12940-016-0102-7.
Archer, D. et al., 2014: Moving towards inclusive urban adaptation: approaches to
integrating community-based adaptation to climate change at city and national
scale. Climate and Development, 6(4), 345-356,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.918868.
Armitage, D.R., 2015: Social-ecological change in Canada's Arctic: coping,
adapting, learning for an uncertain future. In: Climate Change and the Coast:
Building Resilient Communities [Glavovic, B., M. Kelly, R. Kay, and A. Travers
(eds.)]. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA, pp. 103-124.
Arnell, N.W. and S.N. Gosling, 2016: The impacts of climate change on
river flood risk at the global scale. Climatic Change, 134(3), 387-401,
doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1084-5.
Arnell, N.W. et al., 2015: The global impacts of climate change under pathways
that reach 2, 3 and 4C above pre-industrial levels. Report from AVOID2
project to the Committee on Climate Change, 34 pp.
Arriagada, R.A., E.O. Sills, P.J. Ferraro, and S.K. Pattanayak, 2015: Do payments pay
off? Evidence from participation in Costa Rica's PES program. PLOS ONE, 10(7),
1-17, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0131544.
Arthurson, K. and S. Baum, 2015: Making space for social inclusion in
conceptualising climate change vulnerability. Local Environment, 20(1), 1-17,
doi:10.1080/13549839.2013.818951.
Arts, K., 2017: Inclusive sustainable development: a human rights perspective.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 24, 58-62,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.02.001.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Atalay, Y., F. Biermann, and A. Kalfagianni, 2016: Adoption of renewable energy
technologies in oil-rich countries: explaining policy variation in the Gulf
Cooperation Council states. Renewable Energy, 85, 206-214,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2015.06.045.
Ayers, J.M., S. Huq, H. Wright, A.M. Faisal, and S.T. Hussain, 2014: Mainstreaming
climate change adaptation into development in Bangladesh. Climate and
Development, 6(4), 293-305, doi:10.1002/wcc.226.
Babiker, M.H., 2016: Options for climate change policy in MENA countries after
Paris. Policy Perspective No. 18, The Economic Research Forum (ERF), Giza,
Egypt, 7 pp.
Bado, B.V., P. Savadogo, and M.L.S. Manzo, 2016: Restoration of Degraded Lands
in West Africa Sahel: Review of experiences in Burkina Faso and Niger. CGIAR,
16 pp.
Bai, X. et al., 2016: Plausible and desirable futures in the Anthropocene: A new
research agenda. Global Environmental Change, 39, 351-362,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.09.017.
Bai, X. et al., 2018: Six research priorities for cities and climate change. Nature,
555, 23-25, doi:10.1038/d41586-018-02409-z.
Bajelj, B. et al., 2014: Importance of food-demand management for climate
mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 4(10), 924-929,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2353.
Baldacchino, G., 2017: Seizing history: development and non-climate change
in Small Island Developing States. International Journal of Climate Change
Strategies and Management, 10(2), 217-228,
doi:10.1108/ijccsm-02-2017-0037.
Banda, M.L. and S. Fulton, 2017: Litigating Climate Change in National Courts:
Recent Trends and Developments in Global Climate Law. Environmental Law
Reporter, 47(10121), 10121-10134,
www.eli.org/sites/default/files/elr/featuredarticles/47.10121.pdf.
Barnes, P., 2015: The political economy of localization in the transition movement.
Community Development Journal, 50(2), 312-326,
doi:10.1093/cdj/bsu042.
Barnett, J. and E. Walters, 2016: Rethinking the Vulnerability of Small Island
States: Climate Change and Development in the Pacific Islands. In: The Palgrave
Handbook of International Development [Grugel, J. and D. Hammett (eds.)].
Palgrave, London, UK, pp. 731-748,
doi:10.1057/978-1-137-42724-3_40.
Barnett, J., P. Tschakert, L. Head, and W.N. Adger, 2016: A science of loss. Nature
Climate Change, 6, 976-978, doi:10.1038/nclimate3140.
Barnett, J. et al., 2014: A local coastal adaptation pathway. Nature Climate
Change, 4(12), 1103-1108, doi:10.1038/nclimate2383.
Barrett, S., 2013: Local level climate justice? Adaptation finance and
vulnerability reduction. Global Environmental Change, 23(6), 1819-1829,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.015.
Barrington-Leigh, C., 2016: Sustainability and Well-Being: A Happy Synergy.
Development, 59, 292-298, doi:10.1057/s41301-017-0113-x.
Bartos, M.D. and M. Chester, 2014: The Conservation Nexus: Valuing Interdependent
Water and Energy Savings in Arizona. Environmental Science & Technology,
48(4), 2139-2149, doi:10.1021/es4033343.
Bathiany, S., V. Dakos, M. Scheffer, and T.M. Lenton, 2018: Climate models predict
increasing temperature variability in poor countries. Science Advances, 4(5),
eaar5809, doi:10.1126/sciadv.aar5809.
Bauer, N. et al., 2016: Global fossil energy markets and climate change mitigation
- an analysis with REMIND. Climatic Change, 136(1), 69-82,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0901-6.
Bayram, H. and A.B. Ozturk, 2014: Global climate change, desertification, and its
consequences in Turkey and the Middle East. In: Global Climate Change and
Public Health [Pinkerton, K.E. and W.N. Rom (eds.)]. Springer, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 293-305, doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-8417-2_17.
Bebbington, J. and C. Larrinaga, 2014: Accounting and sustainable development:
an exploration. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 39(6), 395-413,
doi:10.1016/j.aos.2014.01.003.
Beilin, R. and C. Wilkinson, 2015: Introduction: Governing for urban resilience.
Urban Studies, 52(7), 1205-1217, doi:10.1177/0042098015574955.
Bell, K., 2015: Can the capitalist economic system deliver environmental justice?
Environmental Research Letters, 10(12), 125017,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125017.
Berger, M., S. Pfister, V. Bach, and M. Finkbeiner, 2015: Saving the planet's climate
or water resources? The trade-off between carbon and water footprints of
European biofuels. Sustainability, 7(6), 6665-6683, doi:10.3390/su7066665.

Chapter 5

Berner, J. et al., 2016: Adaptation in Arctic circumpolar communities: food and
water security in a changing climate. International Journal of Circumpolar
Health, 75(1), 33820, doi:10.3402/ijch.v75.33820.
Berrueta, V.M., M. Serrano-Medrano, C. Garcia-Bustamante, M. Astier, and O.R.
Masera, 2017: Promoting sustainable local development of rural communities
and mitigating climate change: the case of Mexico's Patsari improved cookstove
project. Climatic Change, 140(1), 63-77,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1523-y.
Bertram, C. et al., 2018: Targeted policies can compensate most of the increased
sustainability risks in 1.5C mitigation scenarios. Environmental Research
Letters, 13(6), 064038, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac3ec.
Betts, R.A. et al., 2018: Changes in climate extremes, fresh water availability and
vulnerability to food insecurity projected at 1.5C and 2C global warming with
a higher-resolution global climate model. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119),
20160452, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0452.
Betzold, C. and F. Weiler, 2017: Allocation of aid for adaptation to climate change:
do vulnerable countries receive more support? International Environmental
Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 17, 17-36,
doi:10.1007/s10784-016-9343-8.
Bexell, M. and K. Jonsson, 2017: Responsibility and the United Nations' Sustainable
Development Goals. Forum for Development Studies, 44(1), 13-29,
doi:10.1080/08039410.2016.1252424.
Bickersteth, S. et al., 2017: Mainstreaming climate compatible development:
Insights from CDKN's first seven years. Climate and Development Knowledge
Network (CDKN), London, 199 pp.
Biermann, F. and I. Boas, 2017: Towards a global governance system to protect
climate migrants: taking stock. In: Research Handbook on Climate Change,
Migration and the Law [Mayer, B. and F. Crepeau (eds.)]. Edward Elgar
Publishing, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA, pp. 405-419,
doi:10.4337/9781785366598.00026.
Biermann, M., K. Hillmer-Pegram, C.N. Knapp, and R.E. Hum, 2016: Approaching
a critical turn? A content analysis of the politics of resilience in key bodies of
resilience literature. Resilience, 4(2), 59-78,
doi:10.1080/21693293.2015.1094170.
Binam, J.N., F. Place, A.A. Djalal, and A. Kalinganire, 2017: Effects of local
institutions on the adoption of agroforestry innovations: evidence of farmer
managed natural regeneration and its implications for rural livelihoods in the
Sahel. Agricultural and Food Economics, 5(1), 2,
doi:10.1186/s40100-017-0072-2.
Blanco, V., C. Brown, S. Holzhauer, G. Vulturius, and M.D.A. Rounsevell, 2017: The
importance of socio-ecological system dynamics in understanding adaptation
to global change in the forestry sector. Journal of Environmental Management,
196, 36-47, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.02.066.
Blondeel, M. and T. van de Graaf, 2018: Toward a global coal mining moratorium?
A comparative analysis of coal mining policies in the USA, China, India and
Australia. Climatic Change, 1-13, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2135-5.
Blyth, W., R. McCarthy, and R. Gross, 2015: Financing the UK power sector: is the
money available? Energy Policy, 87, 607-622,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2015.08.028.
Boke, C., 2015: Resilience's problem of the present: reconciling social justice and
future-oriented resilience planning in the Transition Town movement. Resilience,
3(3), 207-220, doi:10.1080/21693293.2015.1072313.
Bonsch, M. et al., 2016: Trade-offs between land and water requirements for largescale bioenergy production. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 11-24,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12226.
Boonstra, W.J., E. Bjorkvik, L.J. Haider, and V. Masterson, 2016: Human
responses to social-ecological traps. Sustainability Science, 11(6), 877-889,
doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0397-x.
Bosomworth, K., P. Leith, A. Harwood, and P.J. Wallis, 2017: What's the problem
in adaptation pathways planning? The potential of a diagnostic problemstructuring approach. Environmental Science & Policy, 76, 23-28,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.06.007.
Bowyer, P., M. Schaller, S. Bender, and D. Jacob, 2015: Adaptation as ClimateRisk
Management: Methods and Approaches. In: Handbook of Climate Change
Adaptation [Filho, L. (ed.)]. Springer, Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 71-92,
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38670-1_28.
Boyd, E., R.A. James, R.G. Jones, H.R. Young, and F.E.L. Otto, 2017: A typology
of loss and damage perspectives. Nature Climate Change, 7(10), 723-729,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3389.

511

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Boyle, J. et al., 2013: Exploring Trends in Low-Carbon, Climate-Resilient Development.
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), 37 pp.
Boysen, L.R., W. Lucht, and D. Gerten, 2017: Trade-offs for food production, nature
conservation and climate limit the terrestrial carbon dioxide removal potential.
Global Change Biology, 23(10), 4303-4317, doi:10.1111/gcb.13745.
Brink, E. et al., 2016: Cascades of green: A review of ecosystem-based adaptation
in urban areas. Global Environmental Change, 36, 111-123,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.11.003.
Brockington, D. and S. Ponte, 2015: The Green Economy in the global South:
experiences, redistributions and resistance. Third World Quarterly, 36(12),
2197-2206, doi:10.1080/01436597.2015.1086639.
Brohe, A., 2014: Whither the CDM? Investment outcomes and future prospects.
Environment, Development and Sustainability, 16(2), 305-322,
doi:10.1007/s10668-013-9478-5.
Brown, D. and G. McGranahan, 2016: The urban informal economy, local inclusion
and achieving a global green transformation. Habitat International, 53, 97-105,
doi:10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.11.002.
Brown, E., J. Cloke, D. Gent, P.H. Johnson, and C. Hill, 2014: Green growth or
ecological commodification: debating the green economy in the global south.
Geografiska Annaler, Series B: Human Geography, 96(3), 245-259,
doi:10.1111/geob.12049.
Bryan, E., Q. Bernier, M. Espinal, and C. Ringler, 2017: Making climate change
adaptation programmes in sub-Saharan Africa more gender responsive: insights
from implementing organizations on the barriers and opportunities. Climate
and Development, 1-15, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1301870.
Buch-Hansen, H., 2018: The Prerequisites for a Degrowth Paradigm Shift:
Insights from Critical Political Economy. Ecological Economics, 146, 157-163,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.10.021.
Bulkeley, H., G.A.S. Edwards, and S. Fuller, 2014: Contesting climate justice in
the city: examining politics and practice in urban climate change experiments.
Global Environmental Change, 25(1), 31-40,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.01.009.
Bulkeley, H., J.A. Carmin, V. Castan Broto, G.A.S. Edwards, and S. Fuller, 2013:
Climate justice and global cities: mapping the emerging discourses. Global
Environmental Change, 23(5), 914-925, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.05.010.
Buntaine, M.T. and L. Prather, 2018: Preferences for Domestic Action Over
International Transfers in Global Climate Policy. Journal of Experimental Political
Science, 1-15, doi:10.1017/xps.2017.34.
Burke, M., S.M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel, 2015: Global non-linear effect of
temperature on economic production. Nature, 527(7577), 235-239,
doi:10.1038/nature15725.
Burns, W. and S. Nicholson, 2017: Bioenergy and carbon capture with storage
(BECCS): the prospects and challenges of an emerging climate policy response.
Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, 7(4), 527-534,
doi:10.1007/s13412-017-0445-6.
Bustamante, M. et al., 2014: Co-benefits, trade-offs, barriers and policies for
greenhouse gas mitigation in the agriculture, forestry and other land use
(AFOLU) sector. Global Change Biology, 20(10), 3270-3290,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12591.
Butler, C., K.A. Parkhill, and N.F. Pidgeon, 2016: Energy consumption and everyday
life: choice, values and agency through a practice theoretical lens. Journal of
Consumer Culture, 16(3), 887-907, doi:10.1177/1469540514553691.
Butler, J.R.A. et al., 2016: Scenario planning to leap-frog the Sustainable
Development Goals: an adaptation pathways approach. Climate Risk
Management, 12, 83-99, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2015.11.003.
Butt, N. et al., 2016: Challenges in assessing the vulnerability of species to climate
change to inform conservation actions. Biological Conservation, 199, 10-15,
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2016.04.020.
Byers, E.A., J.W. Hall, and J.M. Amezaga, 2014: Electricity generation and cooling
water use: UK pathways to 2050. Global Environmental Change, 25, 16-30,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.01.005.
Byers, E.A. et al., 2018: Global exposure and vulnerability to multi-sector
development and climate change hotspots. Environmental Research Letters,
13(5), 055012, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf45.
Byrne, J. et al., 2016: Could urban greening mitigate suburban thermal inequity?:
the role of residents' dispositions and household practices. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(9), 095014, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095014.
Byrnes, W.M., 2014: Climate justice, Hurricane Katrina, and African American
environmentalism. Journal of African American Studies, 18(3), 305-314,
doi:10.1007/s12111-013-9270-5.

512

Cabezon, E., L. Hunter, P. Tumbarello, K. Washimi, and Yiqun Wu, 2016:
Strengthening Macro-Fiscal Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change
in the Small States of the Pacific. In: Resilience and Growth in the Small States of
the Pacific [Khor, H.E., R.P. Kronenberg, and P. Tumbarello (eds.)]. International
Monetary Fund (IMF), Washington DC, USA, pp. 71-94.
Caldecott, B., O. Sartor, and T. Spencer, 2017: Lessons from previous `coal
transitions': High-level summary for decision-makers. IDDRI and Climate
Strategies, 24 pp.
Callen, T., R. Cherif, F. Hasanov, A. Hegazy, and P. Khandelwal, 2014: Economic
Diversification in the GCC: Past, Present, and Future. IMF Staff Discussion Note
SDN/14 /12, International Monetary Fund (IMF), 32 pp.
Calliari, E., 2016: Loss and damage: a critical discourse analysis of Parties' positions
in climate change negotiations. Journal of Risk Research, 9877, 1-23,
doi:10.1080/13669877.2016.1240706.
Calvet-Mir, L., E. Corbera, A. Martin, J. Fisher, and N. Gross-Camp, 2015: Payments
for ecosystem services in the tropics: a closer look at effectiveness and equity.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 14, 150-162,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.06.001.
Calvin, K. et al., 2017: The SSP4: A world of deepening inequality. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 284-296, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.010.
Cameron, C. et al., 2016: Policy trade-offs between climate mitigation and clean
cook-stove access in South Asia. Nature Energy, 1, 1-5,
doi:10.1038/nenergy.2015.10.
Cameron, R.W.F., J. Taylor, and M. Emmett, 2015: A Hedera green facade - energy
performance and saving under different maritime-temperate, winter weather
conditions. Building and Environment, 92, 111-121,
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.04.011.
Campbell, B.M. et al., 2016: Reducing risks to food security from climate change.
Global Food Security, 11, 34-43, doi:10.1016/j.gfs.2016.06.002.
Campeanu, C.N. and I. Fazey, 2014: Adaptation and pathways of change and
response: a case study from Eastern Europe. Global Environmental Change, 28,
351-367, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.010.
Campiglio, E., 2016: Beyond carbon pricing: The role of banking and monetary
policy in financing the transition to a low-carbon economy. Ecological
Economics, 121, 220-230, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.03.020.
Carr, E.R. and M.C. Thompson, 2014: Gender and climate change adaptation in
agrarian settings. Geography Compass, 8(3), 182-197,
doi:10.1111/gec3.12121.
Carr, E.R. and K.N. Owusu-Daaku, 2015: The shifting epistemologies of vulnerability
in climate services for development: The case of Mali's agrometeorological
advisory programme. Area, 7-17, doi:10.1111/area.12179.
Carr, E.R. and S.N. Onzere, 2018: Really effective (for 15% of the men): Lessons in
understanding and addressing user needs in climate services from Mali. Climate
Risk Management, 22, 82-95, doi:10.1016/j.crm.2017.03.002.
Carter, T.R. et al., 2016: Characterising vulnerability of the elderly to climate
change in the Nordic region. Regional Environmental Change, 16(1), 43-58,
doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0688-7.
Castan Broto, V., 2017: Urban Governance and the Politics of Climate change.
World Development, 93, 1-15, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.12.031.
Castro, P., 2016: Common but differentiated responsibilities beyond the nation
state: how is differential treatment addressed in transnational Climate
governance initiatives? Transnational Environmental Law, 5(02), 379-400,
doi:10.1017/s2047102516000224.
Cavanagh, C. and T.A. Benjaminsen, 2014: Virtual nature, violent accumulation:
The `spectacular failure' of carbon offsetting at a Ugandan National Park.
Geoforum, 56, 55-65, doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2014.06.013.
Cervigni, R. and M. Morris (eds.), 2016: Confronting Drought in Africa's Drylands:
Opportunities for Enhancing Resilience. World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 299 pp.
Chakrabarti, S. and E.J. Shin, 2017: Automobile dependence and physical inactivity:
insights from the California Household Travel Survey. Journal of Transport and
Health, 6, 262-271, doi:10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.002.
Chakravarty, D. and M. Tavoni, 2013: Energy poverty alleviation and climate
change mitigation: Is there a trade off? Energy Economics, 40, S67-S73,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2013.09.022.
Chakravarty, D. and J. Roy, 2016: The Global South: New Estimates and Insights
from Urban India. In: Rethinking Climate and Energy Policies: New Perspectives
on the Rebound Phenomenon [Santarius, T., H.J. Walnum, and A. Carlo (eds.)].
Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 55-72, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38807-6_4.
Chakravarty, D., S. Dasgupta, and J. Roy, 2013: Rebound effect: how much to
worry? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 5(2), 216-228,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.03.001.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chan, K.M.A., E. Anderson, M. Chapman, K. Jespersen, and P. Olmsted, 2017:
Payments for ecosystem services: rife with problems and potential-for
transformation towards sustainability. Ecological Economics, 140, 110-122,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.04.029.
Chancel, L. and T. Picketty, 2015: Carbon and inequality: from Kyoto to Paris. Trends
in the global inequality of carbon emissions (1998-2013) & prospects for an
equitable adaptation fund. Paris School of Economics, Paris, France, 50 pp.
Chapin, F.S., C.N. Knapp, T.J. Brinkman, R. Bronen, and P. Cochran, 2016: Communityempowered adaptation for self-reliance. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 19, 67-75, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.12.008.
Chaturvedi, V. and P.R. Shukla, 2014: Role of energy efficiency in climate change
mitigation policy for India: assessment of co-benefits and opportunities within
an integrated assessment modeling framework. Climatic Change, 123(3), 597-
609, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0898-x.
Chelleri, L., G. Minucci, and E. Skrimizea, 2016: Does community resilience
decrease social-ecological vulnerability? Adaptation pathways trade-off in the
Bolivian Altiplano. Regional Environmental Change, 16(8), 2229-2241,
doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1046-8.
Chen, X., X. Liu, and D. Hu, 2015: Assessment of sustainable development: A case
study of Wuhan as a pilot city in China. Ecological Indicators, 50, 206-214,
doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.11.002.
Cheung, W.W.L., G. Reygondeau, and T.L. Frolicher, 2016: Large benefits to marine
fisheries of meeting the 1.5C global warming target. Science, 354(6319),
1591-1594, doi:10.1126/science.aag2331.
Chief, K., A. Meadow, and K. Whyte, 2016: Engaging southwestern tribes in
sustainable water resources topics and management. Water, 8(8), 1-21,
doi:10.3390/w8080350.
Chong, J., 2014: Ecosystem-based approaches to climate change adaptation:
progress and challenges. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law
and Economics, 14(4), 391-405, doi:10.1007/s10784-014-9242-9.
Chu, E., I. Anguelovski, and D. Roberts, 2017: Climate adaptation as strategic
urbanism: assessing opportunities and uncertainties for equity and inclusive
development in cities. Cities, 60, 378-387, doi:10.1016/j.cities.2016.10.016.
Chung Tiam Fook, T., 2017: Transformational processes for community-focused
adaptation and social change: a synthesis. Climate and Development, 9(1),
5-21, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1086294.
Clarke, L.E. et al., 2014: Assessing transformation pathways. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 413-510.
Clements, R., 2009: The Economic Cost of Climate Change in Africa. Pan African
Climate Justice Alliance (PACJA), 52 pp.
Cobbinah, P.B. and G.K. Anane, 2016: Climate change adaptation in rural Ghana:
indigenous perceptions and strategies. Climate and Development, 8(2), 169-
178, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1034228.
Coe, R., F. Sinclair, and E. Barrios, 2014: Scaling up agroforestry requires research `in'
rather than `for' development. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
6(1), 73-77, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.10.013.
Coe, R., J. Njoloma, and F. Sinclair, 2017: To control or not to control: how do we
learn more about how agronomic innovations perform on farms? Experimental
Agriculture, 1-7, doi:10.1017/s0014479717000102.
Cohen, M.G. (ed.), 2017: Climate change and gender in rich countries: work, public
policy and action. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 322 pp.
Cole, M.J., R.M. Bailey, and M.G. New, 2017: Spatial variability in sustainable
development trajectories in South Africa: provincial level safe and just operating
spaces. Sustainability Science, 12(5), 829-848, doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0418-9.
Colenbrander, S., D. Dodman, and D. Mitlin, 2017: Using climate finance to advance
climate justice: the politics and practice of channelling resources to the local
level. Climate Policy, 1-14, doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1388212.
Colenbrander, S. et al., 2016: Can low-carbon urban development be pro-poor?
The case of Kolkata, India. Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 139-158,
doi:10.1177/0956247816677775.
Colloff, M.J. et al., 2017: An integrative research framework for enabling
transformative adaptation. Environmental Science & Policy, 68, 87-96,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.11.007.
Conservation International, 2016: Ecosystem Based Adaptation: Essential for
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Conservation International,
Arlington, VA, USA, 4 pp.

Chapter 5

Conway, D. et al., 2015: Climate and southern Africa's water-energy-food nexus.
Nature Climate Change, 5(9), 837-846,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2735.
Corbera, E., C. Hunsberger, and C. Vaddhanaphuti, 2017: Climate change policies,
land grabbing and conflict: perspectives from Southeast Asia. Canadian Journal
of Development Studies, 38(3), 297-304,
doi:10.1080/02255189.2017.1343413.
Cretney, R.M., A.C. Thomas, and S. Bond, 2016: Maintaining grassroots activism:
Transition Towns in Aotearoa New Zealand. New Zealand Geographer, 72(2),
81-91, doi:10.1111/nzg.12114.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2015: Bioenergy and climate change mitigation: an assessment.
GCB Bioenergy, 7(5), 916-944, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12205.
Croce, D., C. Kaminker, and F. Stewart, 2011: he Role of Pension Funds in Financing
Green Growth Initiatives. OECD Working Papers on Finance, Insurance
and Private Pensions No. 10, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) Publishing, Paris, France,
doi:10.1787/5kg58j1lwdjd-en.
Crosland, T., A. Meyer, and M. Wewerinke-singh, 2016: The Paris Agreement
Implementation Blueprint: a practical guide to bridging the gap between
actions and goal and closing the accountability deficit (Part 1). Environmental
liability, 25(2), 114-125, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2952215.
CSO Equity Review, 2015: Fair Shares: A Civil Society Equity Review of INDCs. CSO
Equity Review Coalition, Manila, London, Cape Town, Washington, et al. 36 pp.
Cugurullo, F., 2013: How to build a sandcastle: an analysis of the genesis and
development of Masdar City. Journal of Urban Technology, 20(1), 23-37,
doi:10.1080/10630732.2012.735105.
Cundill, G. et al., 2014: Social learning for adaptation: a descriptive handbook
for practitioners and action researchers. IRDC, Rhodes University, Ruliv, 118 pp.
Cutter, S.L., 2016: Resilience to What? Resilience for Whom? Geographical Journal,
182(2), 110-113, doi:10.1111/geoj.12174.
Cvitanovic, C. et al., 2016: Linking adaptation science to action to build food
secure Pacific Island communities. Climate Risk Management, 11, 53-62,
doi:10.1016/j.crm.2016.01.003.
Daigneault, A., P. Brown, and D. Gawith, 2016: Dredging versus hedging:
Comparing hard infrastructure to ecosystem-based adaptation to flooding.
Ecological Economics, 122, 25-35, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.11.023.
Dasgupta, P., 2016: Climate Sensitive Adaptation in Health: Imperatives for India
in a Developing Economy Context. Springer India, 194 pp.
Dasgupta, P., K. Ebi, and I. Sachdeva, 2016: Health sector preparedness
for adaptation planning in India. Climatic Change, 138(3-4), 551-566,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1745-7.
Dasgupta, S., M. Huq, M.G. Mustafa, M.I. Sobhan, and D. Wheeler, 2017: The impact
of aquatic salinization on fish habitats and poor communities in a changing
climate: evidence from southwest coastal Bangladesh. Ecological Economics,
139, 128-139, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.04.009.
Datta, N., 2015: Evaluating impacts of watershed development program
on agricultural productivity, income, and livelihood in bhalki watershed
of Bardhaman District, West Bengal. World Development, 66, 443-456,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.08.024.
Davies, K., 2015: Kastom, climate change and intergenerational democracy:
experiences from Vanuatu. In: Climate change in the Asia-Pacific region [Leal
Filho, W. (ed.)]. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 49-66,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-14938-7_4.
Davies, T.E., N. Pettorelli, W. Cresswill, and I.R. Fazey, 2014: Who are the poor?
Measuring wealth inequality to aid understanding of socioeconomic contexts
for conservation: a case-study from the Solomon Islands. Environmental
Conservation, 41(04), 357-366, doi:10.1017/s0376892914000058.
de Coninck, H.C. and D. Puig, 2015: Assessing climate change mitigation
technology interventions by international institutions. Climatic Change, 131(3),
417-433, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1344-z.
de Coninck, H.C. and A. Sagar, 2015: Making sense of policy for climate technology
development and transfer. Climate Policy, 15(1), 1-11,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2014.953909.
de Coninck, H.C. and A. Sagar, 2017: Technology development and transfer (Article
10). In: The Paris Agreement on Climate Change [Klein, D., M.P. Carazo, M.
Doelle, J. Bulmer, and A. Higham (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
pp. 258-276.
De Stefano, L., J.D. Petersen-Perlman, E.A. Sproles, J. Eynard, and A.T. Wolf, 2017:
Assessment of transboundary river basins for potential hydro-political tensions.
Global Environmental Change, 45, 35-46,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.04.008.

513

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Dearing, J.A. et al., 2014: Safe and just operating spaces for regional socialecological systems. Global Environmental Change, 28(1), 227-238,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.06.012.
Death, C., 2014: The Green Economy in South Africa: Global Discourses and Local
Politics. Politikon, 41(1), 1-22, doi:10.1080/02589346.2014.885668.
Death, C., 2015: Four discourses of the green economy in the global South. Third
World Quarterly, 36(12), 2207-2224, doi:10.1080/01436597.2015.1068110.
Death, C., 2016: Green states in Africa: beyond the usual suspects. Environmental
Politics, 25:1, 116-135, doi:10.1080/09644016.2015.1074380.
DeCaro, D.A., C. Anthony, T. Arnold, E.F. Boamah, and A.S. Garmestani, 2017:
Understanding and applying principles of social cognition and decision
making in adaptive environmental governance. Ecology and Society, 22(1), 33,
doi:10.5751/es-09154-220133.
DeClerck, F.A.J. et al., 2016: Agricultural ecosystems and their services: the
vanguard of sustainability? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
23, 92-99, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2016.11.016.
Delponte, I., I. Pittaluga, and C. Schenone, 2017: Monitoring and evaluation of
Sustainable Energy Action Plan: practice and perspective. Energy Policy, 100,
9-17, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.10.003.
Dennig, F., M.B. Budolfson, M. Fleurbaey, A. Siebert, and R.H. Socolow, 2015: Inequality,
climate impacts on the future poor, and carbon prices. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112(52), 15827-15832, doi:10.1073/pnas.1513967112.
Denton, F. et al., 2014: Climate-resilient pathways: adaptation, mitigation, and
sustainable development. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group
II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir,
M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S.
MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1101-1131.
Derbez, M. et al., 2014: Indoor air quality and comfort in seven newly built,
energy-efficient houses in France. Building and Environment, 72, 173-187,
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.10.017.
Di Gregorio, M. et al., 2017: Climate policy integration in the land use sector:
Mitigation, adaptation and sustainable development linkages. Environmental
Science & Policy, 67, 35-43, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.11.004.
Dilling, L., M.E. Daly, W.R. Travis, O. Wilhelmi, and R.A. Klein, 2015: The dynamics
of vulnerability: why adapting to climate variability will not always prepare
us for climate change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 6(4),
413-425, doi:10.1002/wcc.341.
Ding, H. et al., 2016: Climate Benefits, Tenure Costs: The Economic Case For
Securing Indigenous Land Rights in the Amazon. World Resources Institute,
Washington DC, USA, 98 pp.
Dinku, T. et al., 2014: Bridging critical gaps in climate services and applications in
Africa. Earth Perspectives, 1(1), 15, doi:10.1186/2194-6434-1-15.
Dodman, D., H. Leck, M. Rusca, and S. Colenbrander, 2017: African urbanisation
and urbanism: implications for risk accumulation and reduction. International
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 26, 7-15, doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.06.029.
Doswald, N. et al., 2014: Effectiveness of ecosystem-based approaches for
adaptation: review of the evidence-base. Climate and Development, 6(2), 185-
201, doi:10.1080/17565529.2013.867247.
Douxchamps, S. et al., 2016: Linking agricultural adaptation strategies, food
security and vulnerability: evidence from West Africa. Regional Environmental
Change, 16(5), 1305-1317, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0838-6.
Dovie, D.B.K., M. Dzodzomenyo, and O.A. Ogunseitan, 2017: Sensitivity of health
sector indicators' response to climate change in Ghana. Science of the Total
Environment, 574, 837-846, doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.09.066.
Dow, K. et al., 2013: Limits to adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 3(4), 305-307,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1847.
Dual Citizen LLC, 2016: The Global Green Economy Index - GGEI 2016: Measuring
National Performance in the Green Economy. Dual Citizen LLC, Washington DC,
USA and New York, NY, USA, 58 pp.
Duarte, C.M., J. Wu, X. Xiao, A. Bruhn, and D. Krause-Jensen, 2017: Can Seaweed
Farming Play a Role in Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation? Frontiers in
Marine Science, 4, 100, doi:10.3389/fmars.2017.00100.
Duguma, L.A., P.A. Minang, and M. Van Noordwijk, 2014: Climate
change mitigation and adaptation in the land use sector: from
complementarity to synergy. Environmental Management, 54(3), 420-432,
doi:10.1007/s00267-014-0331-x.
Dumont, E.S., S. Bonhomme, T.F. Pagella, and F.L. Sinclair, 2017: Structured
stakeholder engagement leads to development of more diverse and inclusive

514

agroforestry options. Experimental Agriculture, 1-23,
doi:10.1017/s0014479716000788.
Eakin, H.C., M.C. Lemos, and D.R. Nelson, 2014: Differentiating capacities as
a means to sustainable climate change adaptation. Global Environmental
Change, 27(27), 1-8, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.013.
Ebi, K.L. and M. Otmani del Barrio, 2017: Lessons Learned on Health Adaptation
to Climate Variability and Change: Experiences Across Low- and Middle-Income
Countries. Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(6), 065001,
doi:10.1289/ehp405.
Ebi, K.L. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research:
background, process, and future directions. Climatic Change, 122(3), 363-372,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0912-3.
Echegaray, F., 2016: Consumers' reactions to product obsolescence in emerging
markets: the case of Brazil. Journal of Cleaner Production, 134, 191-203,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.08.119.
Ehresman, T.G. and C. Okereke, 2015: Environmental justice and conceptions of
the green economy. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics, 15(1), 13-27, doi:10.1007/s10784-014-9265-2.
Ekwurzel, B. et al., 2017: The rise in global atmospheric CO2, surface temperature,
and sea level from emissions traced to major carbon producers. Climatic
Change, 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-1978-0.
Enqvist, J., M. Tengo, and W.J. Boonstra, 2016: Against the current: rewiring
rigidity trap dynamics in urban water governance through civic engagement.
Sustainability Science, 11(6), 919-933, doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0377-1.
Ensor, J., 2016: Adaptation and resilience in Vanuatu: Interpreting community
perceptions of vulnerability, knowledge and power for community-based
adaptation programming. Report by SEI for Oxfam Australia, Carlton, 32 pp.
Ensor, J. and B. Harvey, 2015: Social learning and climate change adaptation:
evidence for international development practice. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 6(5), 509-522, doi:10.1002/wcc.348.
Entzinger, H. and P. Scholten, 2016: Adapting to Climate Change through
Migration. A case study of the Vietnamese Mekong River Delta. International
Organization for Migration (IOM), Geneva, Switzerland, 62 pp.
Epule, T.E., J.D. Ford, S. Lwasa, and L. Lepage, 2017: Climate change adaptation in
the Sahel. Environmental Science & Policy, 75, 121-137,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.05.018.
Eriksen, S., L.O. Naess, R. Haug, L. Lenaerts, and A. Bhonagiri, 2017: Courting
catastrophe? Can humanitarian actions contribute to climate change
adaptation? IDS Bulletin, 48(4), doi:10.19088/1968-2017.149.
Eriksson, H. et al., 2017: The role of fish and fisheries in recovering from natural
hazards: lessons learned from Vanuatu. Environmental Science & Policy, 76,
50-58, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.06.012.
Estrella, M., F.G. Renaud, K. Sudmeier-Rieux, and U. Nehren, 2016: Defining New
Pathways for Ecosystem-Based Disaster Risk Reduction and Adaptation in the
Post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda. In: Ecosystem-Based Disaster
Risk Reduction and Adaptation in Practice [Renaud, F.G., K. Sudmeier-Rieux,
M. Estrella, and U. Nehren (eds.)]. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 553-591,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-43633-3.
Evans, G. and L. Phelan, 2016: Transition to a post-carbon society: linking
environmental justice and just transition discourses. Energy Policy, 99, 329-
339, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.05.003.
Evans, J.P., R.B. Smith, and R.J. Oglesby, 2004: Middle East climate simulation and
dominant precipitation processes. International Journal of Climatology, 24(13),
1671-1694, doi:10.1002/joc.1084.
Falcone, P.M., P. Morone, and E. Sica, 2018: Greening of the financial system and
fuelling a sustainability transition: a discursive approach to assess landscape
pressures on the Italian financial system. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 127, 23-37, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2017.05.020.
Fan, Y., Q. Qiao, L. Fang, and Y. Yao, 2017: Energy analysis on industrial symbiosis of an
industrial park: a case study of Hefei economic and technological development area.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 141, 791-798, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.159.
Fankhauser, S. and T.K.J. McDermott, 2014: Understanding the adaptation deficit:
Why are poor countries more vulnerable to climate events than rich countries?
Global Environmental Change, 27, 9-18, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.014.
Fankhauser, S. and N. Stern, 2016: Climate change, development, poverty and
economics. Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment
Working Paper No. 253, Grantham Research Institute, London, UK, 25 pp.
FAO, 2015: Adaptation to climate risk and food security: Evidence from smallholder
farmers in Ethiopia. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy, 50 pp.
FAO and NZAGRC, 2017a: Low emissions development of the beef cattle sector in
Uruguay - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Food and

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and New Zealand Agricultural
Greenhouse Gas Research Centre (NZAGRC), Rome, Italy, 34 pp.
FAO and NZAGRC, 2017b: Supporting low emissions development in the Ethiopian
dairy cattle sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and New Zealand
Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre (NZAGRC), Rome, Italy, 34 pp.
Fatima, R., A.J. Wadud, and S. Coelho, 2014: Human Rights, Climate Change,
Environmental Degradation and Migration: A New Paradigm. International
Organization for Migration and Migration Policy Institute, Bangkok, Thailand
and Washington DC, USA, 12 pp.
Fay, M. et al., 2015: Decarbonizing Development: Three Steps to a Zero-Carbon Future.
World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 185 pp, doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0479-3.
Fazey, I. et al., 2016: Past and future adaptation pathways. Climate and
Development, 8(1), 26-44, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.989192.
Fazey, I. et al., 2018: Community resilience for a 1.5C world. Current Opinion
in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 30-40, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.006.
Feola, G. and R. Nunes, 2014: Success and failure of grassroots innovations
for addressing climate change: The case of the Transition Movement. Global
Environmental Change, 24, 232-250, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.11.011.
Ferguson, P., 2015: The green economy agenda: business as usual or
transformational discourse? Environmental Politics, 24(1), 17-37,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2014.919748.
Fernandes-Jesus, M., A. Carvalho, L. Fernandes, and S. Bento, 2017: Community
engagement in the Transition movement: views and practices in Portuguese
initiatives. Local Environment, 22(12), 1546-1562,
doi:10.1080/13549839.2017.1379477.
Few, R., A. Martin, and N. Gross-Camp, 2017: Trade-offs in linking adaptation and
mitigation in the forests of the Congo Basin. Regional Environmental Change,
17(3), 851-863, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1080-6.
Ficklin, L., L.C. Stringer, A.J. Dougill, and S.M. Sallu, 2018: Climate compatible
development reconsidered: calling for a critical perspective. Climate and
Development, 10(3), 193-196, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1372260.
Field, C.B. et al., 2014: Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea,
T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N.
Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 35-94.
Filho, L. and J. Nalau (eds.), 2018: Limits to climate change adaptation. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 410 pp.,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-64599-5.
Fincher, R., J. Barnett, S. Graham, and A. Hurlimann, 2014: Time stories: making
sense of futures in anticipation of sea-level rise. Geoforum, 56, 201-210,
doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2014.07.010.
Fleurbaey, M. et al., 2014: Sustainable development and equity. In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 283-350.
Ford, J.D. et al., 2016: Community-based adaptation research in the Canadian Arctic. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(2), 175-191, doi:10.1002/wcc.376.
Francis, R., P. Weston, and J. Birch, 2015: The social, environmental and economics
benefits of Farmer Managed Natural Regeneration (FMNR). World Vision
Australia, Melbourne, Australia, 44 pp.
Frank, S. et al., 2017: Reducing greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture without
compromising food security? Environmental Research Letters, 12(10), 105004,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa8c83.
Fricko, O. et al., 2016: Energy sector water use implications of a 2C degree climate
policy. Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034011.
Frumhoff, P.C., R. Heede, and N. Oreskes, 2015: The climate responsibilities of
industrial carbon producers. Climatic Change, 132(2), 157-171,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1472-5.
Fuchs, D. et al., 2016: Power: the missing element in sustainable consumption and
absolute reductions research and action. Journal of Cleaner Production, 132,
298-307, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.02.006.
Fuglestvedt, J.S. and S. Kallbekken, 2016: Climate responsibility: fair shares?
Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 19-20, doi:10.1038/nclimate2791.

Chapter 5

Fuhr, H., T. Hickmann, and K. Kern, 2018: The role of cities in multi-level climate
governance: local climate policies and the 1.5C target. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 30, 1-6, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.10.006.
Fujimori, S., N. Hanasaki, and T. Masui, 2017a: Projections of industrial water
withdrawal under shared socioeconomic pathways and climate mitigation
scenarios. Sustainability Science, 12, 275-292,
doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0392-2.
Fujimori, S. et al., 2017b: SSP3: AIM implementation of Shared Socioeconomic
Pathways. Global Environmental Change, 42, 268-283,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.009.
Fukuda-Parr, S., A.E. Yamin, and J. Greenstein, 2014: The power of numbers: a
critical review of Millennium Development Goal targets for human development
and human rights. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, 15(2-3),
105-117, doi:10.1080/19452829.2013.864622.
Fuller, R. and J. Lain, 2017: Building Resilience: A meta-analysis of Oxfam's
resilience. Oxfam Effectiveness Reviews, Oxfam, 35 pp.
Gajjar, S.P., C. Singh, and T. Deshpande, 2018: Tracing back to move ahead: a
review of development pathways that constrain adaptation futures. Climate
and Development, 1-15, doi:10.1080/17565529.2018.1442793.
Galgoczi, B., 2014: The Long and Winding Road from Black to Green: Decades of
Structural Change in the Ruhr Region. International Journal of Labour Research,
6(2), 217-240, www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---actrav/
documents/publication/wcms_375223.pdf.
Garg, A., P. Mohan, S. Shukla, B. Kankal, and S.S. Vishwanathan, 2017: High impact
opportunities for energy efficiency in India. UNEP DTU Partnerhsip, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 49 pp.
Gebrehaweria, G., A. Dereje Assefa, G. Girmay, M. Giordano, and L. Simon, 2016:
An assessment of integrated watershed management in Ethiopia. IWMI Working
Paper 170, International Water Management Institute (IWMI), Colombo, Sri
Lanka, 28 pp., doi:10.5337/2016.214.
Georgeson, L., M. Maslin, and M. Poessinouw, 2017a: Global disparity in the supply
of commercial weather and climate information services. Science Advances, 3,
e1602632, doi:10.1126/sciadv.1602632.
Georgeson, L., M. Maslin, and M. Poessinouw, 2017b: The global green economy: a
review of concepts, definitions, measurement methodologies and their interactions.
Geo: Geography and Environment, 4(1), e00036, doi:10.1002/geo2.36.
Gero, A. et al., 2013: Understanding the Pacific's adaptive capacity to emergencies
in the context of climate change: Country Report - Vanuatu. Report prepared
for NCCARF by the Institute for Sustainable Futures, and WHO Collaborating
Centre, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia, 36 pp.
Gillard, R., A. Gouldson, J. Paavola, and J. Van Alstine, 2016: Transformational
responses to climate change: beyond a systems perspective of social change
in mitigation and adaptation. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change,
7(2), 251-265, doi:10.1002/wcc.384.
Gillingham, K., D. Rapson, and G. Wagner, 2016: The rebound effect and energy
efficiency policy. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(1), 68-88,
doi:10.1093/reep/rev017.
Giwa, A., A. Alabi, A. Yusuf, and T. Olukan, 2017: A comprehensive review on
biomass and solar energy for sustainable energy generation in Nigeria.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 69, 620-641,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.160.
Glazebrook, G. and P. Newman, 2018: The City of the Future. Urban Planning, 3(2),
1-20, doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1247.
Godfrey-Wood, R. and L.O. Naess, 2016: Adapting to Climate Change: Transforming
Development? IDS Bulletin, 47(2), 49-62,
doi:10.19088/1968-2016.131.
Gomez-Echeverri, L., 2018: Climate and development: enhancing impact through
stronger linkages in the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119),
20160444, doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0444.
Gorddard, R., M.J. Colloff, R.M. Wise, D. Ware, and M. Dunlop, 2016: Values, rules
and knowledge: Adaptation as change in the decision context. Environmental
Science & Policy, 57, 60-69, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.12.004.
Gore, C., 2015: Climate Change Adaptation and African Cities: Understanding the
Impact of Government and Governance on Future Action. In: The Urban Climate
Challenge: Rethinking the Role of Cities in the Global Climate Regime [Johnson,
C., N. Toly, and H. Schroeder (eds.)]. Routledge, New York, NY, USA and London,
UK, pp. 205-226.
Government of Kiribati, 2016: Kiribati development plan 2016-19. Government
of Kiribati, 75 pp.

515

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Granderson, A.A., 2017: Value conflicts and the politics of risk: challenges in
assessing climate change impacts and risk priorities in rural Vanuatu. Climate
and Development, 1-14, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1318743.
Grantham, R.W. and M.A. Rudd, 2017: Household susceptibility to hydrological
change in the Lower Mekong Basin. Natural Resources Forum, 41(1), 3-17,
doi:10.1111/1477-8947.12113.
Gray, E., N. Henninger, C. Reij, R. Winterbottom, and P. Agostini, 2016: Integrated
landscape approaches for Africa's drylands. World Bank, Washington DC, USA,
184 pp., doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0826-5.
Green, F., 2018: Anti-fossil fuel norms. Climatic Change, 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2134-6.
Griffiths, S., 2017a: A review and assessment of energy policy in the Middle
East and North Africa region. Energy Policy, 102, 249-269, doi:10.1016/j.
enpol.2016.12.023.
Griffiths, S., 2017b: Renewable energy policy trends and recommendations for
GCC countries. Energy Transitions, 1(1), 3, doi:10.1007/s41825-017-0003-6.
Grill, G. et al., 2015: An index-based framework for assessing patterns and trends
in river fragmentation and flow regulation by global dams at multiple scales.
Environmental Research Letters, 10(1), 015001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/1/015001.
Grist, N. et al., 2017: Framing innovations for climate resilience for farmers in
Sahel. Resilience Intel, 9, 20,
www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/11647.pdf.
Grossmann, M. and E. Creamer, 2017: Assessing diversity and inclusivity within
the Transition Movement: an urban case study. Environmental Politics, 26(1),
161-182, doi:10.1080/09644016.2016.1232522.
Grubert, E.A., A.S. Stillwell, and M.E. Webber, 2014: Where does solar-aided
seawater desalination make sense? A method for identifying sustainable sites.
Desalination, 339, 10-17, doi:10.1016/j.desal.2014.02.004.
Grubler, A. et al., 2018: A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5C target
and sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies.
Nature Energy, 3(6), 515-527, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0172-6.
Gupta, J. and K. Arts, 2017: Achieving the 1.5C objective: just implementation
through a right to (sustainable) development approach. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9376-7.
Gupta, J. and N. Pouw, 2017: Towards a trans-disciplinary conceptualization of
inclusive development. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 24,
96-103, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.03.004.
Gustafson, S. et al., 2017: Merging science into community adaptation planning
processes: a cross-site comparison of four distinct areas of the Lower Mekong
Basin. Climatic Change, 1-16, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1887-7.
Gwimbi, P., 2017: Mainstreaming national adaptation programmes of action into
national development plans in Lesotho: lessons and needs. International Journal
of Climate Change Strategies and Management, 9(3), 299-315,
doi:10.1108/ijccsm-11-2015-0164.
Hackmann, B., 2016: Regime learning in global environmental governance.
Environmental Values, 25(6), 663-686,
doi:10.3197/096327116x14736981715625.
Haider, L.J., W.J. Boonstra, G.D. Peterson, and M. Schluter, 2018: Traps and
Sustainable Development in Rural Areas: A Review. World Development,
101(2013), 311-321, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.05.038.
Hajer, M. et al., 2015: Beyond cockpit-ism: Four insights to enhance the
transformative potential of the sustainable development goals. Sustainability,
7(2), doi:10.3390/su7021651.
Hale, T., 2016: "All Hands on Deck": The Paris Agreement and Nonstate Climate
Action. Global Environmental Politics, 16(3), 12-22,
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00362.
Hallegatte, S. and J. Rozenberg, 2017: Climate change through a poverty lens.
Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 250-256, doi:10.1038/nclimate3253.
Hallegatte, S. et al., 2014: Climate Change and Poverty - An Analytical Framework.
WPS7126, World Bank Group, Washington DC, USA, 47 pp.
Hallegatte, S. et al., 2016: Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change
on Poverty. The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA, 227 pp.,
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0673-5.
Halonen, M. et al., 2017: Mobilizing climate finance flows: Nordic approaches
and opportunities. TemaNord 2017:519, Nordic Council of Ministers, 151 pp.,
doi:10.6027/TN2017-519.
Hammill, B.A. and H. Price-Kelly, 2017: Using NDCs, NAPs and the SDGs to Advance
Climate-Resilient Development. NDC Expert perspectives, NDC Partnership,
Washington DC, USA and Bonn, Germany, 10 pp.

516

Handmer, J. and H. Iveson, 2017: Cyclone Pam in Vanuatu: Learning from the low
death toll. Australian jouranl of Emergency Management, 22(2), 60-65,
https://ajem.infoservices.com.au/items/ajem-32-02-22.
Hanna, R. and P. Oliva, 2016: Implications of Climate Change for Children in
Developing Countries. The Future of Children, 26(1), 115-132,
doi:10.1353/foc.2016.0006.
Hansen, G. and D. Stone, 2016: Assessing the observed impact of anthropogenic
climate change. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 532-537, doi:10.1038/nclimate2896.
Harris, L.M., E.K. Chu, and G. Ziervogel, 2017: Negotiated resilience. Resilience,
3293, 1-19, doi:10.1080/21693293.2017.1353196.
Hartzell-Nichols, L., 2017: A Climate of Risk: Precautionary Principles, Catastrophes,
and Climate Change. Routledge, New York, NY, USA, 168 pp.
Hasegawa, T. et al., 2014: Climate change impact and adaptation assessment on
food consumption utilizing a new scenario framework. Environmental Science
& Technology, 48(1), 438-445, doi:10.1021/es4034149.
Hasegawa, T. et al., 2015: Consequence of climate mitigation on the risk of hunger.
Environmental Science & Technology, 49(12), 7245-7253,
doi:10.1021/es5051748.
Hashemi, S., A. Bagheri, and N. Marshall, 2017: Toward sustainable adaptation to
future climate change: insights from vulnerability and resilience approaches
analyzing agrarian system of Iran. Environment, Development and Sustainability,
19(1), 1-25, doi:10.1007/s10668-015-9721-3.
Hatfield-Dodds, S. et al., 2015: Australia is `free to choose' economic growth and
falling environmental pressures. Nature, 527(7576), 49-53,
doi:10.1038/nature16065.
Havlik, P. et al., 2014: Climate change mitigation through livestock system
transitions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(10), 3709-
14, doi:10.1073/pnas.1308044111.
Hayashi, A., F. Akimoto, F. Sano, and T. Tomoda, 2015: Evaluation of global energy
crop production potential up to 2100 under socioeconomic development and
climate change scenarios. Journal of the Japan Institute of Energy, 94(6), 548-
554, doi:10.3775/jie.94.548.
Hayashi, A., F. Sano, Y. Nakagami, and K. Akimoto, 2018: Changes in terrestrial
water stress and contributions of major factors under temperature rise
constraint scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
1-27, doi:10.1007/s11027-018-9780-5.
Hayha, T., P.L. Lucas, D.P. van Vuuren, S.E. Cornell, and H. Hoff, 2016: From Planetary
Boundaries to national fair shares of the global safe operating space - How can
the scales be bridged? Global Environmental Change, 40, 60-72,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.008.
Hayward, B., 2017: Sea change: climate politics and New Zealand. Bridget Williams
Books, Wellington, NZ, 120 pp.
He, J., Y. Huang, and F. Tarp, 2014: Has the clean development mechanism
assisted sustainable development? Natural Resources Forum, 38(4), 248-260,
doi:10.1111/1477-8947.12055.
Healy, N. and J. Barry, 2017: Politicizing energy justice and energy system
transitions: Fossil fuel divestment and a "just transition". Energy Policy, 108,
451-459, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.06.014.
Heard, B.P., B.W. Brook, T.M.L. Wigley, and C.J.A. Bradshaw, 2017: Burden of
proof: A comprehensive review of the feasibility of 100% renewable-electricity
systems. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 76, 1122-1133,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.03.114.
Heede, R., 2014: Tracing anthropogenic carbon dioxide and methane emissions
to fossil fuel and cement producers, 1854-2010. Climatic Change, 122(1-2),
229-241, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0986-y.
Helliwell, J., R. Layard, and J. Sachs (eds.), 2018: World Happiness Report.
Sustainable Development Solutions Network, New York, NY, USA, 167 pp.
Hemstock, S.L. et al., 2017: A Case for Formal Education in the Technical,
Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Sector for Climate Change Adaptation
and Disaster Risk Reduction in the Pacific Islands Region. In: Climate Change
Adaptation in Pacific Countries: Fostering Resilience and Improving the Quality
of Life [Filho, W. (ed.)]. Springer Nature, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 309-324,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-50094-2_19.
Hess, J.J. and K.L. Ebi, 2016: Iterative management of heat early warning systems
in a changing climate. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1382(1),
21-30, doi:10.1111/nyas.13258.
Heyward, C. and D. Roser (eds.), 2016: Climate justice in a non-ideal world. Oxford
University Press, Oxford UK, 352 pp.
Hic, C., P. Pradhan, D. Rybski, and J.P. Kropp, 2016: Food Surplus and Its Climate
Burdens. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(8), 4269-4277,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05088.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Hildingsson, R. and B. Johansson, 2015: Governing low-carbon energy transitions
in sustainable ways: potential synergies and conflicts between climate and
environmental policy objectives. Energy Policy, 88, 245-252,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2015.10.029.
HLCCP, 2017: Report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices. High-Level
Commission on Carbon Prices (HLCCP). World Bank, Washington DC, USA,
61 pp.
Holden, E., K. Linnerud, and D. Banister, 2017: The imperatives of sustainable
development. Sustainable Development, 25(3), 213-226,
doi:10.1002/sd.1647.
Holz, C., S. Kartha, and T. Athanasiou, 2018: Fairly sharing 1.5: national fair shares
of a 1.5C-compliant global mitigation effort. International Environmental
Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 117-134,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9371-z.
Horstmann, B. and J. Hein, 2017: Aligning climate change mitigation and
sustainable development under the UNFCCC: A critical assessment of the
Clean Development Mechanism, the Green Climate Fund and REDD+. German
Development Institute, Bonn, 154 pp.
Howarth, C. and I. Monasterolo, 2017: Opportunities for knowledge co-production
across the energy-food-water nexus: making interdisciplinary approaches work
for better climate decision making. Environmental Science & Policy, 75, 103-
110, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.05.019.
Howarth, N., M. Galeotti, A. Lanza, and K. Dubey, 2017: Economic development
and energy consumption in the GCC: an international sectoral analysis. Energy
Transitions, 1(2), 6, doi:10.1007/s41825-017-0006-3.
Howell, R. and S. Allen, 2017: People and Planet: values, motivations and formative
influences of individuals acting to mitigate climate change. Environmental
Values, 26(2), 131-155,
doi:10.3197/096327117x14847335385436.
Hubacek, K., G. Baiocchi, K. Feng, and A. Patwardhan, 2017: Poverty eradication in
a carbon constrained world. Nature Communications, 8(1), 1-8,
doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00919-4.
Huggel, C., I. Wallimann-Helmer, D. Stone, and W. Cramer, 2016: Reconciling justice
and attribution research to advance climate policy. Nature Climate Change,
6(10), 901-908, doi:10.1038/nclimate3104.
Hughes, S., E.K. Chu, and S.G. Mason (eds.), 2018: Climate Change in Cities:
Innovations in Multi-Level Governance. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, Switzerland, 378 pp.
Hunsberger, C., S. Bolwig, E. Corbera, and F. Creutzig, 2014: Livelihood impacts of
biofuel crop production: implications for governance. Geoforum, 54, 248-260,
doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.09.022.
Huq, N., A. Bruns, L. Ribbe, and S. Huq, 2017: Mainstreaming ecosystem services
based climate change adaptation (EbA) in bangladesh: status, challenges and
opportunities. Sustainability, 9(6), 926, doi:10.3390/su9060926.
Hwang, J., K. Joh, and A. Woo, 2017: Social inequalities in child pedestrian traffic
injuries: Differences in neighborhood built environments near schools in Austin,
TX, USA. Journal of Transport and Health, 6, 40-49,
doi:10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.003.
Griggs, D.J., M. Nilsson, A. Stevance, and D. McCollum (eds.), 2017: A Guide to SDG
interactions: from Science to Implementation. International Council for Science
(ICSU), Paris, France, 239 pp., doi:10.24948/2017.01.
IEA, 2015: India Energy Outlook. International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France,
187 pp.
IEA, 2016: Energy and Air Pollution: World Energy Outlook Special Report.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 266 pp.
IEA, 2017: Energy Access Outlook 2017: From Poverty to Prosperity. International
Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 144 pp., doi:10.1787/9789264285569-en.
IEA and World Bank, 2017: Sustainable Energy for All 2017 - Progress towards
Sustainable Energy. International Energy Agency (IEA) and International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank, Washington DC, USA,
208 pp., doi:10.1596/ 978-1-4648-1084-8.
INC, 1991: Vanuatu: Draft annex relating to Article 23 (Insurance) for inclusion in
the revised single text on elements relating to mechanisms (A/AC.237/WG.II/
Misc.13) submitted by the Co-Chairmen of Working Group II. A/AC.237/WG.II/
CRP.8, Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework Convention
on Climate Change: Working Group II.
IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K.
Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp.

Chapter 5

IPCC, 2014a: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution
of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E.
Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B.
Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 1454 pp.
IPCC, 2014b: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation
of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R.
Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum,
S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T.
Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1-30.
IRENA, 2016: Renewable Energy Market Analysis: The GCC Region. International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 96 pp.
Ishida, H. et al., 2014: Global-scale projection and its sensitivity analysis of the
health burden attributable to childhood undernutrition under the latest scenario
framework for climate change research. Environmental Research Letters, 9(6),
064014, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/6/064014.
Islam, M.R. and M. Shamsuddoha, 2017: Socioeconomic consequences of climate
induced human displacement and migration in Bangladesh. International
Sociology, 32(3), 277-298, doi:10.1177/0268580917693173.
Jagermeyr, J., A. Pastor, H. Biemans, and D. Gerten, 2017: Reconciling irrigated
food production with environmental flows for Sustainable Development Goals
implementation. Nature Communications, 8, 1-9,
doi:10.1038/ncomms15900.
Jaglin, S., 2014: Regulating service delivery in southern cities: rethinking urban
heterogeneity. In: The Routledge Handbook on Cities of the Global South [Parnell, S.
and S. Oldfield (eds.)]. pp. 434-447, doi:10.4324/9780203387832.ch37.
Jakob, M. and J. C. Steckel, 2016: Implications of climate change mitigation for
sustainable development. Environmental Research Letters, 11(10), 104010,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/10/104010.
Janetos, A.C., E. Malone, E. Mastrangelo, K. Hardee, and A. de Bremond, 2012:
Linking climate change and development goals: framing, integrating, and
measuring. Climate and Development, 4(2), 141-156,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2012.726195.
Jha, C.K., V. Gupta, U. Chattopadhyay, and B. Amarayil Sreeraman, 2017: Migration
as adaptation strategy to cope with climate change: A study of farmers'
migration in rural India. International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and
Management, 10(1), 121-141, doi:10.1108/ijccsm-03-2017-0059.
Jiang, L. and B.C. O'Neill, 2017: Global urbanization projections for the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways. Global Environmental Change, 42, 193-199,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.03.008.
Johansson, E.L., M. Fader, J.W. Seaquist, and K.A. Nicholas, 2016: Green and blue
water demand from large-scale land acquisitions in Africa. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113(41), 11471-11476,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1524741113.
Johnson, C.A., 2017: Resilient cities? The global politics of urban climate adaptation.
In: The Power of Cities in Global Climate Politics [Johnson, C.A. (ed.)]. Palgrave
Macmillan, London, UK, pp. 91-146, doi:10.1057/978-1-137-59469-3_4.
Johnson, N. et al., 2015: Stranded on a low-carbon planet: implications of climate
policy for the phase-out of coal-based power plants. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 90(Part A), 89-102, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2014.02.028.
Jones, L. and T. Tanner, 2017: `Subjective resilience': using perceptions to quantify
household resilience to climate extremes and disasters. Regional Environmental
Change, 17(1), 229-243, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-0995-2.
Jordaan, S.M. et al., 2017: The role of energy technology innovation in reducing
greenhouse gas emissions: a case study of Canada. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 78, 1397-1409, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.162.
Kagawa, S. et al., 2015: CO2 emission clusters within global supply chain networks:
Implications for climate change mitigation. Global Environmental Change, 35,
486-496, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.04.003.
Kaijser, A. and A. Kronsell, 2014: Climate change through the lens of
intersectionality. Environmental Politics, 23(3), 417-433,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2013.835203.
Kalafatis, S., 2017: Identifying the Potential for Climate Compatible Development
Efforts and the Missing Links. Sustainability, 9(9), 1642,
doi:10.3390/su9091642.
Karlsson, L., A. Nightingale, L.O. Naess, and J. Thompson, 2017: `Triple wins' or
`triple faults'? Analysing policy discourse on climate-smart agriculture (CSA).

517

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Working Paper no.197, CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture
and Food Security (CCAFS), Copenhagen, Denmark, 43 pp.
Karner, K., M. Theissing, and T. Kienberger, 2015: Energy efficiency for industries
through synergies with urban areas. Journal of Cleaner Production, 2020, 1-11,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.010.
Kartha, S. et al., 2018: Inequitable mitigation: cascading biases against poorer
countries. Nature Climate Change, 8, 348-349,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0152-7.
Kassie, M., H. Teklewold, M. Jaleta, P. Marenya, and O. Erenstein, 2015:
Understanding the adoption of a portfolio of sustainable intensification
practices in eastern and southern Africa. Land Use Policy, 42, 400-411,
doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.08.016.
Keairns, D.L., R.C. Darton, and A. Irabien, 2016: The energy-water-food nexus.
Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 7(1), 239-262,
doi:10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-080615-033539.
Kelman, I., 2017: Linking disaster risk reduction, climate change, and the
sustainable development goals. Disaster Prevention and Management: An
International Journal, 26(3), 254-258, doi:10.1108/dpm-02-2017-0043.
Kenis, A., 2016: Ecological citizenship and democracy: Communitarian versus
agonistic perspectives. Environmental Politics, 4016, 1-22,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2016.1203524.
Kenis, A. and E. Mathijs, 2014: (De)politicising the local: The case of the Transition
Towns movement in Flanders (Belgium). Journal of Rural Studies, 34, 172-183,
doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2014.01.013.
Keohane, R.O. and D.G. Victor, 2016: Cooperation and discord in global climate
policy. Nature Climate Change, 6(6), 570-575, doi:10.1038/nclimate2937.
Khanna, N., D. Fridley, and L. Hong, 2014: China's pilot low-carbon city initiative:
A comparative assessment of national goals and local plans. Sustainable Cities
and Society, 12, 110-121, doi:10.1016/j.scs.2014.03.005.
Khosla, R., A. Sagar, and A. Mathur, 2017: Deploying Low-carbon Technologies in
Developing Countries: A view from India's buildings sector. Environmental Policy
and Governance, 27(2), 149-162, doi:10.1002/eet.1750.
Khreis, H., A.D. May, and M.J. Nieuwenhuijsen, 2017: Health impacts of urban
transport policy measures: a guidance note for practice. Journal of Transport &
Health, 6, 209-227, doi:10.1016/j.jth.2017.06.003.
Kim, S.-Y. and E. Thurbon, 2015: Developmental Environmentalism: Explaining
South Korea's Ambitious Pursuit of Green Growth. Politics & Society, 43(2),
213-240, doi:10.1177/0032329215571287.
Kim, Y. et al., 2017: A perspective on climate-resilient development and national
adaptation planning based on USAID's experience. Climate and Development,
9(2), 141-151, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1124037.
King, A.D., D.J. Karoly, and B.J. Henley, 2017: Australian climate extremes at 1.5C
and 2C of global warming. Nature Climate Change, 7, 412-416,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3296.
Kirby, P. and T. O'Mahony, 2018: Development Models: Lessons from International
Development. In: The Political Economy of the Low-Carbon Transition: Pathways
Beyond Techno-Optimism. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland,
pp. 89-114, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-62554-6_4.
Klausbruckner, C., H. Annegarn, L.R.F. Henneman, and P. Rafaj, 2016: A policy
review of synergies and trade-offs in South African climate change mitigation
and air pollution control strategies. Environmental Science & Policy, 57, 70-78,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.12.001.
Klein, R.J.T. et al., 2014: Adaptation opportunities, constraints, and limits. In:
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global
and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 899-943.
Klimont, Z. et al., 2017: Bridging the gap - the role of short-lived climate pollutants.
In: The Emissions Gap Report 2017: A UN Environmental Synethesis Report.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 48-57.
Klinsky, S. and A. Golub, 2016: Justice and Sustainability. In: Sustainability Science:
An introduction [Heinrichs, H., P. Martens, G. Michelsen, and A. Wiek (eds.)].
Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 161-173,
doi:10.1007/978-94-017-7242-6.
Klinsky, S. and H. Winkler, 2018: Building equity in: strategies for integrating equity
into modelling for a 1.5C world. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160461,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0461.

518

Klinsky, S., D. Waskow, E. Northrop, and W. Bevins, 2017a: Operationalizing equity
and supporting ambition: identifying a more robust approach to `respective
capabilities'. Climate and Development, 9(4), 1-11,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2016.1146121.
Klinsky, S. et al., 2017b: Why equity is fundamental in climate change policy
research. Global Environmental Change, 44, 170-173,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.08.002.
Kongsager, R. and E. Corbera, 2015: Linking mitigation and adaptation in carbon
forestry projects: Evidence from Belize. World Development, 76, 132-146,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.07.003.
Kongsager, R., B. Locatelli, and F. Chazarin, 2016: Addressing climate change
mitigation and adaptation together: a global assessment of agriculture and
forestry projects. Environmental Management, 57(2), 271-282,
doi:10.1007/s00267-015-0605-y.
Kreibich, N., L. Hermwille, C. Warnecke, and C. Arens, 2017: An update on the
Clean Development Mechanism in Africa in times of market crisis. Climate and
Development, 9(2), 178-190, doi:10.1080/17565529.2016.1145102.
Kumar, N.S. et al., 2014: Climatic Risks and Strategizing Agricultural Adaptation in
Climatically Challenged Regions. TB-ICN: 136/2014, Indian Agriculture Research
Institute, New Delhi, India, 106 pp.
Kuramochi, T. et al., 2018: Ten key short-term sectoral benchmarks to limit warming
to 1.5C. Climate Policy, 18(3), 287-305,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1397495.
Kuruppu, N. and R. Willie, 2015: Barriers to reducing climate enhanced disaster
risks in least developed country-small islands through anticipatory adaptation.
Weather and Climate Extremes, 7, 72-83,
doi:10.1016/j.wace.2014.06.001.
Kusumaningtyas, S.D.A. and E. Aldrian, 2016: Impact of the June 2013 Riau
province Sumatera smoke haze event on regional air pollution. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(7), 075007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/075007.
La Rovere, E.L., 2017: Low-carbon development pathways in Brazil and `Climate
Clubs'. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 8(1), 1-7,
doi:10.1002/wcc.439.
Labordena, M., A. Patt, M. Bazilian, M. Howells, and J. Lilliestam, 2017: Impact of
political and economical barriers for concentrating solar power in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Energy Policy, 102, 52-72,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.12.008.
Labriet, M., C. Fiebig, and M. Labrousse, 2015: Working towards a Smart Energy
Path: Experience from Benin, Mali and Togo. Inside Stories on climate compatible
development, Climate and Development Knowlegdge Network (CDKN), 6 pp.
Lade, S.J., L.J. Haider, G. Engstrom, and M. Schluter, 2017: Resilience offers escape
from trapped thinking on poverty alleviation. Science Advances, 3(5), e1603043,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1603043.
Lahn, B., 2018: In the light of equity and science: scientific expertise and climate
justice after Paris. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics, 18(1), 29-43, doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9375-8.
Lamb, A. et al., 2016: The potential for land sparing to offset greenhouse gas
emissions from agriculture. Nature Climate Change, 6, 488-492,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2910.
Langford, M., A. Sumner, and A.E. Yamin (eds.), 2013: The Millennium Development
Goals and Human Rights: Past, Present and Future. Cambridge University Press,
New York, NY, USA, 571 pp.
Lasage, R. et al., 2015: A Stepwise, participatory approach to design and implement
community based adaptation to drought in the Peruvian Andes. Sustainability,
7(2), 1742-1773, doi:10.3390/su7021742.
Lawrence, J. and M. Haasnoot, 2017: What it took to catalyse uptake of
dynamic adaptive pathways planning to address climate change uncertainty.
Environmental Science & Policy, 68, 47-57, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.12.003.
Lechtenboehmer, S. and K. Knoop, 2017: Realising long-term transitions towards
low carbon societies. Impulses from the 8th Annual Meeting of the International
Research Network for Low Carbon Societies. Wuppertal Spezial no. 53, Wuppertal
Institut fur Klima, Umwelt, Energie, Wuppertal, Germany, 100 pp.
Lefale, P., P. Faiva, and A. C, 2017: Living with Change (LivC): An Integrated
National Strategy for Enhancing the Resilience of Tokelau to Climate Change
and Related Hazards, 2017-2030. Government of Tokelau, Apia, Soamoa, 16 pp.
Leichenko, R. and J.A. Silva, 2014: Climate change and poverty: vulnerability,
impacts, and alleviation strategies. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate
Change, 5(4), 539-556, doi:10.1002/wcc.287.
Lemoine, D. and S. Kapnick, 2016: A top-down approach to projecting market
impacts of climate change. Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 51-55,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2759.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Lemos, C.M., Y. Lo, D.R. Nelson, H. Eakin, and A.M. Bedran-Martins, 2016: Linking
development to climate adaptation: Leveraging generic and specific capacities
to reduce vulnerability to drought in NE Brazil. Global Environmental Change,
39, 170-179, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.001.
Ley, D., 2017: Sustainable Development, Climate Change, and Renewable Energy
in Rural Central America. In: Evaluating Climate Change Action for Sustainable
Development [Uitto, J. I., J. Puri, and R. D. van den Berg (eds.)]. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 187-212,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-43702-6.
Li, T. et al., 2016: Aging will amplify the heat-related mortality risk under a
changing climate: projection for the elderly in Beijing, China. Scientific Reports,
6(1), 28161, doi:10.1038/srep28161.
Liddell, C. and C. Guiney, 2015: Living in a cold and damp home: Frameworks for
understanding impacts on mental well-being. Public Health, 129(3), 191-199,
doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2014.11.007.
Lilliestam, J. and A. Patt, 2015: Barriers, risks and policies for renewables in the
Gulf states. Energies, 8(8), 8263-8285, doi:10.3390/en8088263.
Lin, B.B. et al., 2017: Adaptation Pathways in Coastal Case Studies: Lessons
Learned and Future Directions. Coastal Management, 45(5), 384-405,
doi:10.1080/08920753.2017.1349564.
Lin, J., Y. Hu, S. Cui, J. Kang, and A. Ramaswami, 2015: Tracking urban carbon
footprints from production and consumption perspectives. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(5), 054001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/5/054001.
Lipper, L. et al., 2014: Climate-smart agriculture for food security. Nature Climate
Change, 4(12), 1068-1072, doi:10.1038/nclimate2437.
Lorek, S. and J.H. Spangenberg, 2014: Sustainable consumption within a
sustainable economy - Beyond green growth and green economies. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 63, 33-44, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.08.045.
Lotze-Campen, H. et al., 2014: Impacts of increased bioenergy demand on
global food markets: an AgMIP economic model intercomparison. Agricultural
Economics, 45(1), 103-116, doi:10.1111/agec.12092.
Lucas, K. and K. Pangbourne, 2014: Assessing the equity of carbon mitigation
policies for transport in Scotland. Case Studies on Transport Policy, 2(2), 70-80,
doi:10.1016/j.cstp.2014.05.003.
Lucon, O. et al., 2014: Buildings. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga,
Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, S. I. Baum, P. Brunner, B.
Eickemeier, J. Kriemann, S. Savolainen, C. Schlomer, V. Stechow, T. Zwickel, and
J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 671-738.
Luomi, M., 2014: Mainstreaming climate policy in the Gulf Cooperation Council
States. OIES Paper: MEP 7, The Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, Oxford, UK,
73 pp.
Lwasa, S., K. Buyana, P. Kasaija, and J. Mutyaba, 2018: Scenarios for adaptation
and mitigation in urban Africa under 1.5C global warming. Current Opinion
in Environmental Sustainability, 30, 52-58, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.02.012.
Lyon, C., 2018: Complexity ethics and UNFCCC practices for 1.5C climate change.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 48-55,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.008.
Mace, M.J., 2016: Mitigation commitments under the Paris Agreement and the
way forward. Climate Law, 6(1-2), 21-39,
doi:10.1163/18786561-00601002.
Macintyre, T., H. Lotz-Sisitka, A. Wals, C. Vogel, and V. Tassone, 2018: Towards
transformative social learning on the path to 1.5C degrees. Current Opinion
in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 80-87, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.003.
Maclellan, N., 2015: Yumi stap redi long klaemet jenis: Lessons from the Vanuatu
NGO Climate Change Adaptation Program. Oxfam Australia, 48 pp.
Maidment, C.D., C.R. Jones, T.L. Webb, E.A. Hathway, and J.M. Gilbertson, 2014:
The impact of household energy efficiency measures on health: A meta-analysis.
Energy Policy, 65, 583-593, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.054.
Maor, M., J. Tosun, and A. Jordan, 2017: Proportionate and disproportionate policy
responses to climate change: core concepts and empirical applications. Journal of
Environmental Policy and Planning, 1-13, doi:10.1080/1523908x.2017.1281730.
Mapfumo, P. et al., 2017: Pathways to transformational change in the face of
climate impacts: an analytical framework. Climate and Development, 9(5),
439-451, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1040365.
Marjanac, S. and L. Patton, 2018: Extreme weather event attribution science and
climate change litigation: an essential step in the causal chain? Journal of
Energy & Natural Resources Law, 1-34,
doi:10.1080/02646811.2018.1451020.

Chapter 5

Markandya, A. et al., 2018: Health co-benefits from air pollution and mitigation
costs of the Paris Agreement: a modelling study. The Lancet Planetary Health,
2(3), e126-e133, doi:10.1016/s2542-5196(18)30029-9.
Marsh, J., 2015: Mixed motivations and complex causality in the Mekong. Forced
Migration Review, 68-69, www.fmreview.org/climatechange-disasters/marsh.
Martinez-Baron, D., G. Orjuela, G. Renzoni, A.M. Loboguerrero Rodriguez, and
S.D. Prager, 2018: Small-scale farmers in a 1.5C future: the importance of
local social dynamics as an enabling factor for implementation and scaling of
climate-smart agriculture. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31,
112-119, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.02.013.
Mathur, V.N., S. Afionis, J. Paavola, A.J. Dougill, and L.C. Stringer, 2014: Experiences
of host communities with carbon market projects: towards multi-level climate
justice. Climate Policy, 14(1), 42-62, doi:10.1080/14693062.2013.861728.
Maupin, A., 2017: The SDG13 to combat climate change: an opportunity for Africa
to become a trailblazer? African Geographical Review, 36(2), 131-145,
doi:10.1080/19376812.2016.1171156.
Mayer, B., 2016: The relevance of the no-harm principle to climate change law and
politics. Asia Pacific Journal of Environmental Law, 19(1), 79-104,
doi:10.4337/apjel.2016.01.04.
Mbow, C., C. Neely, and P. Dobie, 2015: How can an integrated landscape approach
contribute to the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and advance climate-smart objectives? In: Climate-Smart Landscapes:
Multifunctionality in Practice [Minang, P.A., M. van Noordwijk, C. Mbow, J. de
Leeuw, and D. Catacutan (eds.)]. World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi,
Kenya, pp. 103-117.
McCollum, D.L. et al., 2018a: Connecting the Sustainable Development Goals by
their energy inter-linkages. Environmental Research Letters, 13(3), 033006,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaafe3.
McCollum, D.L. et al., 2018b: Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris
Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature Energy,
3(7), 589-599, doi:10.1038/s41560-018-0179-z.
McCubbin, S., B. Smit, and T. Pearce, 2015: Where does climate fit? Vulnerability to
climate change in the context of multiple stressors in Funafuti, Tuvalu. Global
Environmental Change, 30, 43-55,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.10.007.
McGlade, C. and P. Ekins, 2015: The geographical distribution of fossil fuels
unused when limiting global warming to 2C. Nature, 517(7533), 187-190,
doi:10.1038/nature14016.
McGranahan, G., D. Schensul, and G. Singh, 2016: Inclusive urbanization: can the
2030 Agenda be delivered without it? Environment and Urbanization, 28(1),
13-34, doi:10.1177/0956247815627522.
McKay, B., S. Sauer, B. Richardson, and R. Herre, 2016: The political economy of
sugarcane flexing: initial insights from Brazil, Southern Africa and Cambodia.
The Journal of Peasant Studies, 43(1), 195-223,
doi:10.1080/03066150.2014.992016.
McNamara, K.E., 2015: Cross-border migration with dignity in Kiribati. Forced
Migration Review, 49, 62, www.fmreview.org/climatechange-disasters/mcnamara.
McNamara, K.E. and S.S. Prasad, 2014: Coping with extreme weather: Communities
in Fiji and Vanuatu share their experiences and knowledge. Climatic Change,
123(2), 121-132, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-1047-2.
Mechler, R. and T. Schinko, 2016: Identifying the policy space for climate loss and
damage. Science, 354(6310), 290-292, doi:10.1126/science.aag2514.
Mechler, R., L.M. Bouwer, T. Schinko, S. Surminski, and J. Linnerooth-Bayer (eds.), 2019:
Loss and Damage from Climate Change: Concepts, Methods and Policy Options.
Springer International Publishing, 561 pp, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-72026-5.
Meerow, S. and J.P. Newell, 2016: Urban resilience for whom, what, when, where,
and why? Urban Geography, 1-21, doi:10.1080/02723638.2016.1206395.
Mehmood, A., 2016: Of resilient places: planning for urban resilience. European
Planning Studies, 24(2), 407-419, doi:10.1080/09654313.2015.1082980.
Meinshausen, M. et al., 2015: National post-2020 greenhouse gas targets and
diversity-aware leadership. Nature Climate Change, 5(12), 1098-1106,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2826.
Melica, G. et al., 2018: Multilevel governance of sustainable energy policies:
The role of regions and provinces to support the participation of small local
authorities in the Covenant of Mayors. Sustainable Cities and Society, 39, 729-
739, doi:10.1016/j.scs.2018.01.013.
Michaelowa, A., M. Allen, and F. Sha, 2018: Policy instruments for limiting global
temperature rise to 1.5C - can humanity rise to the challenge? Climate Policy,
18(3), 275-286, doi:10.1080/14693062.2018.1426977.
Millar, R.J. et al., 2017: Emission budgets and pathways consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5C. Nature Geoscience, 1-8, doi:10.1038/ngeo3031.

519

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Millard-Ball, A., 2013: The limits to planning: causal impacts of city climate
action plans. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 33(1), 5-19,
doi:10.1177/0739456x12449742.
Mishra, V., S. Mukherjee, R. Kumar, and D. Stone, 2017: Heat wave exposure in
India in current, 1.5C, and 2.0C worlds. Environmental Research Letters, 12,
124012, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa9388.
Mitchell, D. et al., 2016: Attributing human mortality during extreme heat waves to
anthropogenic climate change. Environmental Research Letters, 11(7), 074006,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/074006.
MoCC, 2016: Corporate Plan 2016-2018. Ministry of Climate Chanage and
Adaptation (MoCC), Government of Vanuatu, Vanuatu, 98 pp.
Moellendorf, D., 2015: Climate change justice. Philosophy Compass, 10, 173-186,
doi:10.3197/096327111x12997574391887.
Morita, K. and K. Matsumoto, 2015: Enhancing Biodiversity Co-benefits of
Adaptation to Climate Change. In: Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation
[Filho, W.L. (ed.)]. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 953-972,
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-38670-1_21.
Mouratiadou, I. et al., 2018: Water demand for electricity in deep decarbonisation
scenarios: a multi-model assessment. Climatic Change, 147(1), 91-106,
doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2117-7.
MRFCJ, 2015a: Women's Participation - An Enabler of Climate Justice. Mary
Robinson Foundation Climate Justice (MRFCJ), Dublin, Ireland, 24 pp.
MRFCJ, 2015b: Zero Carbon, Zero Poverty The Climate Justice Way: Achieving an
equitable phase-out of carbon emissions by 2050 while protecting human rights.
Mary Robinson Foundation Climate Justice (MRFCJ), Dublin, Ireland, 70 pp.
Muratori, M., K. Calvin, M. Wise, P. Kyle, and J. Edmonds, 2016: Global economic
consequences of deploying bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS).
Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), 1-9, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095004.
Murphy, D.J., L. Yung, C. Wyborn, and D.R. Williams, 2017: Rethinking climate
change adaptation and place through a situated pathways framework: a case
study from the Big Hole Valley, USA. Landscape and Urban Planning, 167, 441-
450, doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2017.07.016.
Murphy, K., G.A. Kirkman, S. Seres, and E. Haites, 2015: Technology transfer in the
CDM: an updated analysis. Climate Policy, 15(1), 127-145,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2013.812719.
Murtinho, F., 2016: What facilitates adaptation? An analysis of community-based
adaptation to environmental change in the Andes. International Journal of the
Commons, 10(1), 119-141, doi:10.18352/ijc.585.
Muttarak, R. and W. Lutz, 2014: Is education a key to reducing vulnerability to
natural disasters and hence unavoidable climate change? Ecology and Society,
19(1), 42, doi:10.5751/es-06476-190142.
Myers, S.S. et al., 2017: Climate Change and Global Food Systems: Potential
Impacts on Food Security and Undernutrition. Annual Review of Public Health,
1-19, doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031816-044356.
Naess, L.O. et al., 2015: Climate policy meets national development contexts:
insights from Kenya and Mozambique. Global Environmental Change, 35, 534-
544, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.08.015.
Nagoda, S., 2015: New discourses but same old development approaches?
Climate change adaptation policies, chronic food insecurity and development
interventions in northwestern Nepal. Global Environmental Change, 35, 570-
579, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.08.014.
Nalau, J., J. Handmer, and M. Dalesa, 2017: The role and capacity of government
in a climate crisis: Cyclone Pam in Vanuatu. In: Climate Change Adaptation in
Pacific Countries: Fostering Resilience and Improving the Quality of Life [Leal
Filho, W. (ed.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 151-
161, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-50094-2_9.
Nalau, J. et al., 2016: The practice of integrating adaptation and disaster risk
reduction in the south-west Pacific. Climate and Development, 8(4), 365-375,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1064809.
NASEM, 2016: Attribution of Extreme Weather Events in the Context of
Climate Change. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(NASEM). The National Academies Press, Washington DC, USA, 186 pp.,
doi:10.17226/21852.
Nelson, D.R., M.C. Lemos, H. Eakin, and Y.-J. Lo, 2016: The limits of poverty
reduction in support of climate change adaptation. Environmental Research
Letters, 11(9), 094011, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/094011.
Newell, P. et al., 2014: The Political Economy of Low Carbon Energy in Kenya.
IDS Working Papers Vol 2014 No 445, Institute of Development Studies (IDS),
Brighton, UK, 38 pp., doi:10.1111/j.2040-0209.2014.00445.x.
Newman, P., T. Beatley, and H. Boyer, 2017: Resilient Cities: Overcoming Fossil Fuel
Dependence (2nd edition). Island Press, Washington DC, USA, 264 pp.

520

Nguyen, M.T., S. Vink, M. Ziemski, and D.J. Barrett, 2014: Water and energy
synergy and trade-off potentials in mine water management. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 84(1), 629-638, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.01.063.
Nhamo, G., 2016: New Global Sustainable Development Agenda: A Focus on
Africa. Sustainable Development, 25, 227-241, doi:10.1002/sd.1648.
Niang, I. et al., 2014: Africa. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1199-1265.
Nicholls, R.J. et al., 2018: Stabilization of global temperature at 1.5C and 2.0C:
implications for coastal areas. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160448,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0448.
Nicolosi, E. and G. Feola, 2016: Transition in place: Dynamics, possibilities, and
constraints. Geoforum, 76, 153-163, doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.09.017.
Nilsson, M., D. Griggs, and M.Visback, 2016: Map the interactions between Sustainable
Development Goals. Nature, 534(7607), 320-322, doi:10.1038/534320a.
Nkomwa, E.C., M.K. Joshua, C. Ngongondo, M. Monjerezi, and F. Chipungu, 2014:
Assessing indigenous knowledge systems and climate change adaptation
strategies in agriculture: a case study of Chagaka Village, Chikhwawa, Southern
Malawi. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, 67-69, 164-172,
doi:10.1016/j.pce.2013.10.002.
Noble, I. et al., 2014: Adaptation needs and options. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken,
K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C.
Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and
L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 659-708.
Normann, H.E., 2015: The role of politics in sustainable transitions: The rise and
decline of offshore wind in Norway. Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions, 15(2015), 180-193, doi:10.1016/j.eist.2014.11.002.
North, P. and N. Longhurst, 2013: Grassroots localisation? The scalar potential of
and limits of the `transition' approach to climate change and resource constraint.
Urban Studies, 50(7), 1423-1438, doi:10.1177/0042098013480966.
Nunan, F. (ed.), 2017: Making Climate Compatible Development Happen.
Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 262 pp.
Nunn, P.D., W. Aalbersberg, S. Lata, and M. Gwilliam, 2014: Beyond the core:
Community governance for climate-change adaptation in peripheral parts of
Pacific Island Countries. Regional Environmental Change, 14(1), 221-235,
doi:10.1007/s10113-013-0486-7.
Nyantakyi-Frimpong, H. and R. Bezner-Kerr, 2015: The relative importance of
climate change in the context of multiple stressors in semi-arid Ghana. Global
Environmental Change, 32, 40-56, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.03.003.
O'Brien, K.L., 2016: Climate change and social transformations: is it time for a
quantum leap? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(5), 618-
626, doi:10.1002/wcc.413.
O'Brien, K.L., 2017: Climate Change Adaptation and Social Transformation.
In: International Encyclopedia of Geography: People, the Earth,
Environment and Technology. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Oxford, UK, pp. 1-8,
doi:10.1002/9781118786352.wbieg0987.
O'Brien, K.L., 2018: Is the 1.5C target possible? Exploring the three spheres of
transformation. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 153-160,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.04.010.
O'Brien, K.L., S. Eriksen, T.H. Inderberg, and L. Sygna, 2015: Climate change
and development: adaptation through transformation. In: Climate Change
Adaptation and Development: Changing Paradigms and Practices [Inderberg,
T.H., S. Eriksen, K. O'Brien, and L. Sygna (eds.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and
New York, NY, USA, pp. 273-289.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017a: The roads ahead: narratives for shared socioeconomic
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 169-180, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017b: IPCC reasons for concern regarding climate change risks.
Nature Climate Change, 7(1), 28-37, doi:10.1038/nclimate3179.
O'Neill, D.W., A.L. Fanning, W.F. Lamb, and J.K. Steinberger, 2018: A good life for all
within planetary boundaries. Nature Sustainability, 1(2), 88-95,
doi:10.1038/s41893-018-0021-4.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Ober, K. and P. Sakdapolrak, 2017: How do social practices shape policy? Analysing
the field of `migration as adaptation' with Bourdieu's `Theory of Practice'. The
Geographical Journal, 183(4), 359-369, doi:10.1111/geoj.12225.
Obersteiner, M. et al., 2016: Assessing the land resource-food price nexus of the
Sustainable Development Goals. Science Advances, 2(9), e1501499-e1501499,
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1501499.
OECD, 2017: The Government Role in Mobilising Investment and Innovation in
Renewable Energy. OECD Investment Insights, August 2017, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris, France, 4 pp.
Oei, P.-Y. and R. Mendelevitch, 2016: European Scenarios of CO2 Infrastructure
Investment until 2050. The Energy Journal, 37(01),
doi:10.5547/01956574.37.si3.poei.
Ojea, E., 2015: Challenges for mainstreaming Ecosystem-based Adaptation into the
international climate agenda. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability,
14, 41-48, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.03.006.
Okereke, C. and P. Coventry, 2016: Climate justice and the international regime:
before, during, and after Paris. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change,
7(6), 834-851, doi:10.1002/wcc.419.
Olawuyi, D.S., 2017: From technology transfer to technology absorption: addressing
climate technology gaps in Africa. Fixing Climate Governance Series Paper No. 5,
Centre for International Governance Innovation, Waterloo, Canada, 16 pp.
Olsson, L. et al., 2014: Livelihoods and Poverty. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D.
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B.
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, pp. 793-832.
Oosterhuis, F.H. and P. Ten Brink (eds.), 2014: Paying the Polluter: Environmentally
Harmful Subsidies and their Reform. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK
and Northampton, MA, USA, 368 pp.
Oppenheimer, M., M. Campos, and R. Warren, 2014: Emergent risks and key
vulnerabilities. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M.
Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 659-708.
Orindi, V., Y. Elhadi, and C. Hesse, 2017: Democratising climate finance at local
levels. In: Building a Climate Resilient Economy and Society: Challenges and
Opportunities [Ninan, K.N. and M. Inoue (eds.)]. Edward Elgar Publishing,
Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA, pp. 250-264.
Otto, F.E.L., R.B. Skeie, J.S. Fuglestvedt, T. Berntsen, and M.R. Allen, 2017: Assigning
historic responsibility for extreme weather events. Nature Climate Change,
7(11), 757-759, doi:10.1038/nclimate3419.
Page, E.A. and C. Heyward, 2017: Compensating for climate change Loss and
Damage. Political Studies, 65(2), 356-372, doi:10.1177/0032321716647401.
Pal, J.S. and E.A.B. Eltahir, 2016: Future temperature in southwest Asia projected
to exceed a threshold for human adaptability. Nature Climate Change, 18203,
1-4, doi:10.1038/nclimate2833.
Palazzo, A. et al., 2017: Linking regional stakeholder scenarios and shared
socioeconomic pathways: Quantified West African food and climate
futures in a global context. Global Environmental Change, 45, 227-242,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.002.
Pan, X., M. Elzen, N. Hohne, F. Teng, and L. Wang, 2017: Exploring fair and ambitious
mitigation contributions under the Paris Agreement goals. Environmental
Science & Policy, 74, 49-56, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.04.020.
Pandey, U.C. and C. Kumar, 2018: Emerging Paradigms of Capacity Building in
the Context of Climate Change. In: Climate Literacy and Innovations in Climate
Change Education: Distance Learning for Sustainable Development [Azeiteiro,
U.M., W. Leal Filho, and L. Aires (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
pp. 193-214, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-70199-8_11.
Parikh, K.S., J.K. Parikh, and P.P. Ghosh, 2018: Can India grow and live within a 1.5
degree CO2 emissions budget? Energy Policy, 120, 24-37,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2018.05.014.
Park, J., S. Hallegatte, M. Bangalore, and E. Sandhoefner, 2015: Households and
heat stress estimating the distributional consequences of climate change. Policy
Research Working Paper no. WPS7479, World Bank Group, Washington, DC,
USA, 58 pp.

Chapter 5

Parkinson, S.C. et al., 2016: Impacts of Groundwater Constraints on Saudi Arabia's
Low-Carbon Electricity Supply Strategy. Environmental Science & Technology,
50(4), 1653-1662, doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05852.
Parnell, S., 2017: Africa's urban risk and resilience. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction, 26, 1-6, doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.050.
Patterson, J.J. et al., 2016: Exploring the governance and politics of transformations
towards sustainability. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions,
1-16, doi:10.1016/j.eist.2016.09.001.
Patterson, J.J. et al., 2018: Political feasibility of 1.5C societal transformations: the
role of social justice. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 1-9,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.11.002.
Pearce, T., J. Ford, A.C. Willox, and B. Smit, 2015: Inuit Traditional Ecological
Knowledge (TEK), subsistence hunting and adaptation to climate change in the
Canadian Arctic. Arctic, 68(2), 233-245, doi:10.2307/43871322.
Pelling, M., T. Abeling, and M. Garschagen, 2016: Emergence and Transition in
London's Climate Change Adaptation Pathways. Journal of Extreme Events,
3(3), 1650012, doi:10.1142/s2345737616500123.
Pelling, M. et al., 2018: Africa's urban adaptation transition under a 1.5 climate.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 10-15,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.11.005.
Petkova, E.P. et al., 2017: Towards more comprehensive projections of urban
heat-related mortality: estimates for New York city under multiple population,
adaptation, and climate scenarios. Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(1),
47-55, doi:10.1289/ehp166.
Pfeiffer, A., R. Millar, C. Hepburn, and E. Beinhocker, 2016: The `2C carbon stock'
for electricity generation: cumulative committed carbon emissions from the
electricity generation sector and the transition to a green economy. Applied
Energy, 179, 1395-1408, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.02.093.
Phillips, J., P. Newell, and A. Pueyo, 2017: Triple wins? Prospects for pro-poor,
low carbon, climate resilient energy services in Kenya. In: Making Climate
Compatible Development Happen [Nunan, F. (ed.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 114-129.
Popescu, G.H. and F.C. Ciurlau, 2016: Can environmental sustainability be
attained by incorporating nature within the capitalist economy? Economics,
Management, and Financial Markets, 11(4), 75-81.
Popp, A. et al., 2014: Land-use transition for bioenergy and climate stabilization:
Model comparison of drivers, impacts and interactions with other land use
based mitigation options. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 495-509,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0926-x.
Popp, A. et al., 2017: Land-use futures in the shared socio-economic pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 331-345,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.10.002.
Potouroglou, M. et al., 2017: Measuring the role of seagrasses in regulating
sediment surface elevation. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1-11,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-12354-y.
Pradhan, A., C. Chan, P.K. Roul, J. Halbrendt, and B. Sipes, 2018: Potential of
conservation agriculture (CA) for climate change adaptation and food security
under rainfed uplands of India: a transdisciplinary approach. Agricultural
Systems, 163, 27-35, doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.002.
Preston, F. and J. Lehne, 2017: A wider circle? The circular economy in developing
countries. Chatham House: The Royal Institute of International Affairs, London,
24 pp.
Pretis, F., M. Schwarz, K. Tang, K. Haustein, and M.R. Allen, 2018: Uncertain
impacts on economic growth when stabilizing global temperatures at 1.5C or
2C warming. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20160460,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2016.0460.
Purdon, M., 2015: Opening the black box of carbon finance "additionality": the
political economy of carbon finance effectiveness across Tanzania, Uganda, and
Moldova. World Development, 74, 462-478,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.05.024.
Quan, J., L.O. Naess, A. Newsham, A. Sitoe, and M.C. Fernandez, 2017: The Political
Economy of REDD+ in Mozambique: Implications for Climate Compatible
Development. In: Making Climate Compatible Development Happen [Nunan, F.
(ed.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 151-181.
Rai, N. and S. Fisher (eds.), 2017: The Political Economy of Low Carbon Resilient
Development: Planning and implementation. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and
New York, NY, USA, 172 pp.
Rao, N.D., 2014: International and intranational equity in sharing climate change
mitigation burdens. International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics, 14(2), 129-146, doi:10.1007/s10784-013-9212-7.

521

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Rao, N.D. and J. Min, 2018: Less global inequality can improve climate outcomes.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 9, e513,
doi:10.1002/wcc.513.
Rao, N.D., B.J. van Ruijven, V. Bosetti, and K. Riahi, 2017: Improving poverty and
inequality modeling in climate research. Nature Climate Change, 7, 857-862,
doi:10.1038/s41558-017-0004-x.
Rao, S. et al., 2016: Future Air Pollution in the Shared Socio-Economic Pathways.
Global Environmental Change, 42, 346-358,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.012.
Rasch, R., 2017: Income Inequality and Urban Vulnerability to Flood Hazard in
Brazil. Social Science Quarterly, 98(1), 299-325, doi:10.1111/ssqu.12274.
Rasul, G. and B. Sharma, 2016: The nexus approach to water-energy-food security:
an option for adaptation to climate change. Climate Policy, 16(6), 682-702,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1029865.
Raworth, K., 2017: A Doughnut for the Anthropocene: humanity's compass in the
21st century. The Lancet Planetary Health, 1(2), e48-e49,
doi:10.1016/s2542-5196(17)30028-1.
Redclift, M. and D. Springett (eds.), 2015: Routledge International Handbook of
Sustainable Development. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA,
448 pp.
Regmi, B.R. and C. Star, 2015: Exploring the policy environment for mainstreaming
community-based adaptation (CBA) in Nepal. International Journal of Climate
Change Strategies and Management, 7(4), 423-441,
doi:10.1108/ijccsm-04-2014-0050.
Reid, H., 2016: Ecosystem- and community-based adaptation: learning from
community-based natural resource management. Climate and Development,
8(1), 4-9, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1034233.
Reid, H. and S. Huq, 2014: Mainstreaming community-based adaptation into
national and local planning. Climate and Development, 6(4), 291-292,
doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.973720.
Reij, C. and R. Winterbottom, 2015: Scaling up Regreening: Six Steps to Success.
A Practical Approach to Forest Landscape Restoration. World Resource Institute
(WRI), Washington DC, USA, 72 pp.
Republic of Vanuatu, 2016: Vanuatu 2030: The People's Plan. Government of the
Republic of Vanuatu, Port Villa, Vanuatu, 28 pp.
Republic of Vanuatu, 2017: Vanuatu 2030: The People's Plan. National Sustainable
Development Plan 2016-2030. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. The
Government of the Republic of Vanuatu, Port Vila, Vanuatu, 48 pp.
Revi, A. et al., 2014: Urban areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea,
T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel,
A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, pp. 535-612.
Rey, T., L. Le De, F. Leone, and D. Gilbert, 2017: An integrative approach to
understand vulnerability and resilience post-disaster: the 2015 cyclone Pam
in urban Vanuatu as case study. Disaster Prevention and Management: An
International Journal, 26(3), 259-275, doi:10.1108/dpm-07-2016-0137.
Reyer, C.P.O. et al., 2017a: Climate change impacts in Latin America and the
Caribbean and their implications for development. Regional Environmental
Change, 17(6), 1601-1621, doi:10.1007/s10113-015-0854-6.
Reyer, C.P.O. et al., 2017b: Turn down the heat: regional climate change impacts on
development. Regional Environmental Change, 17(6), 1563-1568,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1187-4.
Riahi, K. et al., 2015: Locked into Copenhagen pledges - Implications of shortterm emission targets for the cost and feasibility of long-term climate goals.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 90, 8-23,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.016.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy,
land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: an overview. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 153-168, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Robertson, M., 2014: Sustainability Principles and Practice. Routledge, London,
UK, 392 pp., doi:10.4324/9780203768747.
Robinson, M. and T. Shine, 2018: Achieving a climate justice pathway to 1.5C.
Nature Climate Change, 8(7), 564-569, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0189-7.
Robinson, S. and M. Dornan, 2017: International financing for climate change
adaptation in small island developing states. Regional Environmental Change,
17(4), 1103-1115, doi:10.1007/s10113-016-1085-1.
Robiou du Pont, Y. et al., 2017: Equitable mitigation to achieve the Paris Agreement
goals. Nature Climate Change, 7(1), 38-43, doi:10.1038/nclimate3186.

522

Rockstrom, J. et al., 2017: Sustainable intensification of agriculture for human
prosperity and global sustainability. Ambio, 46(1), 4-17,
doi:10.1007/s13280-016-0793-6.
Rogelj, J. et al., 2018: Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature increase
below 1.5C. Nature Climate Change, 1-8,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0091-3.
Roger, C., T. Hale, and L. Andonova, 2017: The comparative politics of transnational
climate governance. International Interactions, 43(1), 1-25,
doi:10.1080/03050629.2017.1252248.
Rose, S.K. et al., 2014: Bioenergy in energy transformation and climate
management. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 477-493,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0965-3.
Rosenbloom, D., 2017: Pathways: An emerging concept for the theory and
governance of low-carbon transitions. Global Environmental Change, 43, 37-
50, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.011.
Rosenzweig, C. et al., 2018: Climate Change and Cities: Second Assessment
Report of the Urban Climate Change Research Network. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 811 pp.,
doi:10.1017/9781316563878.
Roser, D. and C. Seidel, 2017: Climate justice. Routledge, Abingdon, UK, 230 pp.
Roser, D., C. Huggel, M. Ohndorf, and I. Wallimann-Helmer, 2015: Advancing the
interdisciplinary dialogue on climate justice. Climatic Change, 133(3), 349-359,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1556-2.
Rozenberg, J. and S. Hallegatte, 2016: Modeling the Impacts of Climate Change
on Future Vietnamese Households: A Micro-Simulation Approach. World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper No. 7766, World Bank, 20 pp.
Runhaar, H., B. Wilk, Persson, C. Uittenbroek, and C. Wamsler, 2018: Mainstreaming
climate adaptation: taking stock about "what works" from empirical research
worldwide. Regional Environmental Change, 18(4), 1201-1210,
doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1259-5.
Rutledge, D. et al., 2017: Identifying Feedbacks, Understanding Cumulative
Impacts and Recognising Limits: A National Integrated Assessment. Synthesis
Report RA3. Climate Changes, Impacts and Implications for New Zealand to
2100. CCII (Climate Changes, Impacts & Implications), 84 pp.
Sachs, J., G. Schmidt-Traub, C. Kroll, D. Durand-Delacre, and K. Teksoz, 2017: SDG
Index and Dashboards Report 2017. Bertelsmann Stiftung and Sustainable
Development Solutions Network (SDSN), New York, NY, USA, 479 pp.
Salleh, A., 2016: Climate, Water, and Livelihood Skills: A Post-Development
Reading of the SDGs. Globalizations, 13(6), 952-959,
doi:10.1080/14747731.2016.1173375.
Sanchez, A. and M. Izzo, 2017: Micro hydropower: an alternative for climate change
mitigation, adaptation, and development of marginalized local communities in
Hispaniola Island. Climatic Change, 140(1), 79-87,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1865-0.
Santarius, T., H.J. Walnum, and C. Aall (eds.), 2016: Rethinking Climate and Energy
Policies: New Perspectives on the Rebound Phenomenon. Springer, Cham,
Switzerland, 294 pp., doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38807-6.
Santos, P., P. Bacelar-Nicolau, M.A. Pardal, L. Bacelar-Nicolau, and U.M. Azeiteiro,
2016: Assessing Student Perceptions and Comprehension of Climate Change
in Portuguese Higher Education Institutions. In: Implementing Climate Change
Adaptation in Cities and Communities: Integrating Strategies and Educational
Approaches [Filho, W.L., K. Adamson, R.M. Dunk, U.M. Azeiteiro, S. Illingworth,
and F. Alves (eds.)]. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 221-236,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-28591-7_12.
Satterthwaite, D., 2016: Missing the Millennium Development Goal targets for
water and sanitation in urban areas. Environment and Urbanization, 28(1),
99-118, doi:10.1177/0956247816628435.
Satterthwaite, D. et al., 2018: Responding to climate change in cities and in their
informal settlements and economies. International Institute for Environment
and Development, Edmonton, Canada, 61 pp.
Savo, V. et al., 2016: Observations of climate change among subsistence-oriented
communities around the world. Nature Climate Change, 6(5), 462-473,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2958.
Schade, J. and W. Obergassel, 2014: Human rights and the Clean Development
Mechanism. Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 27(4), 717-735,
doi:10.1080/09557571.2014.961407.
Schaeffer, M. et al., 2015: Feasibility of limiting warming to 1.5 and 2C. Climate
Analytics, Berlin, Germany, 20 pp.
Schaller, N. et al., 2016: Human influence on climate in the 2014 southern England
winter floods and their impacts. Nature Climate Change, 6(6), 627-634,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2927.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Schirmer, J. and L. Bull, 2014: Assessing the likelihood of widespread landholder
adoption of afforestation and reforestation projects. Global Environmental
Change, 24, 306-320, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.11.009.
Schleussner, C.-F. et al., 2016: Differential climate impacts for policy-relevant limits
to global warming: the case of 1.5C and 2C. Earth System Dynamics, 7(2),
327-351, doi:10.5194/esd-7-327-2016.
Schlosberg, D., L.B. Collins, and S. Niemeyer, 2017: Adaptation policy and
community discourse: risk, vulnerability, and just transformation. Environmental
Politics, 26(3), 1-25, doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1287628.
Schwan, S. and X. Yu, 2017: Social protection as a strategy to address climateinduced migration. International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and
Management, 10(1), 43-64, doi:10.1108/ijccsm-01-2017-0019.
Scoones, I. et al., 2017: Pathways to Sustainable Agriculture. Routledge, Abingdon,
UK and New York, NY, USA, 132 pp.
Scott, F.L., C.R. Jones, and T.L. Webb, 2014: What do people living in deprived
communities in the UK think about household energy efficiency interventions?
Energy Policy, 66, 335-349,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.084.
Sealey-Huggins, L., 2017: `1.5C to stay alive': climate change, imperialism and
justice for the Caribbean. Third World Quarterly, 6597, 1-20,
doi:10.1080/01436597.2017.1368013.
Serdeczny, O.M., S. Bauer, and S. Huq, 2017: Non-economic losses from climate
change: opportunities for policy-oriented research. Climate and Development,
1-5, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1372268.
Seto, K.C. et al., 2016: Carbon Lock-In: Types, Causes, and Policy Implications.
Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 41(1), 425-452,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-085934.
Sgouridis, S. et al., 2016: RE-mapping the UAE's energy transition: an economywide assessment of renewable energy options and their policy implications.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 55, 1166-1180,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.05.039.
Shackleton, S., G. Ziervogel, S. Sallu, T. Gill, and P. Tschakert, 2015: Why is sociallyjust climate change adaptation in sub-Saharan Africa so challenging? A review
of barriers identified from empirical cases. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, 6(3), 321-344, doi:10.1002/wcc.335.
Shaffrey, L.C. et al., 2009: U.K. HiGEM: the new U.K. high-resolution global
environment model - model description and basic evaluation. Journal of
Climate, 22(8), 1861-1896, doi:10.1175/2008jcli2508.1.
Shah, N., M. Wei, V. Letschert, and A. Phadke, 2015: Benefits of leapfrogging to
superefficiency and low global warming potential refrigerants in room air
conditioning. LBNL-1003671, Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory(LBNL), Berkeley, CA, USA, 58 pp.
Sharpe, R.A., C.R. Thornton, V. Nikolaou, and N.J. Osborne, 2015: Higher energy
efficient homes are associated with increased risk of doctor diagnosed asthma
in a UK subpopulation. Environment International, 75, 234-244,
doi:10.1016/j.envint.2014.11.017.
Shaw, C., S. Hales, P. Howden-Chapman, and R. Edwards, 2014: Health co-benefits
of climate change mitigation policies in the transport sector. Nature Climate
Change, 4(6), 427-433, doi:10.1038/nclimate2247.
Shi, L. et al., 2016: Roadmap towards justice in urban climate adaptation research.
Nature Climate Change, 6(2), 131-137, doi:10.1038/nclimate2841.
Shi, Y., J. Liu, H. Shi, H. Li, and Q. Li, 2017: The ecosystem service value as a new
eco-efficiency indicator for industrial parks. Journal of Cleaner Production, 164,
597-605, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.06.187.
Shindell, D.T., G. Faluvegi, K. Seltzer, and C. Shindell, 2018: Quantified, localized
health benefits of accelerated carbon dioxide emissions reductions. Nature
Climate Change, 8(4), 291-295, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0108-y.
Shindell, D.T. et al., 2017: A climate policy pathway for near- and long-term
benefits. Science, 356(6337), 493-494, doi:10.1126/science.aak9521.
Shine, T., 2017: Integrating climate action into national development planning -
Coherent Implementation of the Paris Agreement and Agenda 2030. Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), Stockholm, Sweden, 26 pp.
Shine, T. and G. Campillo, 2016: The Role of Development Finance in Climate Action
Post-2015. OECD Development Co-operation Working Papers, No. 31, OECD
Publishing, Paris, France, 38 pp.
Shue, H., 2014: Climate Justice: Vulnerability and Protection. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK, 368 pp.
Shue, H., 2017: Responsible for what? Carbon producer CO2 contributions and
the energy transition. Climatic Change, 1-6, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2042-9.
Shue, H., 2018: Mitigation gambles: uncertainty, urgency and the last gamble
possible. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,

Chapter 5

Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2119), 20170105,
doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0105.
Shultz, J.M., M.A. Cohen, S. Hermosilla, Z. Espinel, and Andrew McLean, 2016:
Disaster risk reduction and sustainable development for small island developing
states. Disaster Health, 3(1), 32-44, doi:10.1080/21665044.2016.1173443.
Sinclair, F.L., 2016: Systems science at the scale of impact: Reconciling bottomup participation with the production of widely applicable research outputs.
In: Sustainable Intensification in Smallholder Agriculture: An Integrated
Systems Research Approach [Oborn, I., B. Vanlauwe, M. Phillips, R. Thomas,
W. Brooijmans, and K. Atta-Krah (eds.)]. Earthscan, London, UK, pp. 43-57.
Singh, C., 2018: Is participatory watershed development building local adaptive
capacity? Findings from a case study in Rajasthan, India. Environmental
Development, 25, 43-58, doi:10.1016/j.envdev.2017.11.004.
Singh, C. et al., 2017: The utility of weather and climate information for adaptation
decision-making: current uses and future prospects in Africa and India. Climate
and Development, 1-17, doi:10.1080/17565529.2017.1318744.
Singh, R., K.K. Garg, S.P. Wani, R.K. Tewari, and S.K. Dhyani, 2014: Impact of
water management interventions on hydrology and ecosystem services in
Garhkundar-Dabar watershed of Bundelkhand region, Central India. Journal of
Hydrology, 509, 132-149, doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2013.11.030.
Skeie, R.B. et al., 2017: Perspective has a strong effect on the calculation of
historical contributions to global warming. Environmental Research Letters,
12(2), 024022, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5b0a.
SLoCaT, 2017: Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action (MPGCA) Transport
Initiatives: Stock-take on action toward implementation of the Paris Agreement
and the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development. Second Progress Report.
Partnership on Sustainable Low Carbon Transport (SLoCaT), Bonn, Germany,
72 pp.
Smith, K.R. and A. Sagar, 2014: Making the clean available: escaping India's
Chulha Trap. Energy Policy, 75, 410-414, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.09.024.
Smith, K.R. et al., 2014: Human health: impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. In:
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global
and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R.
Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L.
Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 709-754.
Smith, P. et al., 2014: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU). In: Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K.
Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen,
S. Schlomer, C. Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 811-922.
Smith, P. et al., 2016: Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions.
Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 42-50, doi:10.1038/nclimate2870.
Smits, M. and C. Middleton, 2014: New Arenas of Engagement at the Water
Governance-Climate Finance Nexus? An Analysis of the Boom and Bust of
Hydropower CDM Projects in Vietnam. Water Alternatives, 7(3), 561-583, www.
water-alternatives.org/index.php/alldoc/articles/vol7/v8issue3/264-a7-3-7/file.
Smucker, T.A. et al., 2015: Differentiated livelihoods, local institutions, and the
adaptation imperative: Assessing climate change adaptation policy in Tanzania.
Geoforum, 59, 39-50, doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2014.11.018.
Solecki, W. et al., 2018: City transformations in a 1.5C warmer world. Nature
Climate Change, 8(3), 177-181, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0101-5.
Sondak, C.F.A. et al., 2017: Carbon dioxide mitigation potential of seaweed
aquaculture beds (SABs). Journal of Applied Phycology, 29(5), 2363-2373,
doi:10.1007/s10811-016-1022-1.
Sonwa, D.J. et al., 2017: Drivers of climate risk in African agriculture. Climate and
Development, 9(5), 383-398, doi:10.1080/17565529.2016.1167659.
Sorrell, S., 2015: Reducing energy demand: A review of issues, challenges
and approaches. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 47, 74-82,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.002.
Sovacool, B.K., B.-O. Linner, and M.E. Goodsite, 2015: The political economy of
climate adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 5(7), 616-618,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2665.
Sovacool, B.K., B.-O. Linner, and R.J.T. Klein, 2017: Climate change adaptation
and the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF): qualitative insights from
policy implementation in the Asia-Pacific. Climatic Change, 140(2), 209-226,
doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1839-2.

523

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

SPC, 2015: Vanuatu climate change and disaster risk reduction policy 2016-2030.
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), Suva, Fiji, 48 pp.
SPC, 2016: Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific: An Integrated
Approach to Address Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management (FRDP)
2017-2030. Pacific Community (SPC), Suva, Fiji, 40 pp.
Spencer, T. et al., 2018: The 1.5C target and coal sector transition: at the limits of
societal feasibility. Climate Policy, 18(3), 335-331,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2017.1386540.
Staggenborg, S. and C. Ogrodnik, 2015: New environmentalism and Transition
Pittsburgh. Environmental Politics, 24(5), 723-741,
doi:10.1080/09644016.2015.1027059.
Steering Committee on Partnerships for SIDS and UN DESA, 2016: Partnerships for
Small Island Developing States 2016. The Steering Committee on Partnerships
for Small Island Developing States and the United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, 49 pp.
Sterrett, C.L., 2015: Final evaluation of the Vanuatu NGO Climate Change
Adaptation Program. Climate Concern, 96 pp.
Stevens, C., R. Winterbottom, J. Springer, and K. Reytar, 2014: Securing Rights,
Combating Climate Change: How Strengthening Community Forest Rights Mitigates
Climate Change. World Resources Institute, Washington DC, USA, 64 pp.
Stirling, A., 2014: Emancipating Transformations: From controlling `the transition'
to culturing plural radical progress. STEPS Centre (Social, Technological and
Environmental Pathways to Sustainability), Brighton, UK, 48 pp.
Striessnig, E. and E. Loichinger, 2015: Future differential vulnerability to natural
disasters by level of education. Vienna Yearbook of Population Research, 13,
221-240, www.jstor.org/stable/24770031.
Stringer, L.C., S.M. Sallu, A.J. Dougill, B.T. Wood, and L. Ficklin, 2017: Reconsidering
climate compatible development as a new development landscape in southern
Africa. In: Making Climate Compatible Development Happen [Nunan, F. (ed.)].
Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 22-43.
Stringer, L.C. et al., 2014: Advancing climate compatible development: Lessons
from southern Africa. Regional Environmental Change, 14(2), 713-725,
doi:10.1007/s10113-013-0533-4.
Suckall, N., E. Tompkins, and L. Stringer, 2014: Identifying trade-offs between
adaptation, mitigation and development in community responses to climate and
socio-economic stresses: Evidence from Zanzibar, Tanzania. Applied Geography,
46, 111-121, doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.11.005.
Suckall, N., L.C. Stringer, and E.L. Tompkins, 2015: Presenting Triple-Wins?
Assessing Projects That Deliver Adaptation, Mitigation and Development Cobenefits in Rural Sub-Saharan Africa. Ambio, 44(1), 34-41,
doi:10.1007/s13280-014-0520-0.
Suffolk, C. and W. Poortinga, 2016: Behavioural changes after energy efficiency
improvements in residential properties. In: Rethinking Climate and Energy
Policies: New Perspectives on the Rebound Phenomenon [Santarius, T.,
H.J. Walnum, and C. Aall (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
Switzerland, pp. 121-142, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38807-6_8.
Surminski, S., L.M. Bouwer, and J. Linnerooth-Bayer, 2016: How insurance can
support climate resilience. Nature Climate Change, 6(4), 333-334,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2979.
Szabo, S. et al., 2015: Sustainable Development Goals Offer New Opportunities
for Tropical Delta Regions. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable
Development, 57(4), 16-23, doi:10.1080/00139157.2015.1048142.
Tabara, J.D., A.L. St. Clair, and E.A.T. Hermansen, 2017: Transforming communication
and knowledge production processes to address high-end climate change.
Environmental Science & Policy, 70, 31-37, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.01.004.
Tabara, J.D. et al., 2018: Positive tipping points in a rapidly warming world. Current
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31, 120-129,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.01.012.
Tait, L. and M. Euston-Brown, 2017: What role can African cities play in low-carbon
development? A multilevel governance perspective of Ghana, Uganda and
South Africa. Journal of Energy in Southern Africa, 28(3), 43-53,
doi:10.17159/2413-3051/2017/v28i3a1959.
Tanner, T. et al., 2017: Political economy of climate compatible development:
artisanal fisheries and climate change in Ghana. In: Making Climate Compatible
Development Happen [Nunan, F. (ed.)]. Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York,
NY, USA, pp. 223-241, doi:10.1111/j.2040-0209.2014.00446.x.
Taylor, M., 2017: Climate-smart agriculture: what is it good for? The Journal of
Peasant Studies, 45(1), 89-107, doi:10.1080/03066150.2017.1312355.
Taylor Aiken, G., 2015: (Local-) community for global challenges: carbon
conversations, transition towns and governmental elisions. Local Environment,
20(7), 764-781, doi:10.1080/13549839.2013.870142.

524

Taylor Aiken, G., 2016: Prosaic state governance of community low carbon
transitions. Political Geography, 55, 20-29,
doi:10.1016/j.polgeo.2016.04.002.
Taylor Aiken, G., L. Middlemiss, S. Sallu, and R. Hauxwell-Baldwin, 2017:
Researching climate change and community in neoliberal contexts: an emerging
critical approach. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 8(4), e463,
doi:10.1002/wcc.463.
Teferi, Z.A. and P. Newman, 2018: Slum upgrading: can the 1.5C carbon
reduction work with SDGs in these settlements? Urban Planning, 3(2), 52-63,
doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1239.
Thomas, A. and L. Benjamin, 2017: Management of loss and damage in small
island developing states: implications for a 1.5C or warmer world. Regional
Environmental Change, 17(81), 1-10, doi:10.1007/s10113-017-1184-7.
Thompson-Hall, M., E.R. Carr, and U. Pascual, 2016: Enhancing and expanding
intersectional research for climate change adaptation in agrarian settings.
Ambio, 45(s3), 373-382, doi:10.1007/s13280-016-0827-0.
Thornton, T.F. and C. Comberti, 2017: Synergies and trade-offs between adaptation,
mitigation and development. Climatic Change, 1-14,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0884-3.
Thorp, T.M., 2014: Climate Justice: A Voice for the Future. Palgrave Macmillan UK,
New York, 439 pp., doi:10.1057/9781137394644.
Tilman, D. and M. Clark, 2014: Global diets link environmental sustainability and
human health. Nature, 515(7528), 518-522, doi:10.1038/nature13959.
Tokar, B., 2014: Toward climate justice: perspectives on the climate crisis and social
change (2nd edition). New Compass Press, Porsgrunn, Norway, 182 pp.
Toole, S., N. Klocker, and L. Head, 2016: Re-thinking climate change adaptation
and capacities at the household scale. Climatic Change, 135(2), 203-209,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1577-x.
Tschakert, P. et al., 2016: Micropolitics in collective learning spaces for adaptive
decision making. Global Environmental Change, 40, 182-194,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.07.004.
Tschakert, P. et al., 2017: Climate change and loss, as if people mattered: Values,
places, and experiences. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 8(5),
e476, doi:10.1002/wcc.476.
Tung, R.L., 2016: Opportunities and Challenges Ahead of China's "New Normal".
Long Range Planning, 49(5), 632-640, doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2016.05.001.
UN, 2014: World urbanisation prospects, 2014 revisions. Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, New York, NY, USA.
UN, 2015a: The Millennium Development Goals Report 2015. United Nations (UN),
New York, NY, USA, 75 pp.
UN, 2015b: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. A/RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New
York, 35 pp.
UN Women, 2016: Time to Act on Gender, Climate Change and Disaster Risk
Reduction: An overview of progress in the Pacific region with evidence from
The Republic of Marshall Islands, Vanuatu and Samoa. United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) Regional Office
for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand, 92 pp.
UN Women and MRFCJ, 2016: The Full View: Ensuring a comprehensive approach
to achieve the goal of gender balance in the UNFCCC process. UN Women and
Mary Robinson Foundation Climate Justice (MRFCJ), 80 pp.
UNDP, 2016: Risk Governance: Building Blocks for Resilient Development in the
Pacific. Policy Brief: October 2016, United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and Pacific Risk Resilience Programme (PRRP), Suva, Fiji, 20 pp.
UNEP, 2017: The Emissions Gap Report 2017. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya, 89 pp.
UNFCCC, 2011a: Decision 1/CP.16: The Cancun Agreements: Outcome of the work of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 31 pp.
UNFCCC, 2011b: Decision 7/CP.17: Work programme on loss and damage.
In: Report of the Conference of the Parties on its seventeenth session, held
in Durban from 28 November to 11 December 2011. Addendum. Part Two:
Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its seventeenth session. FCCC/
CP/2011/9/Add.2, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), pp. 5-8.
UNFCCC, 2014: Decision 2/CP.19: Warsaw international mechanism for loss and
damage associated with climate change impact. In: Report of the Conference of
the Parties on its nineteenth session, held in Warsaw from 11 to 23 November
2013. Addendum. Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at
its nineteenth session. FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1, United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), pp. 6-8.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

UNFCCC, 2015: Adoption of the Paris Agreement. FCCC/CP/2015/L.9, United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 32 pp.
UNGA, 2014: Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 November 2014:
SIDS accelerated modalities of action (SAMOA) pathway. A/RES/69/15, United
Nations General Assembly (UNGA), 30 pp.
UNRISD, 2016: Policy Innovations for Transformative Change: Implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. United Nations Research Institute
for Social Development (UNRISD), Geneva, Switzerland, 248 pp.
UNU-EHS, 2016: World Risk Report 2016. Focus: Logistics and infrastructure.
United Nations University, Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNUEHS), Bonn, Germany, 74 pp.
Urge-Vorsatz, D., S.T. Herrero, N.K. Dubash, and F. Lecocq, 2014: Measuring the
co-benefits of climate change mitigation. Annual Review of Environment and
Resources, 39, 549-582,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-031312-125456.
Urge-Vorsatz, D. et al., 2016: Measuring multiple impacts of low-carbon energy
options in a green economy context. Applied Energy, 179, 1409-1426,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.07.027.
Ustadi, I., T. Mezher, and M.R.M. Abu-Zahra, 2017: The effect of the carbon capture
and storage (CCS) technology deployment on the natural gas market in the
United Arab Emirates. Energy Procedia, 114, 6366-6376,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.1773.
Vale, L.J., 2014: The politics of resilient cities: whose resilience and whose city?
Building Research and Information, 42(2), 191-201,
doi:10.1080/09613218.2014.850602.
Van Aelst, K. and N. Holvoet, 2016: Intersections of gender and marital status
in accessing climate change adaptation: evidence from rural Tanzania. World
Development, 79, 40-50, doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.11.003.
Van de Graaf, T. and A. Verbruggen, 2015: The oil endgame: strategies of oil
exporters in a carbon-constrained world. Environmental Science & Policy, 54,
456-462, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.08.004.
van der Geest, K. and K. Warner, 2015: Editorial: Loss and damage from climate
change: emerging perspectives. International Journal of Global Warming, 8(2),
133-140, doi:10.1504/ijgw.2015.071964.
Van der Heijden, J., 2018: The limits of voluntary programs for low-carbon buildings
for staying under 1.5C. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 30,
59-66, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.03.006.
van der Voorn, T., J. Quist, C. Pahl-Wostl, and M. Haasnoot, 2017: Envisioning
robust climate change adaptation futures for coastal regions: a comparative
evaluation of cases in three continents. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies
for Global Change, 22(3), 519-546, doi:10.1007/s11027-015-9686-4.
van Noorloos, F. and M. Kloosterboer, 2017: Africa's new cities: The contested
future of urbanisation. Urban Studies, 1-19, doi:10.1177/0042098017700574.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2017a: The Shared Socio-economic Pathways: Trajectories for
human development and global environmental change. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 148-152, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.10.009.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2017b: Energy, land-use and greenhouse gas emissions
trajectories under a green growth paradigm. Global Environmental Change, 42,
237-250, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.008.
van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2018: Alternative pathways to the 1.5C target reduce
the need for negative emission technologies. Nature Climate Change, 8, 1-7,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0119-8.
Vanhala, L. and C. Hestbaek, 2016: Framing climate change Loss and Damage
in UNFCCC negotiations. Global Environmental Politics, 16(4), 111-129,
doi:10.1162/glep_a_00379.
Vardakoulias, O. and N. Nicholles, 2014: Managing uncertainty: An economic
evaluation of community-based adaptation in Dakoro, Niger. nef consulting,
London, UK, 53 pp.
Veland, S. et al., 2018: Narrative matters for sustainability: the transformative
role of storytelling in realizing 1.5C futures. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 31, 41-47, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.005.
Vermeulen, S. et al., 2016: The Economic Advantage: Assessing the value of climate
change actions in agriculture. International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD), Rome, Italy, 77 pp.
Vierros, M., 2017: Communities and blue carbon: the role of traditional
management systems in providing benefits for carbon storage, biodiversity
conservation and livelihoods. Climatic Change, 140(1), 89-100,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0920-3.
Vinyeta, K., K.P. Whyte, and K. Lynn, 2015: Climate Change Through an
Intersectional Lens: Gendered Vulnerability and Resilience in Indigenous
Communities in the United States. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-923, US

Chapter 5

Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station,
Corvallis, Oregon, USA, 72 pp.
Vogt-Schilb, A. and S. Hallegatte, 2017: Climate Policies and Nationally Determined
Contributions: Reconciling the Needed Ambition with the Political Economy.
IDB Working Paper Series No. IDB-WP-818, Inter-American Development Bank,
Washington DC, USA, 35 pp., doi:10.18235/0000714.
Volz, U. et al., 2015: Financing the Green Transformation: How to Make Green
Finance Work in Indonesia. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK,
174 pp., doi:10.1057/9781137486127.
von Stechow, C. et al., 2015: Integrating Global Climate Change Mitigation Goals
with Other Sustainability Objectives: A Synthesis. Annual Review of Environment
and Resources, 40(1), 363-394,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-021113-095626.
von Stechow, C. et al., 2016: 2C and SDGs: United they stand, divided they fall?
Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034022.
Wachsmuth, D., D. Cohen, and H. Angelo, 2016: Expand the frontiers of urban
sustainability. Nature, 536, 391-393, doi:10.1038/536391a.
Waisman, H.-D., C. Guivarch, and F. Lecocq, 2013: The transportation sector and
low-carbon growth pathways: modelling urban, infrastructure, and spatial
determinants of mobility. Climate Policy, 13(sup01), 106-129,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2012.735916.
Wallimann-Helmer, I., 2015: Justice for climate loss and damage. Climatic Change,
133(3), 469-480, doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1483-2.
Walsh-Dilley, M. and W. Wolford, 2015: (Un)Defining resilience: subjective
understandings of `resilience' from the field. Resilience, 3(3), 173-182,
doi:10.1080/21693293.2015.1072310.
Wamsler, C., C. Luederitz, E. Brink, C. Wamsler, and C. Luederitz, 2014: Local
levers for change: mainstreaming ecosystem-based adaptation into municipal
planning to foster sustainability transitions. Global Environmental Change, 29,
189-201, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.09.008.
Wang, X., 2017: The role of attitudinal motivations and collective efficacy on
Chinese consumers' intentions to engage in personal behaviors to mitigate
climate change. The Journal of Social Psychology, 1-13,
doi:10.1080/00224545.2017.1302401.
Wang, Y., Q. Song, J. He, and Y. Qi, 2015: Developing low-carbon cities through
pilots. Climate Policy, 15, 81-103,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1050347.
Wanner, T., 2014: The new `Passive Revolution' of the green economy and growth
discourse: Maintaining the `Sustainable Development' of Neoliberal capitalism.
New Political Economy, 20(1), 1-21, doi:10.1080/13563467.2013.866081.
Warner, B.P. and C.P. Kuzdas, 2017: The role of political economy in framing
and producing transformative adaptation. Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 29, 69-74, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.012.
Warner, B.P., C. Kuzdas, M.G. Yglesias, and D.L. Childers, 2015: Limits to adaptation
to interacting global change risks among smallholder rice farmers in Northwest
Costa Rica. Global Environmental Change, 30, 101-112,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.11.002.
Warner, K. and K. Geest, 2013: Loss and damage from climate change: locallevel evidence from nine vulnerable countries. International Journal of Global
Warming, 5(4), 367-386, doi:10.1504/ijgw.2013.057289.
Watts, N. et al., 2015: Health and climate change: policy responses to protect
public health. The Lancet, 386(10006), 1861-1914,
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(15)60854-6.
Wegner, G.I., 2016: Payments for ecosystem services (PES): a flexible, participatory,
and integrated approach for improved conservation and equity outcomes.
Environment, Development and Sustainability, 18(3), 617-644,
doi:10.1007/s10668-015-9673-7.
Weisser, F., M. Bollig, M. Doevenspeck, and D. Muller-Mahn, 2014: Translating the
`adaptation to climate change' paradigm: the politics of a travelling idea in
Africa. The Geographical Journal, 180(2), 111-119, doi:10.1111/geoj.12037.
Wells, E.M. et al., 2015: Indoor air quality and occupant comfort in homes
with deep versus conventional energy efficiency renovations. Building and
Environment, 93(Part 2), 331-338, doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.06.021.
Welsch, M. et al., 2014: Adding value with CLEWS - Modelling the energy system
and its interdependencies for Mauritius. Applied Energy, 113, 1434-1445,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.08.083.
Weng, X., Z. Dong, Q. Wu, and Y. Qin, 2015: China's path to a green economy:
decoding China's green economy concepts and policies. IIED Country Report,
International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London, UK,
40 pp.

525

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Werfel, S.H., 2017: Household behaviour crowds out support for climate change
policy when sufficient progress is perceived. Nature Climate Change, 7(7),
512-515, doi:10.1038/nclimate3316.
Wesseling, J.H. et al., 2017: The transition of energy intensive processing
industries towards deep decarbonization: Characteristics and implications for
future research. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 79, 1303-1313,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.156.
Weston, P., R. Hong, C. Kabore, and C.A. Kull, 2015: Farmer-managed natural
regeneration enhances rural livelihoods in dryland West Africa. Environmental
Management, 55(6), 1402-1417, doi:10.1007/s00267-015-0469-1.
Wewerinke-Singh, M., 2018a: Climate migrants' right to enjoy their culture. In:
Climate Refugees: Beyond the Legal Impasse? [Behrman, S. and A. Kent (eds.)].
Earthscan/Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 194-213.
Wewerinke-Singh, M., 2018b: State Responsibility for Human Rights Violations
Associated with Climate Change. In: Routledge Handbook of Human Rights
and Climate Governance [Duyck, S., S. Jodoin, and A. Johl (eds.)]. Routledge,
Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 75-89.
WHO, 2014: Quantitative risk assessment of the effects of climate change on
selected causes of death, 2030s and 2050s. [Hales, S., S. Kovats, S. Lloyd, and
D. Campbell-Lendrum (eds.)]. World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva,
Switzerland, 128 pp.
Wiebe, K. et al., 2015: Climate change impacts on agriculture in 2050 under a
range of plausible socioeconomic and emissions scenarios. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(8), 085010, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/085010.
Wiktorowicz, J., T. Babaeff, J. Eggleston, and P. Newman, 2018: WGV: an Australian
urban precinct case study to demonstrate the 1.5C agenda including multiple
SDGs. Urban Planning, 3(2), 64-81, doi:10.17645/up.v3i2.1245.
Wilkinson, E., A. Kirbyshire, L. Mayhew, P. Batra, and A. Milan, 2016: Climateinduced migration and displacement: closing the policy gap. Overseas
Development Institute (ODI), London, UK, 12 pp.
Willand, N., I. Ridley, and C. Maller, 2015: Towards explaining the health impacts of
residential energy efficiency interventions - A realist review. Part 1: Pathways.
Social Science and Medicine, 133, 191-201,
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.02.005.
Winkler, H. and N.K. Dubash, 2016: Who determines transformational change in
development and climate finance? Climate Policy, 16(6), 783-791,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1033674.
Winkler, H. et al., 2018: Countries start to explain how their climate contributions
are fair: more rigour needed. International Environmental Agreements: Politics,
Law and Economics, 18(1), 99-115, doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9381-x.
Winsemius, H.C. et al., 2018: Disaster risk, climate change, and poverty: assessing
the global exposure of poor people to floods and droughts. Environment and
Development Economics, 17, 1-21, doi:10.1017/s1355770X17000444.
Wise, R.M. et al., 2014: Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as part of
pathways of change and response. Global Environmental Change, 28, 325-336,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.002.
Wood, B.T., 2017: Socially just triple-wins? An evaluation of projects that pursue
climate compatible development goals in Malawi. PhD Thesis, School of Earth
and Environment, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK, 278 pp.
Wood, B.T., S.M. Sallu, and J. Paavola, 2016a: Can CDM finance energy access
in Least Developed Countries? Evidence from Tanzania. Climate Policy, 16(4),
456-473, doi:10.1080/14693062.2015.1027166.
Wood, B.T., A.J. Dougill, C.H. Quinn, and L.C. Stringer, 2016b: Exploring Power
and Procedural Justice Within Climate Compatible Development Project
Design: Whose Priorities Are Being Considered? The Journal of Environment &
Development, 25(4), 363-395, doi:10.1177/1070496516664179.
Work, C., 2015: Intersections of Climate Change Mitigation Policies, Land Grabbing
and Conflict in a Fragile State: Insights from Cambodia. MOSAIC Working Paper
Series No. 2, MOSAIC Research project, International Institute of Social Studies
(IISS), RCSD Chiang Mai University, 34 pp.
Wright, H., S. Huq, and J. Reeves, 2015: Impact of climate change on least developed
countries: are the SDGs possible? IIED Briefing May 2015, International Institute
for Environment and Development (IIED), London, UK, 4 pp.
WWF, 2017: Responsible sourcing of forest products: The business case for
retailers. World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), Gland, Switzerland, 47 pp.
Wyborn, C., L. Yung, D. Murphy, and D.R. Williams, 2015: Situating adaptation: how
governance challenges and perceptions of uncertainty influence adaptation
in the Rocky Mountains. Regional Environmental Change, 15(4), 669-682,
doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0663-3.
Yang, S., B. Chen, and S. Ulgiati, 2016: Co-benefits of CO2 and PM2.5 Emission
Reduction. Energy Procedia, 104, 92-97, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2016.12.017.

526

Yaro, J.A., J. Teye, and S. Bawakyillenuo, 2015: Local institutions and adaptive
capacity to climate change/variability in the northern savannah of Ghana. Climate
and Development, 7(3), 235-245, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.951018.
Zeng, H., X. Chen, X. Xiao, and Z. Zhou, 2017: Institutional pressures, sustainable
supply chain management, and circular economy capability: Empirical evidence
from Chinese eco-industrial park firms. Journal of Cleaner Production, 155, 54-
65, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.093.
Zhang, H. and W. Chen, 2015: The role of biofuels in China's transport sector in
carbon mitigation scenarios. Energy Procedia, 75, 2700-2705,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.682.
Zhang, S., E. Worrell, and W. Crijns-Graus, 2015: Cutting air pollution by improving
energy efficiency of China's cement industry. Energy Procedia, 83, 10-20,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.12.191.
Zhang, Y. et al., 2017: Processes of coastal ecosystem carbon sequestration and
approaches for increasing carbon sink. Science China Earth Sciences, 60(5), 809-
820, doi:10.1007/s11430-016-9010-9.
Zhao, D., A.P. McCoy, J. Du, P. Agee, and Y. Lu, 2017: Interaction effects of building
technology and resident behavior on energy consumption in residential buildings.
Energy and Buildings, 134, 223-233, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.10.049.
Ziervogel, G., A. Cowen, and J. Ziniades, 2016: Moving from adaptive to transformative
capacity: Building foundations for inclusive, thriving, and regenerative urban
settlements. Sustainability, 8(9), 955, doi:10.3390/su8090955.
Ziervogel, G. et al., 2017: Inserting rights and justice into urban resilience: a
focus on everyday risk. Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 123-138,
doi:10.1177/0956247816686905.
Zimm, C., F. Sperling, and S. Busch, 2018: Identifying sustainability and knowledge
gaps in socio-economic pathways vis-a-vis the Sustainable Development Goals.
Economies, 6(2), 20, doi:10.3390/economies6020020.
REF

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Chapter 5

Reference list for Table 5.2.
Aamaas, B. and G.P. Peters, 2017: The climate impact of Norwegians' travel
behavior. Travel Behaviour and Society, 6, 10-18, doi:10.1016/j.tbs.2016.04.001.
Abanda, F.H., M.B. Manjia, K.E. Enongene, J.H.M. Tah, and C. Pettang, 2016: A
feasibility study of a residential photovoltaic system in Cameroon. Sustainable
Energy Technologies and Assessments, 17, 38-49,
doi:10.1016/j.seta.2016.08.002.
Abdelouas, A., 2006: Uranium mill tailings: geochemistry, mineralogy, and
environmental impact. Elements, 2(6), 335-341,
doi:10.2113/gselements.2.6.335.
Abdul Quader, M., S. Ahmed, S.Z. Dawal, and Y. Nukman, 2016: Present needs,
recent progress and future trends of energy-efficient Ultra-Low Carbon Dioxide
(CO2) Steelmaking (ULCOS) program. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 55, 537-549, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.101.
Acemoglu, D., 2009: Introduction to modern economic growth. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1008 pp.
Acemoglu, D., F.A. Gallego, and J.A. Robinson, 2014: Institutions, human Capital,
and development. Annual Review of Economics, 6(1), 875-912,
doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080213-041119.
Acheampong, M., F.C. Ertem, B. Kappler, and P. Neubauer, 2017: In pursuit of
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) number 7: Will biofuels be reliable?
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 75(7), 927-937,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.074.
Adamantiades, A. and I. Kessides, 2009: Nuclear power for sustainable
development: Current status and future prospects. Energy Policy, 37(12), 5149-
5166, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.07.052.
Aggarwal, P., 2017: 2C target, India's climate action plan and urban transport
sector. Travel Behaviour and Society, 6, 110-116,
doi:10.1016/j.tbs.2016.11.001.
Ahearne, J.F., 2011: Prospects for nuclear energy. Energy Economics, 33(4), 572-
580, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2010.11.014.
Ahmad, S. and J.A. Puppim de Oliveira, 2016: Determinants of urban mobility in
India: lessons for promoting sustainable and inclusive urban transportation in
developing countries. Transport Policy, 50, 106-114,
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2016.04.014.
Ahman, M., L.J. Nilsson, and B. Johansson, 2017: Global climate policy and
deep decarbonization of energy-intensive industries. Climate Policy, 17(5),
634-649, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1167009.
Ahmed, N., W.W.L. Cheung, S. Thompson, and M. Glaser, 2017a: Solutions to blue
carbon emissions: Shrimp cultivation, mangrove deforestation and climate
change in coastal Bangladesh. Marine Policy, 82, 68-75,
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.007.
Ahmed, N., S.W. Bunting, M. Glaser, M.S. Flaherty, and J.S. Diana, 2017b: Can
greening of aquaculture sequester blue carbon? Ambio, 46(4), 468-477,
doi:10.1007/s13280-016-0849-7.
Ajanovic, A., 2015: The future of electric vehicles: prospects and impediments.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment, 4(6), 521-536,
doi:10.1002/wene.160.
Alahakoon, S., 2017: Significance of energy storages in future power networks.
Energy Procedia, 110, 14-19, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.098.
Alho, C.J.R., 2011: Environmental Effects of Hydropower Reservoirs on Wild
Mammals and Freshwater Turtles in Amazonia: A Review. Oecologia Australis,
15(3), 593-604, doi:10.4257/oeco.2011.1503.11.
Ali, S.M.H., M.J.S. Zuberi, M.A. Tariq, D. Baker, and A. Mohiuddin, 2015: A study to
incorporate renewable energy technologies into the power portfolio of Karachi,
Pakistan. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 47, 14-22,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.009.
Allen, S., T. Dietz, and A.M. McCright, 2015: Measuring household energy efficiency
behaviors with attention to behavioral plasticity in the United States. Energy
Research & Social Science, 10, 133-140,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.07.014.
Alongi, D.M., 2012: Carbon sequestration in mangrove forests. Carbon
Management, 3(3), 313-322, doi:10.4155/cmt.12.20.
AlSabbagh, M., Y.L. Siu, A. Guehnemann, and J. Barrett, 2017: Integrated approach
to the assessment of CO2e-mitigation measures for the road passenger transport
sector in Bahrain. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 71, 203-215,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.12.052.
Altieri, K.E. et al., 2016: Achieving development and mitigation objectives through
a decarbonization development pathway in South Africa. Climate Policy,
16(sup1), S78-S91, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1150250.

Al-Zoughool, M. and D. Krewski, 2009: Health effects of radon: A review of
the literature. International Journal of Radiation Biology, 85(1), 57-69,
doi:10.1080/09553000802635054.
Anda, M. and J. Temmen, 2014: Smart metering for residential energy efficiency:
the use of community based social marketing for behavioural change and smart
grid introduction. Renewable Energy, 67, 119-127,
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2013.11.020.
Anderson, A. et al., 2017: Empowering smart communities: electrification,
education, and sustainable entrepreneurship in IEEE Smart Village Initiatives.
IEEE Electrification Magazine, 5(2), 6-16, doi:10.1109/mele.2017.2685738.
Andrew, D., 2017: Trade and Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 15: Promoting
"Life on Land" through Mandatory and Voluntary Approaches. ADBI Working
Paper Series, No. 700, Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI), Tokyo, Japan,
33 pp.
Anenberg, S.C. et al., 2013: Cleaner cooking solutions to achieve health, climate,
and economic cobenefits. Environmental Science & Technology, 47(9), 3944-
3952, doi:10.1021/es304942e.
Apeaning, R.W. and P. Thollander, 2013: Barriers to and driving forces for
industrial energy efficiency improvements in African industries: a case study
of Ghana's largest industrial area. Journal of Cleaner Production, 53, 204-213,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.04.003.
Apps, J.A., L. Zheng, Y. Zhang, T. Xu, and J.T. Birkholzer, 2010: Evaluation of
Potential Changes in Groundwater Quality in Response to CO2 Leakage from
Deep Geologic Storage. Transport in Porous Media, 82(1), 215-246,
doi:10.1007/s11242-009-9509-8.
Aranda, C., A.C. Kuesel, and E.R. Fletcher, 2014: A systematic review of linkages
between access to electricity in healthcare facilities, health services delivery,
and health outcomes: findings for emergency referrals, maternal and child
services. UBS Optimus Foundation & Liberian Institute for Biomedical Research,
Zurich, Switzerland.
Asaduzzaman, M., D.F. Barnes, and S.R. Khandker, 2010: Restoring Balance:
Bangladesh's Rural Energy Realities. World Bank Working Paper: No. 181, World
Bank, Washington DC, USA, 170 pp.,
doi:10.1596/978-0-8213-7897-7.
Asfaw, A., C. Mark, and R. Pana-Cryan, 2013: Profitability and occupational injuries
in US underground coal mines. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 50, 778-786,
doi:10.1016/j.aap.2012.07.002.
Ashworth, P. et al., 2012: What's in store: Lessons from implementing CCS.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 9, 402-409,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2012.04.012.
Atchley, A.L., R.M. Maxwell, and A.K. Navarre-Sitchler, 2013: Human health
risk assessment of CO2 leakage into overlying aquifers using a stochastic,
geochemical reactive transport approach. Environmental Science & Technology,
47(11), 5954-5962.
Azevedo, I. and V.M.S. Leal, 2017: Methodologies for the evaluation of local
climate change mitigation actions: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 79, 681-690, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.100.
Babiker, M.H. and R.S. Eckaus, 2007: Unemployment effects of climate policy.
Environmental Science & Policy, 10(7-8), 600-609,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2007.05.002.
Bailis, R., R. Drigo, A. Ghilardi, and O. Masera, 2015: The carbon footprint of
traditional woodfuels. Nature Climate Change, 5(3), 266-272,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2491.
Bajelj, B. et al., 2014: Importance of food-demand management for climate
mitigation. Nature Climate Change, 4(10), 924-929,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2353.
Balishter, G.V.K. and R. Singh, 1991: Impact of mechanization on employment and
farm productivity. Productivity, 32(3), 484-489.
Banerjee, R. et al., 2012: Energy End-Use: Industry. In: Global Energy Assessment
- Toward a Sustainable Future [Johansson, T.B., N. Nakicenovic, A. Patwardhan,
and L. Gomez-Echeverri (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA and the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, pp. 513-574.
Bartley, T., 2010: Transnational Private Regulation in Practice: The Limits of Forest
and Labor Standards Certification in Indonesia. Business and Politics, 12(03),
1-34, doi:10.2202/1469-3569.1321.
Bartos, M.D. and M. Chester, 2014: The Conservation Nexus: Valuing Interdependent
Water and Energy Savings in Arizona. Environmental Science & Technology,
48(4), 2139-2149, doi:10.1021/es4033343.

527

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Bastos Lima, M.G., W. Ashely-Cantello, I. Visseren-Hamakers, A. Gupta, and J.
Brana-Varela, 2015: Forests Post-2015: Maximizing Synergies between the
Sustainable Development Goals and REDD+. WWF-WUR Policy Brief No. 3,
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and Wageningen University & Research (WUR), 5 pp.
Bastos Lima, M.G., G. Kissinger, I.J. Visseren-Hamakers, J. Brana-Varela, and
A. Gupta, 2017: The Sustainable Development Goals and REDD+: assessing
institutional interactions and the pursuit of synergies. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 17(4), 589-606,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9366-9.
Bazilian, M. et al., 2011: Considering the energy, water and food nexus: towards
an integrated modelling approach. Energy Policy, 39(12), 7896-7906,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.09.039.
Beddington, J. et al., 2012: Achieving food security in the face of climate change:
Final report from the Commission on Sustainable Agriculture and Climate
Change. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food
Security (CCAFS), Copenhagen, Denmark, 59 pp.
Behnassi, M., M. Boussaid, and R. Gopichandran, 2014: Achieving Food Security
in a Changing Climate: The Potential of Climate-Smart Agriculture. In:
Environmental Cost and Face of Agriculture in the Gulf Cooperation Council
Countries [Shahid, S.A. and M. Ahmed (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, Switzerland, pp. 27-42, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05768-2_2.
Bellarby, J. et al., 2013: Livestock greenhouse gas emissions and mitigation
potential in Europe. Global Change Biology, 19(1), 3-18,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2012.02786.x.
Belton Chevallier, L., B. Motte-Baumvol, S. Fol, and Y. Jouffe, 2018: Coping with
the costs of car dependency: A system of expedients used by low-income
households on the outskirts of Dijon and Paris. Transport Policy, 65, 79-88,
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2017.06.006.
Benson, S.M. and D.R. Cole, 2008: CO2 Sequestration in Deep Sedimentary
Formations. Elements, 4(5), 325-331, doi:10.2113/gselements.4.5.325.
Bernard, T. and M. Torero, 2015: Social interaction effects and connection to
electricity: experimental evidence from rural Ethiopia. Economic Development
and Cultural Change, 63(3), 459-484, doi:10.1086/679746.
Bernier, Q. et al., 2013: Addressing Gender in Climate-Smart Smallholder
Agriculture. ICRAF Policy Brief 14, World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi,
Kenya, 4 pp.
Berrueta, V.M., M. Serrano-Medrano, C. Garcia-Bustamante, M. Astier, and O.R.
Masera, 2017: Promoting sustainable local development of rural communities
and mitigating climate change: the case of Mexico's Patsari improved cookstove
project. Climatic Change, 140(1), 63-77,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1523-y.
Bertram, C. et al., 2015: Carbon lock-in through capital stock inertia associated
with weak near-term climate policies. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 90(PA), 62-72, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.10.001.
Bhattacharyya, A., J.P. Meltzer, J. Oppenheim, Z. Qureshi, and N. Stern, 2016:
Delivering on better infrastructure for better development and better climate.
The Brookings Institution, The New Climate Economy, and Grantham Research
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, 160 pp.
Bhojvaid, V. et al., 2014: How do People in Rural India Perceive Improved Stoves
and Clean Fuel? Evidence from Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(2), 1341-1358,
doi:10.3390/ijerph110201341.
Bickerstaff, K., P. Simmons, and N. Pidgeon, 2008: Constructing Responsibilities for
Risk: Negotiating Citizen - State Relationships. Environment and Planning A:
Economy and Space, 40(6), 1312-1330, doi:10.1068/a39150.
Bilton, A.M., R. Wiesman, A.F.M. Arif, S.M. Zubair, and S. Dubowsky, 2011: On
the feasibility of community-scale photovoltaic-powered reverse osmosis
desalination systems for remote locations. Renewable Energy, 36(12), 3246-
3256, doi:10.1016/j.renene.2011.03.040.
Blyth, W. et al., 2014: Low carbon jobs: the evidence for net job creation from
policy support for energy efficiency and renewable energy. Technical Report, UK
Energy Research Centre, London, UK, 66 pp.
Bogdanski, A., 2012: Integrated food-energy systems for climate-smart agriculture.
Agriculture & Food Security, 1(1), 9, doi:10.1186/2048-7010-1-9.
Bonan, J., S. Pareglio, and M. Tavoni, 2014: Access to Modern Energy: A Review of
Impact Evaluations. Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan, Italy, 30 pp.
Bongardt, D. et al., 2013: Low-Carbon Land Transport: Policy Handbook. Routledge,
Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 264 pp.
Bonsch, M. et al., 2016: Trade-offs between land and water requirements for largescale bioenergy production. GCB Bioenergy, 8(1), 11-24,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12226.

528

Borenstein, S., 2012: The private and public economics of renewable electricity
generation. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 67-92,
doi:10.1257/jep.26.1.67.
Branca, G., N. McCarthy, L. Lipper, and M.C. Jolejole, 2011: Climate-smart
agriculture: a synthesis of empirical evidence of food security and mitigation
benefits from improved cropland management. Mitigation of Climate Change
in Agriculture Series 3, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), Rome, Italy, 35 pp.
Brandl, P., S.M. Soltani, P.S. Fennell, and N. Mac Dowell, 2017: Evaluation of cooling
requirements of post-combustion CO2 capture applied to coal-fired power
plants. Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 122, 1-10,
doi:10.1016/j.cherd.2017.04.001.
Brown, H.C.P., 2011: Gender, climate change and REDD+ in the Congo Basin
forests of Central Africa. International Forestry Review, 13(2), 163-176,
doi:10.1505/146554811797406651.
Brugge, D. and V. Buchner, 2011: Health effects of uranium: new research findings.
Reviews on Environmental Health, 26(4), 231-249,
doi:10.1515/reveh.2011.032.
Buck, B.H. and G. Krause, 2012: Integration of Aquaculture and Renewable
Energy Systems. In: Encyclopedia of Sustainability Science and Technology
Vol. 1. Springer Science+ Business Media, New York, NY, USA, pp. 511-533,
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-0851-3_180.
Burgherr, P., P. Eckle, and S. Hirschberg, 2012: Comparative assessment of severe
accident risks in the coal, oil and natural gas chains. Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, 105, 97-103, doi:10.1016/j.ress.2012.03.020.
Burlig, F. and L. Preonas, 2016: Out of the darkness and into the light? Development
effects of rural electrification. EI @ Haas WP 268, Energy Institute at Haas,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, 52 pp.
Burney, J., H. Alaofe, R. Naylor, and D. Taren, 2017: Impact of a rural solar
electrification project on the level and structure of women's empowerment.
Environmental Research Letters, 12(9), 095007,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa7f38.
Burton, C.H., 2007: The potential contribution of separation technologies to
the management of livestock manure. Livestock Science, 112(3), 208-216,
doi:10.1016/j.livsci.2007.09.004.
Bustamante, M. et al., 2014: Co-benefits, trade-offs, barriers and policies for
greenhouse gas mitigation in the agriculture, forestry and other land use
(AFOLU) sector. Global Change Biology, 20(10), 3270-3290,
doi:10.1111/gcb.12591.
Byers, E.A., J.W. Hall, J.M. Amezaga, G.M. O'Donnell, and A. Leathard, 2016:
Water and climate risks to power generation with carbon capture and storage.
Environmental Research Letters, 11(2), 024011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/2/024011.
Byravan, S. et al., 2017: Quality of life for all: A sustainable development
framework for India's climate policy reduces greenhouse gas emissions. Energy
for Sustainable Development, 39, 48-58,
doi:10.1016/j.esd.2017.04.003.
Cabraal, A.R., D.F. Barnes, and S.G. Agarwal, 2005: Productive uses of energy for
rural development. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 30(1), 117-
144, doi:10.1146/annurev.energy.30.050504.144228.
CAF, 2017: Crecimiento urbano y accesso a Oportunidades: un desafio para
America Latina (in Spanish). Corporacion Andina de Fomento (CAF), Bogota,
Colombia, 287 pp.
Cameron, C. et al., 2016: Policy trade-offs between climate mitigation and clean
cook-stove access in South Asia. Nature Energy, 1, 1-5,
doi:10.1038/nenergy.2015.10.
Cameron, R.W.F., J. Taylor, and M. Emmett, 2015: A Hedera green facade - energy
performance and saving under different maritime-temperate, winter weather
conditions. Building and Environment, 92, 111-121,
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.04.011.
Campbell, B.M., P. Thornton, R. Zougmore, P. van Asten, and L. Lipper, 2014:
Sustainable intensification: What is its role in climate smart agriculture? Current
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 8, 39-43,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2014.07.002.
Cardis, E. et al., 2006: Estimates of the cancer burden in Europe from radioactive
fallout from the Chernobyl accident. International Journal of Cancer, 119(6),
1224-1235, doi:10.1002/ijc.22037.
Carrara, S. and T. Longden, 2017: Freight futures: The potential impact of road
freight on climate policy. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, 55, 359-372,
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2016.10.007.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Cascajo, R., A. Garcia-Martinez, and A. Monzon, 2017: Stated preference survey
for estimating passenger transfer penalties: design and application to Madrid.
European Transport Research Review, 9(3), 42,
doi:10.1007/s12544-017-0260-x.
Casillas, C.E. and D.M. Kammen, 2010: The Energy-Poverty-Climate Nexus. Science,
330(6008), 1181-1182, doi:10.1126/science.1197412.
Casillas, C.E. and D.M. Kammen, 2012: Quantifying the social equity of carbon
mitigation strategies. Climate Policy, 12(6), 690-703,
doi:10.1080/14693062.2012.669097.
Cass, N., G. Walker, and P. Devine-Wright, 2010: Good neighbours, public relations
and bribes: the politics and perceptions of community benefit provision in
renewable energy development in the UK. Journal of Environmental Policy &
Planning, 12(3), 255-275,
doi:10.1080/1523908x.2010.509558.
Cayla, J.-M. and D. Osso, 2013: Does energy efficiency reduce inequalities? Impact
of policies in Residential sector on household budget. In: ECEEE Summer Study
Proceedings. European Council for an Energy Efficient Economy (ECEEE), Toulon/
Hyeres, France, pp. 1247-1257.
CDP, 2015: CDP Global Climate Change Report 2015 - At the tipping point?
Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) Worldwide, 91 pp.
Chakrabarti, S. and E.J. Shin, 2017: Automobile dependence and physical inactivity:
insights from the California Household Travel Survey. Journal of Transport and
Health, 6, 262-271, doi:10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.002.
Chakravarty, D., S. Dasgupta, and J. Roy, 2013: Rebound effect: how much to
worry? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 5(2), 216-228,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.03.001.
Chakravorty, U., M. Pelli, and B. Ural Marchand, 2014: Does the quality of
electricity matter? Evidence from rural India. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 107, 228-247,
doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2014.04.011.
Chan, E.Y.Y. and S.M. Griffiths, 2010: The epidemiology of mine accidents in China.
The Lancet, 376(9741), 575-577, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(10)60660-5.
Chaturvedi, V. and P.R. Shukla, 2014: Role of energy efficiency in climate change
mitigation policy for India: assessment of co-benefits and opportunities within
an integrated assessment modeling framework. Climatic Change, 123(3), 597-
609, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0898-x.
Chen, B. and X. Qi, 2018: Protest response and contingent valuation of an urban
forest park in Fuzhou City, China. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 29, 68-76,
doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2017.11.005.
Chen, H., H. Qi, R. Long, and M. Zhang, 2012: Research on 10-year tendency of
China coal mine accidents and the characteristics of human factors. Safety
science, 50(4), 745-750, doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2011.08.040.
Cherian, A., 2015: Energy and Global Climate Change: Bridging the Sustainable
Development Divide. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, UK, 304 pp.,
doi:10.1002/9781118846070.
Chowdhury, S.K., 2010: Impact of infrastructures on paid work opportunities and
unpaid work burdens on rural women in Bangladesh. Journal of International
Development, 22(7), 997-1017, doi:10.1002/jid.1607.
Cibin, R., E. Trybula, I. Chaubey, S.M. Brouder, and J.J. Volenec, 2016: Watershedscale impacts of bioenergy crops on hydrology and water quality using improved
SWAT model. GCB Bioenergy, 8(4), 837-848, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12307.
Clancy, J.S., T. Winther, M. Matinga, and S. Oparaocha, 2012: Gender equity in access
to and benefits from modern energy and improved energy technologies: world
development report background paper. Gender and Energy WDR Background
Paper 44, ETC/ENERGIA in association Nord/Sor-konsulentene, 44 pp.
Clarke, L.E. et al., 2009: International climate policy architectures: Overview of the
EMF 22 International Scenarios. Energy Economics, 31, S64-S81,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2009.10.013.
Clarke, L.E. et al., 2014: Assessing transformation pathways. In: Climate Change
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A.
Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer,
C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 413-510.
Clifton, K.J., 2004: Mobility Strategies and Food Shopping for Low-Income Families:
A Case Study. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 23(4), 402-413,
doi:10.1177/0739456x04264919.
Colenbrander, S. et al., 2016: Can low-carbon urban development be pro-poor?
The case of Kolkata, India. Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 139-158,
doi:10.1177/0956247816677775.

Chapter 5

Connolly, D. et al., 2014: Heat Roadmap Europe: Combining district heating with
heat savings to decarbonise the EU energy system. Energy Policy, 65, 475-489,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.035.
Cook, P., 2011: Infrastructure, rural electrification and development. Energy for
Sustainable Development, 15(3), 304-313, doi:10.1016/j.esd.2011.07.008.
Cooke, S.J. et al., 2016: On the sustainability of inland fisheries: finding a future for
the forgotten. Ambio, 45(7), 753-764,
doi:10.1007/s13280-016-0787-4.
Corbera, E. and U. Pascual, 2012: Ecosystem Services: Heed Social Goals. Science,
335(6069), 655-656, doi:10.1126/science.335.6069.655-c.
Corner, A. et al., 2011: Nuclear power, climate change and energy security:
Exploring British public attitudes. Energy Policy, 39(9), 4823-4833,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.06.037.
Corsten, M., A. Ramirez, L. Shen, J. Koornneef, and A. Faaij, 2013: Environmental
impact assessment of CCS chains - lessons learned and limitations from LCA
literature. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 13, 59-71.
Crane, R., 2007: Is There a Quiet Revolution in Women's Travel? Revisiting the
Gender Gap in Commuting. Journal of the American Planning Association,
73(3), 298-316, doi:10.1080/01944360708977979.
Creutzig, F., R. Muhlhoff, and J. Romer, 2012: Decarbonizing urban transport in
European cities: four cases show possibly high co-benefits. Environmental
Research Letters, 7(4), 044042,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/7/4/044042.
Creutzig, F., C. Esteve, B. Simon, and H. Carol, 2013: Integrating place-specific
livelihood and equity outcomes into global assessments of bioenergy
deployment. Environmental Research Letters, 8(3), 035047,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/035047.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2014: Catching two European birds with one renewable
stone: mitigating climate change and Eurozone crisis by an energy transition.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 38, 1015-1028,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.028.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2015: Transport: A roadblock to climate change mitigation?
Science, 350(6263), 911-912, doi:10.1126/science.aac8033.
Creutzig, F. et al., 2016: Beyond technology: demand-side solutions for climate
change mitigation. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 41(1), 173-
198, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-110615-085428.
Cumbers, A., 2012: Reclaiming Public Ownership: Making Space for Economic
Democracy. Zed Books Ltd, London, UK and New York, NY, USA, 192 pp.
Dagevos, H. and J. Voordouw, 2013: Sustainability and meat consumption: is
reduction realistic? Sustainability: Science, Practice, & Policy, 9(2), 1-10,
doi:10.1080/15487733.2013.11908115.
Dahl, E.L., K. Bevanger, T. Nygard, E. Roskaft, and B.G. Stokke, 2012: Reduced
breeding success in white-tailed eagles at Smola windfarm, western Norway, is
caused by mortality and displacement. Biological Conservation, 145(1), 79-85,
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2011.10.012.
Daut, I., M. Adzrie, M. Irwanto, P. Ibrahim, and M. Fitra, 2013: Solar Powered Air
Conditioning System. Energy Procedia, 36, 444-453,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2013.07.050.
Davis, S.C. et al., 2013: Management swing potential for bioenergy crops. GCB
Bioenergy, 5(6), 623-638, doi:10.1111/gcbb.12042.
de Best-Waldhober, M., D. Daamen, and A. Faaij, 2009: Informed and uninformed
public opinions on CO2 capture and storage technologies in the Netherlands.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 3(3), 322-332,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2008.09.001.
de Koning, J.I.J.C., T.H. Ta, M.R.M. Crul, R. Wever, and J.C. Brezet, 2016: GetGreen
Vietnam: towards more sustainable behaviour among the urban middle class.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 134(Part A), 178-190,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.01.063.
de Lucas, M., M. Ferrer, M.J. Bechard, and A.R. Munoz, 2012: Griffon vulture
mortality at wind farms in southern Spain: distribution of fatalities and active
mitigation measures. Biological Conservation, 147(1), 184-189,
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2011.12.029.
de Moraes, M.A.F.D., C.C. Costa, J.J.M. Guilhoto, L.G.A. Souza, and F.C.R. Oliveira,
2010: Social Externalities of Fuels. In: Ethanol and Bioelectricity: Sugarcane in
the Future of the Energy Matrix [Leao de Sousa, E.L. and I. de Carvalho Macedo
(eds.)]. UNICA Brazilian Sugarcane Industry Association, Sao Paulo, Brazil,
pp. 44-75.
De Stefano, L., J.D. Petersen-Perlman, E.A. Sproles, J. Eynard, and A.T. Wolf, 2017:
Assessment of transboundary river basins for potential hydro-political tensions.
Global Environmental Change, 45, 35-46,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.04.008.

529

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Dechezlepretre, A. and M. Sato, 2014: The impacts of environmental regulations
on competitiveness. London School of Economics (LSE) and Global Green
Growth Institute (GGGI), 28 pp.
Demetriades, J. and E. Esplen, 2009: The Gender Dimensions of Poverty and
Climate Change Adaptation. IDS Bulletin, 39(4), 24-31,
doi:10.1111/j.1759-5436.2008.tb00473.x.
Denis-Ryan, A., C. Bataille, and F. Jotzo, 2016: Managing carbon-intensive
materials in a decarbonizing world without a global price on carbon. Climate
Policy, 16(sup1), S110-S128, doi:10.1080/14693062.2016.1176008.
Denman, K.L., 2008: Climate change, ocean processes and ocean iron fertilization.
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 364, 219-225, doi:10.3354/meps07542.
Denton, F., 2002: Climate Change Vulnerability, Impacts, and Adaptation: Why
Does Gender Matter? Gender and Development, 10(2), 10-20,
www.jstor.org/stable/4030569.
Derbez, M. et al., 2014: Indoor air quality and comfort in seven newly built,
energy-efficient houses in France. Building and Environment, 72, 173-187,
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.10.017.
Dinkelman, T., 2011: The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New
Evidence from South Africa. The American Economic Review, 101(7), 3078-
3108, doi:10.1257/aer.101.7.3078.
Djamila, H., C.-M. Chu, and S. Kumaresan, 2013: Field study of thermal comfort in
residential buildings in the equatorial hot-humid climate of Malaysia. Building
and Environment, 62, 133-142, doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.01.017.
Dodson, J. and N. Sipe, 2008: Shocking the Suburbs: Urban Location,
Homeownership and Oil Vulnerability in the Australian City. Housing Studies,
23(3), 377-401, doi:10.1080/02673030802015619.
Dodson, J., B. Gleeson, and N. Sipe, 2004: Transport Disadvantage and Social
Status: A review of literature and methods. Urban Policy Program Research
Monograph 5, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia, 55 pp.
Dooley, K. and S. Kartha, 2018: Land-based negative emissions: risks for
climate mitigation and impacts on sustainable development. International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, 18(1), 79-98,
doi:10.1007/s10784-017-9382-9.
Duarte, C.M., J. Wu, X. Xiao, A. Bruhn, and D. Krause-Jensen, 2017: Can Seaweed
Farming Play a Role in Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation? Frontiers in
Marine Science, 4, 100, doi:10.3389/fmars.2017.00100.
Dulac, J., 2013: Global land transport infrastructure requirements: Estimating road
and railway infrastructure capacity and costs to 2050. 50 pp.
ECF, 2014: Europe's low-carbon transition: Understanding the challenges and
opportunities for the chemical sector. European Climate Foundation (ECF),
60 pp.
Echegaray, F., 2016: Consumers' reactions to product obsolescence in emerging
markets: the case of Brazil. Journal of Cleaner Production, 134, 191-203,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.08.119.
Einsiedel, E.F., A.D. Boyd, J. Medlock, and P. Ashworth, 2013: Assessing sociotechnical mindsets: Public deliberations on carbon capture and storage in the
context of energy sources and climate change. Energy Policy, 53, 149-158,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.10.042.
Eis, J., R. Bishop, and P. Gradwell, 2016: Galvanising Low-Carbon Innovation.
A New Climate Economy working paper for Seizing the Global Opportunity:
Partnerships for Better Growth and a Better Climate. New Climate Economy
(NCE), Washington DC, USA and London, UK, 28 pp.
Epstein, A.H. and S.L.H. Theuer, 2017: Sustainable development and climate action:
thoughts on an integrated approach to SDG and climate policy implementation.
In: Papers from Interconnections 2017. Interconnections 2017.
Epstein, P.R. et al., 2011: Full cost accounting for the life cycle of coal. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 1219(1), 73-98,
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05890.x.
Ertem, F.C., P. Neubauer, and S. Junne, 2017: Environmental life cycle assessment
of biogas production from marine macroalgal feedstock for the substitution of
energy crops. Journal of Cleaner Production, 140, 977-985,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.08.041.
Evenson, R.E., 1999: Global and local implications of biotechnology and climate
change for future food supplies. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 96(11), 5921-8, doi:10.1073/pnas.96.11.5921.
Fan, Y., Q. Qiao, L. Fang, and Y. Yao, 2017: Energy analysis on industrial symbiosis
of an industrial park: a case study of Hefei economic and technological
development area. Journal of Cleaner Production, 141, 791-798,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.159.
Fankhaeser, S., F. Sehlleier, and N. Stern, 2008: Climate change, innovation and
jobs. Climate Policy, 8(4), 421-429, doi:10.3763/cpol.2008.0513.

530

Fankhauser, S. and S. Tepic, 2007: Can poor consumers pay for energy and water?
An affordability analysis for transition countries. Energy Policy, 35(2), 1038-
1049, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2006.02.003.
Fay, M. et al., 2015: Decarbonizing Development: Three Steps to a Zero-Carbon
Future. World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 185 pp.,
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0479-3.
Fernando, L. and S. Evans, 2015: Case Studies in Transformation towards Industrial
Sustainability. International Journal of Knowledge and Systems Science, 6(3),
1-17, doi:10.4018/ijkss.2015070101.
Figueroa, M.J. and S.K. Ribeiro, 2013: Energy for road passenger transport and
sustainable development: assessing policies and goals interactions. Current
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 5(2), 152-162,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.04.004.
Figueroa, M.J., L. Fulton, and G. Tiwari, 2013: Avoiding, transforming, transitioning:
Pathways to sustainable low carbon passenger transport in developing
countries. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 5(2), 184-190,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.02.006.
Figueroa, M.J., O. Lah, L.M. Fulton, A. McKinnon, and G. Tiwari, 2014: Energy
for transport. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 39, 295-325,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-031913-100450.
Finco, M.V.A. and W. Doppler, 2010: Bioenergy and sustainable development: The
dilemma of food security and climate change in the Brazilian savannah. Energy
for Sustainable Development, 14, 194-199,
doi:10.1016/j.esd.2010.04.006.
Fricko, O. et al., 2016: Energy sector water use implications of a 2C degree climate
policy. Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034011.
Frondel, M., N. Ritter, C.M. Schmidt, and C. Vance, 2010: Economic impacts from
the promotion of renewable energy technologies: The German experience.
Energy Policy, 38(8), 4048-4056, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.029.
Fu, W., Y. Lu, P. Harris, A. Comber, and L. Wu, 2018: Peri-urbanization may vary with
vegetation restoration: A large scale regional analysis. Urban Forestry & Urban
Greening, 29, 77-87, doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2017.11.006.
Gallego, F., J.P. Montero, and C. Salas, 2013: The effect of transport policies on
car use: A bundling model with applications. Energy Economics, 40, S85-S97,
doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2013.09.018.
Gao, L. and B.A. Bryan, 2017: Finding pathways to national-scale land-sector
sustainability. Nature, 544(7649), 217-222, doi:10.1038/nature21694.
Garnett, T., 2011: Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions in the food system (including the food chain)? Food Policy, 36, S23-
S32, doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2010.10.010.
Garvin, J.C., C.S. Jennelle, D. Drake, and S.M. Grodsky, 2011: Response of raptors
to a windfarm. Journal of Applied Ecology, 48(1), 199-209,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2664.2010.01912.x.
Ghosh-Dastidar, B. et al., 2014: Distance to Store, Food Prices, and Obesity in
Urban Food Deserts. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 47(5), 587-595,
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2014.07.005.
Gnanadesikan, A., J.L. Sarmiento, and R.D. Slater, 2003: Effects of patchy ocean
fertilization on atmospheric carbon dioxide and biological production. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles, 17(2), 1050, doi:10.1029/2002gb001940.
Godfray, H.C.J. and T. Garnett, 2014: Food security and sustainable intensification.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
369(1639), doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0273.
Gohin, A., 2008: Impacts of the European Biofuel Policy on the Farm Sector: A
General Equilibrium Assessment. Review of Agricultural Economics, 30(4),
623-641, www.jstor.org/stable/30225908.
Goldthau, A., 2014: Rethinking the governance of energy infrastructure: Scale,
decentralization and polycentrism. Energy Research & Social Science, 1, 134-
140, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2014.02.009.
Gossling, S. and D. Metzler, 2017: Germany's climate policy: Facing an automobile
dilemma. Energy Policy, 105, 418-428, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.03.019.
Gouldson, A. et al., 2015: Exploring the economic case for climate action in cities.
Global Environmental Change, 35, 93-105,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.07.009.
Greenberg, H.R., J.A. Blink, and T.A. Buscheck, 2013: Repository Layout and
Required Ventilation Trade Studies in Clay/Shale using the DSEF Thermal
Analytical Model. LLNL-TR-638880, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
(LLNL), Livermore, CA, USA, 33 pp.
Griffin, P.W., G.P. Hammond, and J.B. Norman, 2018: Industrial energy use and
carbon emissions reduction in the chemicals sector: A UK perspective. Applied
Energy, 227, 587-602, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.08.010.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Griffiths, N.A. et al., 2017: Water quality effects of short-rotation pine management
for bioenergy feedstocks in the southeastern United States. Forest Ecology and
Management, 400, 181-198, doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2017.06.011.
Grill, G. et al., 2015: An index-based framework for assessing patterns and trends
in river fragmentation and flow regulation by global dams at multiple scales.
Environmental Research Letters, 10(1), 015001,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/1/015001.
Grodsky, S.M. et al., 2011: Investigating the causes of death for wind
turbine-associated bat fatalities. Journal of Mammalogy, 92(5), 917-925,
doi:10.1644/10-mamm-a-404.1.
Grogan, L. and A. Sadanand, 2013: Rural Electrification and Employment in
Poor Countries: Evidence from Nicaragua. World Development, 43, 252-265,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.09.002.
Grubert, E.A., 2016: Water consumption from hydroelectricity in the United States.
Advances in Water Resources, 96, 88-94, doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2016.07.004.
Grubler, A. and D. Fisk (eds.), 2013: Energizing Sustainable Cities: Assessing Urban
Energy. Routledge Earthscan, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA, 222 pp.
Guivarch, C., R. Crassous, O. Sassi, and S. Hallegatte, 2011: The costs of climate
policies in a second-best world with labour market imperfections. Climate
Policy, 11(1), 768-788, doi:10.3763/cpol.2009.0012.
Gussow, K., A. Proelss, A. Oschlies, K. Rehdanz, and W. Rickels, 2010: Ocean iron
fertilization: why further research is needed. Marine Policy, 34(5), 911-918,
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2010.01.015.
Gyamfi, S., S. Krumdieck, and T. Urmee, 2013: Residential peak electricity demand
response - Highlights of some behavioural issues. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 25, 71-77, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.04.006.
Ha, M. and M. Wu, 2017: Land management strategies for improving water quality
in biomass production under changing climate. Environmental Research Letters,
12(3), 034015, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5f32.
Haileselassie, M., H. Taddele, K. Adhana, and S. Kalayou, 2013: Food safety
knowledge and practices of abattoir and butchery shops and the microbial
profile of meat in Mekelle City, Ethiopia. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical
Biomedicine, 3(5), 407-412, doi:10.1016/s2221-1691(13)60085-4.
Haines, A. and C. Dora, 2012: How the low carbon economy can improve health.
BMJ, 344, 1-6, doi:10.1136/bmj.e1018.
Haines, A. et al., 2007: Policies for accelerating access to clean energy, improving
health, advancing development, and mitigating climate change. The Lancet,
370(9594), 1264-1281, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(07)61257-4.
Hallegatte, S. et al., 2016a: Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate
Change on Poverty. The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA, 227 pp.,
doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0673-5.
Hallegatte, S. et al., 2016b: Mapping the climate change challenge. Nature Climate
Change, 6(7), 663-668, doi:10.1038/nclimate3057.
Hammond, J. et al., 2017: The Rural Household Multi-Indicator Survey (RHoMIS)
for rapid characterisation of households to inform climate smart agriculture
interventions: Description and applications in East Africa and Central America.
Agricultural Systems, 151, 225-233, doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2016.05.003.
Hartmann, J. et al., 2013: Enhanced chemical weathering as a geoengineering
strategy to reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide, supply nutrients, and mitigate
ocean acidification. Reviews of Geophysics, 51(2), 113-149,
doi:10.1002/rog.20004.
Harvey, C.A. et al., 2014: Climate-Smart Landscapes: Opportunities and Challenges
for Integrating Adaptation and Mitigation in Tropical Agriculture. Conservation
Letters, 7(2), 77-90, doi:10.1111/conl.12066.
Hasegawa, T. et al., 2015: Consequence of climate mitigation on the risk of hunger.
Environmental Science & Technology, 49(12), 7245-7253,
doi:10.1021/es5051748.
Haves, E., 2012: Does energy access help women? Beyond anecdotes: a review of
the evidence. Ashden, London, UK, 9 pp.
Havlik, P. et al., 2014: Climate change mitigation through livestock system
transitions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(10), 3709-
14, doi:10.1073/pnas.1308044111.
He, R., Y. Xiong, and Z. Lin, 2016: Carbon emissions in a dual channel closed loop
supply chain: the impact of consumer free riding behavior. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 134(Part A), 384-394, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.142.
Hedenus, F., S. Wirsenius, and D.J.A. Johansson, 2014: The importance of reduced
meat and dairy consumption for meeting stringent climate change targets.
Climatic Change, 124(1-2), 79-91, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1104-5.
Heinavaara, S. et al., 2010: Cancer incidence in the vicinity of Finnish nuclear
power plants: an emphasis on childhood leukemia. Cancer Causes & Control,
21(4), 587-595, doi:10.1007/s10552-009-9488-7.

Chapter 5

Heinonen, J., M. Jalas, J.K. Juntunen, S. Ala-Mantila, and S. Junnila, 2013: Situated
lifestyles: II. The impacts of urban density, housing type and motorization on
the greenhouse gas emissions of the middle-income consumers in Finland.
Environmental Research Letters, 8(3), 035050,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/035050.
Hejazi, M.I. et al., 2015: 21st century United States emissions mitigation could
increase water stress more than the climate change it is mitigating. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(34), 10635-40,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1421675112.
Hendrickson, T.P. and A. Horvath, 2014: A perspective on cost-effectiveness of
greenhouse gas reduction solutions in water distribution systems. Environmental
Research Letters, 9(2), 024017,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/2/024017.
Herrero, M. and P.K. Thornton, 2013: Livestock and global change: Emerging issues
for sustainable food systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
110(52), 20878-20881, doi:10.1073/pnas.1321844111.
Herrero, M. et al., 2013: Biomass use, production, feed efficiencies, and greenhouse
gas emissions from global livestock systems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110(52), 20888-20893,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1308149110.
Hertwich, E.G., M. Aaberg, B. Singh, and A.H. Stromman, 2008: Life-cycle
Assessment of Carbon Dioxide Capture for Enhanced Oil Recovery. Chinese
Journal of Chemical Engineering, 16(3), 343-353,
doi:10.1016/s1004-9541(08)60085-3.
Hic, C., P. Pradhan, D. Rybski, and J.P. Kropp, 2016: Food Surplus and Its Climate
Burdens. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(8), 4269-4277,
doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05088.
Hillier, J., 2011: Strategic navigation across multiple planes: Towards a Deleuzeaninspired methodology for strategic spatial planning. Town Planning Review,
82(5), 503-527, doi:10.3828/tpr.2011.30.
Hirth, L. and F. Ueckerdt, 2013: Redistribution effects of energy and climate policy:
The electricity market. Energy Policy, 62, 934-947,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.07.055.
Hiyama, A. et al., 2013: The Fukushima nuclear accident and the pale grass blue
butterfly: evaluating biological effects of long-term low-dose exposures. BMC
evolutionary biology, 13(1), 168, doi:10.1186/1471-2148-13-168.
Holland, R.A. et al., 2015: Global impacts of energy demand on the freshwater
resources of nations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
112(48), E6707-E6716, doi:10.1073/pnas.1507701112.
Holopainen, R. et al., 2014: Comfort assessment in the context of sustainable
buildings: Comparison of simplified and detailed human thermal sensation
methods. Building and Environment, 71, 60-70,
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.09.009.
Hontelez, J., 2016: Advancing SDG Implementation through Forest Certification.
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), Winnipeg, MN,
Canada. Retrieved from:
http://sdg.iisd.org/commentary/guest-articles/advancing-sdg-implementationthrough-forest-certification.
Hori, S., K. Kondo, D. Nogata, and H. Ben, 2013: The determinants of household
energy-saving behavior: Survey and comparison in five major Asian cities.
Energy Policy, 52, 354-362, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.09.043.
Huang, W., A. Wilkes, X. Sun, and A. Terheggen, 2013: Who is importing forest
products from Africa to China? An analysis of implications for initiatives
to enhance legality and sustainability. Environment, Development and
Sustainability, 15(2), 339-354,
doi:10.1007/s10668-012-9413-1.
Huebner, G.M., J. Cooper, and K. Jones, 2013: Domestic energy consumption -
What role do comfort, habit, and knowledge about the heating system play?
Energy and Buildings, 66, 626-636,
doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.07.043.
Hult, A. and J. Larsson, 2016: Possibilities and problems with applying a
consumption perspective in local climate strategies - the case of Gothenburg,
Sweden. Journal of Cleaner Production, 134, 434-442,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.10.033.
Hwang, J., K. Joh, and A. Woo, 2017: Social inequalities in child pedestrian traffic
injuries: Differences in neighborhood built environments near schools in Austin,
TX, USA. Journal of Transport and Health, 6, 40-49,
doi:10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.003.
ICSU and ISSC, 2015: Review of targets for the Sustainable Development Goals:
The Science Perspective. International Council for Science (ICSU), Paris, France,
92 pp., doi:978-0-930357-97-9.

531

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

IEA, 2016: Energy and Air Pollution: World Energy Outlook Special Report.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 266 pp.
Inger, R. et al., 2009: Marine renewable energy: potential benefits to biodiversity?
An urgent call for research. Journal of Applied Ecology, 46(6), 1145-1153,
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01697.x.
Ingram, J., 2011: A food systems approach to researching food security and its
interactions with global environmental change. Food Security, 3(4), 417-431,
doi:10.1007/s12571-011-0149-9.
IPCC, 2005: IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. [Metz,
B., O. Davidson, H.C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Prepared
by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, 442 pp.
IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution
of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E.
Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B.
Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlomer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, and J.C. Minx
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 1454 pp.
IRENA, 2016: Renewable Energy and Jobs - Annual Review 2016. International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 19 pp.
Isenhour, C. and K. Feng, 2016: Decoupling and displaced emissions: on Swedish
consumers, Chinese producers and policy to address the climate impact
of consumption. Journal of Cleaner Production, 134(Part A), 320-329,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.12.037.
Islar, M., S. Brogaard, and M. Lemberg-Pedersen, 2017: Feasibility of energy justice:
Exploring national and local efforts for energy development in Nepal. Energy
Policy, 105, 668-676, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.03.004.
Jackson, T. and P. Senker, 2011: Prosperity without Growth: Economics for a Finite
Planet. Energy & Environment, 22(7), 1013-1016,
doi:10.1260/0958-305x.22.7.1013.
Jain, A.A., R.R. Koford, A.W. Handcock, and G.G. Zenner, 2011: Bat mortality
and activity at a northern Iowa wind resource area. The American Midland
Naturalist, 165(1), 185-200, doi:10.1674/0003-0031-165.1.185.
Jain, R.K., R. Gulbinas, J.E. Taylor, and P.J. Culligan, 2013: Can social influence
drive energy savings? Detecting the impact of social influence on the energy
consumption behavior of networked users exposed to normative eco-feedback.
Energy and Buildings, 66, 119-127, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.06.029.
Jain, S. and M.P. Sharma, 2010: Prospects of biodiesel from Jatropha in India:
A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 14(2), 763-771,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2009.10.005.
Jakob, M. and J.C. Steckel, 2014: How climate change mitigation could harm
development in poor countries. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate
Change, 5(2), 161-168, doi:10.1002/wcc.260.
Jin, X. and N. Gruber, 2003: Offsetting the radiative benefit of ocean iron
fertilization by enhancing N2O emissions. Geophysical Research Letters, 30(24),
1-4, doi:10.1029/2003gl018458.
Jingura, R. and R. Kamusoko, 2016: The energy-development nexus in Sub-Saharan
Africa. In: Handbook on Africa: Challenges and Issues for the 21st Century
[Sherman, W. (ed.)]. Nova Science Publishers, Hauppauge, NY, USA, pp. 25-46.
Johansson, M.T. and P. Thollander, 2018: A review of barriers to and driving forces
for improved energy efficiency in Swedish industry - Recommendations for
successful in-house energy management. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 82, 618-628, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.052.
Johnson, J.M.-F., A.J. Franzluebbers, S.L. Weyers, and D.C. Reicosky, 2007:
Agricultural opportunities to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Environmental
Pollution, 150(1), 107-124, doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2007.06.030.
Johnson, N. et al., 2015: Stranded on a low-carbon planet: implications of climate
policy for the phase-out of coal-based power plants. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 90(Part A), 89-102,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2014.02.028.
Jones, B.A. and S.M. McDermott, 2018: The economics of urban afforestation:
Insights from an integrated bioeconomic-health model. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 89, 116-135, doi:10.1016/j.jeem.2018.03.007.
Jost, C. et al., 2016: Understanding gender dimensions of agriculture and climate
change in smallholder farming communities. Climate and Development, 8(2),
133-144, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1050978.
Kaatsch, P., C. Spix, R. Schulze-Rath, S. Schmiedel, and M. Blettner, 2008: Leukaemia
in young children living in the vicinity of German nuclear power plants.
International Journal of Cancer, 122(4), 721-726, doi:10.1002/ijc.23330.

532

Kagawa, S. et al., 2015: CO2 emission clusters within global supply chain networks:
Implications for climate change mitigation. Global Environmental Change, 35,
486-496, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.04.003.
Kahn Ribeiro, S. et al., 2012: Energy End-Use: Transport. In: Global Energy
Assessment - Toward a Sustainable Future [Johansson, T.B., N. Nakicenovic,
A. Patwardhan, and L. Gomez-Echeverri (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA and the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 575-648.
Karekezi, S., S. McDade, B. Boardman, and J. Kimani, 2012: Energy, Poverty and
Development. In: Global Energy Assessment - Toward a Sustainable Future
[Johansson, T.B., N. Nakicenovic, A. Patwardhan, and L. Gomez-Echeverri (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg,
Austria, pp. 151-190.
Karner, K., M. Theissing, and T. Kienberger, 2015: Energy efficiency for industries
through synergies with urban areas. Journal of Cleaner Production, 2020, 1-11,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.010.
Katila, P., W. de Jong, G. Galloway, B. Pokorny, and P. Pacheco, 2017: Building
on synergies: Harnessing community and smallholder forestry for Sustainable
Development Goals. International Union of Forest Research Organizations
(IUFRO), 23 pp.
Kaygusuz, K., 2011: Energy services and energy poverty for sustainable rural
development. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15, 936-947,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2010.11.003.
Kern, J.D., D. Patino-Echeverri, and G.W. Characklis, 2014: The Impacts of Wind
Power Integration on Sub-Daily Variation in River Flows Downstream of
Hydroelectric Dams. Environmental Science & Technology, 48(16), 9844-9851,
doi:10.1021/es405437h.
Khan, M., G. Srafeim, and A. Yoon, 2015: Corporate Sustainability: First Evidence
on Materiality. HBS Working Paper Number: 15-073, Harvard Business School,
Cambridge, MA, USA, 55 pp.
Khan, S., M.A. Hanjra, and J. Mu, 2009: Water management and crop production
for food security in China: A review. Agricultural Water Management, 96(3),
349-360, doi:10.1016/j.agwat.2008.09.022.
Kibria, G., 2015: Climate Resilient Development (CRD), Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) & Climate Finance (CF) - A Case Study. ResearchGate, 4 pp.,
doi:10.13140/rg.2.1.4393.2240.
Kim, Y. and C. Sun, 2017: The Energy-Efficient Adaptation Scheme for Residential
Buildings in Kazakhstan. Energy Procedia, 118, 28-34,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2017.07.005.
Kim, Y. et al., 2017: A perspective on climate-resilient development and national
adaptation planning based on USAID's experience. Climate and Development,
9(2), 141-151, doi:10.1080/17565529.2015.1124037.
Kirubi, C., A. Jacobson, D.M. Kammen, and A. Mills, 2009: Community-Based
Electric Micro-Grids Can Contribute to Rural Development: Evidence from
Kenya. World Development, 37(7), 1208-1221,
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2008.11.005.
Klausbruckner, C., H. Annegarn, L.R.F. Henneman, and P. Rafaj, 2016: A policy
review of synergies and trade-offs in South African climate change mitigation
and air pollution control strategies. Environmental Science & Policy, 57, 70-78,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.12.001.
Kohler, P., J. Hartmann, and D.A. Wolf-Gladrow, 2010: Geoengineering potential of
artificially enhanced silicate weathering of olivine. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(47), 20228-20233, doi:10.1073/pnas.1000545107.
Kohler, P., J.F. Abrams, C. Volker, J. Hauck, and D.A. Wolf-Gladrow, 2013:
Geoengineering impact of open ocean dissolution of olivine on atmospheric
CO2, surface ocean pH and marine biology. Environmental Research Letters,
8(1), 014009, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/014009.
Kohlin, G., E.O. Sills, S.K. Pattanayak, and C. Wilfong, 2011: Energy, Gender and
Development: What are the Linkages? Where is the Evidence? A background
paper for the World Development Report 2012 on Gender Equality and
Development. Paper No. 125, World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 75 pp.
Kong, X. et al., 2016: Groundwater Depletion by Agricultural Intensification
in China's HHH Plains, Since 1980s. Advances in Agronomy, 135, 59-106,
doi:10.1016/bs.agron.2015.09.003.
Koornneef, J., A. Ramirez, W. Turkenburg, and A. Faaij, 2011: The environmental
impact and risk assessment of CO2 capture, transport and storage-an evaluation
of the knowledge base using the DPSIR framework. Energy Procedia, 4, 2293-
2300, doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2011.02.119.
Kowarik, I., 2018: Urban wilderness: Supply, demand, and access. Urban Forestry &
Urban Greening, 29, 336-347, doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2017.05.017.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Krukowski, R.A., C. Sparks, M. Dicarlo, J. McSweeney, and D.S. West, 2013: There's
more to food store choice than proximity: A questionnaire development study.
BMC Public Health, 13(1), 586, doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-586.
Kumar, A. et al., 2011: Hydropower. In: IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy
Sources and Climate Change Mitigation [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y.
Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen,
S. Schlomer, and C. von Stechow (eds.)]. Prepared by Working Group III of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 437-496.
Kumar, N., P. Besuner, S. Lefton, D. Agan, and D. Hilleman, 2012: Power Plant
Cycling Costs. NREL/SR-5500-55433, National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL), Golden, CO, USA, 80 pp.
Kummu, M. et al., 2012: Lost food, wasted resources: Global food supply chain
losses and their impacts on freshwater, cropland, and fertiliser use. Science of
The Total Environment, 438, 477-489,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.08.092.
Kunz, M.J., A. Wuest, B. Wehrli, J. Landert, and D.B. Senn, 2011: Impact of
a large tropical reservoir on riverine transport of sediment, carbon, and
nutrients to downstream wetlands. Water Resources Research, 47(12),
doi:10.1029/2011wr010996.
Kunze, C. and S. Becker, 2015: Collective ownership in renewable energy and
opportunities for sustainable degrowth. Sustainability Science, 10, 425-437,
doi:10.1007/s11625-015-0301-0.
Kwong, Q.J., N.M. Adam, and B.B. Sahari, 2014: Thermal comfort assessment and
potential for energy efficiency enhancement in modern tropical buildings: A
review. Energy and Buildings, 68(Part A), 547-557,
doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.09.034.
Lakshmi, K., C. Anuradha, K. Boomiraj, and A. Kalaivani, 2015: Applications
of Biotechnological Tools to Overcome Climate Change and its Effects on
Agriculture. Research News For U (RNFU), 20, 218-222.
Lall, S.V. et al., 2017: Africa's Cities: Opening Doors to the World. World Bank,
Washington DC, USA, 162 pp., doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1044-2.
Lam, N.L., K.R. Smith, A. Gauthier, and M.N. Bates, 2012: Kerosene: A Review
of Household Uses and their Hazards in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part B, 15(6), 396-432,
doi:10.1080/10937404.2012.710134.
Lamb, A. et al., 2016: The potential for land sparing to offset greenhouse gas
emissions from agriculture. Nature Climate Change, 6, 488-492,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2910.
Lampitt, R.S. et al., 2008: Ocean fertilization: a potential means of geoengineering?
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 366(1882), 3919-3945, doi:10.1098/rsta.2008.0139.
Larson, A.M., T. Dokken, and A.E. Duchelle, 2014: The role of women in early REDD+
implementation. REDD+ on the ground: A case book of subnational initiatives
across the globe, 17(1), 440-441, doi:10.1505/146554815814725031.
Launiainen, S. et al., 2014: Is the Water Footprint an Appropriate Tool for Forestry
and Forest Products: The Fennoscandian Case. Ambio, 43(2), 244-256,
doi:10.1007/s13280-013-0380-z.
Lawrence, A., M. Karlsson, and P. Thollander, 2018: Effects of firm characteristics
and energy management for improving energy efficiency in the pulp and paper
industry. Energy, 153, 825-835, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2018.04.092.
LeDoux, T.F. and I. Vojnovic, 2013: Going outside the neighborhood: The shopping
patterns and adaptations of disadvantaged consumers living in the lower
eastside neighborhoods of Detroit, Michigan. Health & Place, 19, 1-14,
doi:10.1016/j.healthplace.2012.09.010.
Li, T. et al., 2016: Aging will amplify the heat-related mortality risk under a
changing climate: projection for the elderly in Beijing, China. Scientific Reports,
6(1), 28161, doi:10.1038/srep28161.
Liddell, C. and C. Guiney, 2015: Living in a cold and damp home: Frameworks for
understanding impacts on mental well-being. Public Health, 129(3), 191-199,
doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2014.11.007.
Lieder, M. and A. Rashid, 2016: Towards circular economy implementation: A
comprehensive review in context of manufacturing industry. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 115, 36-51, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.12.042.
Lim, S.S. et al., 2012: A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and
injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 19902010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The
Lancet, 380(9859), 2224-2260, doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(12)61766-8.
Lin, J., Y. Hu, S. Cui, J. Kang, and A. Ramaswami, 2015: Tracking urban carbon
footprints from production and consumption perspectives. Environmental
Research Letters, 10(5), 054001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/5/054001.

Chapter 5

Lipper, L. et al., 2014: Climate-smart agriculture for food security. Nature Climate
Change, 4(12), 1068-1072, doi:10.1038/nclimate2437.
Lipscomb, M., A.M. Mobarak, and T. Barham, 2013: Development Effects of
Electrification: Evidence from the Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants
in Brazil. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(2), 200-231,
doi:10.1257/app.5.2.200.
Liu, Y. and Y. Bai, 2014: An exploration of firms' awareness and behavior of
developing circular economy: An empirical research in China. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 87, 145-152,
doi:10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.04.002.
Long, T.B., V. Blok, and I. Coninx, 2016: Barriers to the adoption and diffusion of
technological innovations for climate-smart agriculture in Europe: evidence from
the Netherlands, France, Switzerland and Italy. Journal of Cleaner Production,
112, 9-21, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.06.044.
Lotze-Campen, H. et al., 2014: Impacts of increased bioenergy demand on
global food markets: an AgMIP economic model intercomparison. Agricultural
Economics, 45(1), 103-116, doi:10.1111/agec.12092.
Lovich, J.E. and J.R. Ennen, 2013: Assessing the state of knowledge of utility-scale
wind energy development and operation on non-volant terrestrial and marine
wildlife. Applied Energy, 103, 52-60,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.10.001.
Lowery, B., D. Sloane, D. Payan, J. Illum, and L. Lewis, 2016: Do Farmers' Markets
Increase Access to Healthy Foods for All Communities? Comparing Markets in
24 Neighborhoods in Los Angeles. Journal of the American Planning Association,
82(3), 252-266, doi:10.1080/01944363.2016.1181000.
Lucas, K. and K. Pangbourne, 2014: Assessing the equity of carbon mitigation
policies for transport in Scotland. Case Studies on Transport Policy, 2(2), 70-80,
doi:10.1016/j.cstp.2014.05.003.
Lybbert, T. and D. Sumner, 2010: Agricultural Technologies for Climate Change
Mitigation and Adaptation in Developing Countries: Policy Options for
Innovation and Technology Diffusion. ICTSD-IPC Platform on Climate Change,
Agriculture and Trade, Issue Brief No.6, International Centre for Trade and
Sustainable Development, Geneva, Switzerland and International Food &
Agricultural Trade Policy Council, Washington DC, USA, 32 pp.
Brander, L.M. et al., 2012: Ecosystem service values for mangroves in Southeast
Asia: a meta-analysis and value transfer application. Ecosystem Services, 1(1),
62-69, doi:10.1016/j.ecoser.2012.06.003.
Maidment, C.D., C.R. Jones, T.L. Webb, E.A. Hathway, and J.M. Gilbertson, 2014:
The impact of household energy efficiency measures on health: A meta-analysis.
Energy Policy, 65, 583-593, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.054.
Mansson, A., 2016: Energy security in a decarbonised transport sector: A scenario
based analysis of Sweden's transport strategies. Energy Strategy Reviews, 13-
14, 236-247, doi:10.1016/j.esr.2016.06.004.
Manville, M., 2017: Travel and the Built Environment: Time for Change. Journal of
the American Planning Association, 83(1), 29-32,
doi:10.1080/01944363.2016.1249508.
Markusson, N. et al., 2012: A socio-technical framework for assessing the viability
of carbon capture and storage technology. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 79(5), 903-918, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2011.12.001.
Marra, J.E. and R.A. Palmer, 2011: Radioactive Waste Management. In: Waste
[Letcher, T.M. and D.A. Vallero (eds.)]. Academic Press, Boston, MA, USA, pp.
101-108, doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-381475-3.10007-5.
Martinez-Jaramillo, J.E., S. Arango-Aramburo, K.C. Alvarez-Uribe, and P. JaramilloAlvarez, 2017: Assessing the impacts of transport policies through energy
system simulation: The case of the Medellin Metropolitan Area, Colombia.
Energy Policy, 101, 101-108, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.11.026.
Matinga, M.N., 2012: A socio-cultural perspective on transformation of gender
roles and relations, and non-change in energy-health perceptions following
electrification in rural South Africa (Case Study for World Development Report
2012). ETC/ENERGIA in association Nord/Sor-konsulentene, 17 pp.
Matthews, N. and M. McCartney, 2018: Opportunities for building resilience
and lessons for navigating risks: Dams and the water energy food nexus.
Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy, 37(1), 56-61,
doi:10.1002/ep.12568.
Mbow, C. et al., 2014: Agroforestry solutions to address food security and climate
change challenges in Africa. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 6,
61-67, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.10.014.
McCarthy, N., L. Lipper, and G. Branca, 2011: Climate-Smart Agriculture:
Smallholder Adoption and Implications for Climate Change Adaptation and
Mitigation. Mitigation of Climate Change Series 4, Food and Agricultural
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 25 pp.

533

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

McCollum, D.L. et al., 2018: Connecting the sustainable development goals by
their energy inter-linkages. Environmental Research Letters, 13(3), 033006,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaafe3.
McKinney, M.L. and K. Ingo, 2018: The contribution of wild urban ecosystems to
liveable cities. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 29, 334-335,
doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2017.09.004.
McLeod, R.S., C.J. Hopfe, and A. Kwan, 2013: An investigation into future
performance and overheating risks in Passivhaus dwellings. Building and
Environment, 70, 189-209, doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.08.024.
McPherson, E.G., A.M. Berry, and N.S. van Doorn, 2018: Performance testing to
identify climate-ready trees. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 29, 28-39,
doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2017.09.003.
Meldrum, J., S. Nettles-Anderson, G. Heath, and J. Macknick, 2013: Life cycle
water use for electricity generation: a review and harmonization of literature
estimates. Environmental Research Letters, 8(1), 015031.
Meltzer, J.P., 2016: Financing Low Carbon, Climate Resilient Sustainable
Infrastructure: The Role of Climate Finance and Green Financial Systems. Global
Economy & Development Working Paper 96, Brookings Institution, Washington
DC, USA, 52 pp.
Michler-Cieluch, T., G. Krause, and B.H. Buck, 2009: Reflections on integrating
operation and maintenance activities of offshore wind farms and mariculture.
Ocean & Coastal Management, 52(1), 57-68,
doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2008.09.008.
Miles, L. and V. Kapos, 2008: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation: Global Land-Use Implications. Science,
320(5882), 1454-1455, doi:10.1126/science.1155358.
Miller, E., L.M. Bell, and L. Buys, 2007: Public understanding of carbon sequestration
in Australia: socio-demographic predictors of knowledge, engagement and
trust. International Journal of Emerging Technologies and Society, 5(1), 15-33.
Mittlefehldt, S., 2016: Seeing forests as fuel: How conflicting narratives have
shaped woody biomass energy development in the United States since the
1970s. Energy Research & Social Science, 14, 13-21,
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.12.023.
Moller, A.P. and T.A. Mousseau, 2011: Conservation consequences of Chernobyl
and other nuclear accidents. Biological Conservation, 144(12), 2787-2798,
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2011.08.009.
Moller, A.P., F. Barnier, and T.A. Mousseau, 2012: Ecosystems effects 25 years after
Chernobyl: pollinators, fruit set and recruitment. Oecologia, 170(4), 1155-
1165, doi:10.1007/s00442-012-2374-0.
Moller, A.P., A. Bonisoli-Alquati, G. Rudolfsen, and T.A. Mousseau, 2011: Chernobyl
Birds Have Smaller Brains. PLOS ONE, 6(2), e16862,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016862.
Montanarella, L. and I.L. Alva, 2015: Putting soils on the agenda: the three Rio
Conventions and the post-2015 development agenda. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability, 15, 41-48, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.07.008.
Moomaw, W. et al., 2011: Annex II: Methodology. In: IPCC Special Report on
Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation [Edenhofer, O.,
R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel,
P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S. Schlomer, and C. von Stechow (eds.)]. Prepared
by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 973-1000.
Morton, J.F., 2007: The impact of climate change on smallholder and subsistence
agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(50), 19680-
19685, doi:10.1073/pnas.0701855104.
Mousseau, T.A. and A.P. Moller, 2013: Elevated Frequency of Cataracts in Birds
from Chernobyl. PLOS ONE, 8(7), e66939, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0066939.
Msangi, S., M. Ewing, M.W. Rosegrant, and T. Zhu, 2010: Biofuels, Food Security,
and the Environment: A 2020/2050 Perspective. In: Global Change: Impacts on
Water and food Security [Ringler, C., A.K. Biswas, and S. Cline (eds.)]. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 65-94,
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-04615-5_4.
Mtui, G.Y.S., 2011: Involvement of biotechnology in climate change adaptation
and mitigation: Improving agricultural yield and food security. International
Journal for Biotechnology and Molecular Biology Research, 2(13), 222-231,
www.academicjournals.org/ijbmbr/abstracts/abstracts/abstracts2011/30dec/
mtui.htm.
Muratori, M., K. Calvin, M. Wise, P. Kyle, and J. Edmonds, 2016: Global economic
consequences of deploying bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS).
Environmental Research Letters, 11(9), 1-9,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/9/095004.

534

Muys, B. et al., 2014: Integrating mitigation and adaptation into development:
the case of Jatropha curcas in sub-Saharan Africa. GCB Bioenergy, 6, 169-171,
doi:10.1111/gcbb.12070.
NCE, 2014: Better Growth, Better Climate: Global Report. New Climate Economy
(NCE), Washington DC, USA, 308 pp.
NCE, 2015: Seizing the Global Opportunity: Partnerships for Better Growth and a
Better Climate. New Climate Economy (NCE), Washington DC, USA and London,
UK, 76 pp.
Nelson, V., K. Meadows, T. Cannon, J. Morton, and A. Martin, 2002: Uncertain
Predictions, Invisible Impacts, and the Need to Mainstream Gender in Climate
Change Adaptations. Gender and Development, 10(2), 51-59,
www.jstor.org/stable/4030574.
Nemet, G.F., T. Holloway, and P. Meier, 2010: Implications of incorporating airquality co-benefits into climate change policymaking. Environmental Research
Letters, 5(1), 014007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/5/1/014007.
Nguyen, M.T., S. Vink, M. Ziemski, and D.J. Barrett, 2014: Water and energy
synergy and trade-off potentials in mine water management. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 84(1), 629-638, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.01.063.
Noonan, D.S., L.-H.C. Hsieh, and D. Matisoff, 2015: Economic, sociological, and
neighbor dimensions of energy efficiency adoption behaviors: Evidence from
the U.S residential heating and air conditioning market. Energy Research &
Social Science, 10, 102-113, doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.07.009.
Noris, F. et al., 2013: Indoor environmental quality benefits of apartment energy
retrofits. Building and Environment, 68, 170-178,
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.07.003.
O'Mahony, T. and J. Dufour, 2015: Tracking development paths: Monitoring driving
forces and the impact of carbon-free energy sources in Spain. Environmental
Science & Policy, 50(2007), 62-73,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.02.005.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: narratives for shared socioeconomic
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 169-180, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
OECD, 2017: Economic Outlook for Southeast Asia, China and India 2017:
Addressing Energy Challenges. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) Publishing, Paris, France, 261 pp.
Oschlies, A., W. Koeve, W. Rickels, and K. Rehdanz, 2010: Side effects and
accounting aspects of hypothetical large-scale Southern Ocean iron fertilization.
Biogeosciences, 7(12), 4014-4035, doi:10.5194/bg-7-4017-2010.
Ozturk, M. et al., 2017: Biomass and bioenergy: An overview of the development
potential in Turkey and Malaysia. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
79, 1285-1302, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.111.
Pachauri, S. and N.D. Rao, 2013: Gender impacts and determinants of energy
poverty: are we asking the right questions? Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 5(2), 205-215,
doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2013.04.006.
Pachauri, S. et al., 2012: Energy Access for Development. In: Global Energy
Assessment - Toward a Sustainable Future [Johansson, T.B., N. Nakicenovic,
A. Patwardhan, and L. Gomez-Echeverri (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA and the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 1401-
1458.
Paquay, F.S. and R.E. Zeebe, 2013: Assessing possible consequences of ocean
liming on ocean pH, atmospheric CO2 concentration and associated costs.
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 17, 183-188,
doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2013.05.005.
Patel, S.J., J.H. Patel, A. Patel, and R.N. Gelani, 2016: Role of women gender in
livestock sector: A review. Journal of Livestock Science, 7, 92-96.
Pei, N. et al., 2018: Long-term afforestation efforts increase bird species diversity in
Beijing, China. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 29, 88-95,
doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2017.11.007.
Peng, J. and L. Lu, 2013: Investigation on the development potential of rooftop
PV system in Hong Kong and its environmental benefits. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 27, 149-162, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.06.030.
Peng, W., J. Yang, F. Wagner, and D.L. Mauzerall, 2017: Substantial air quality and
climate co-benefits achievable now with sectoral mitigation strategies in China.
Science of The Total Environment, 598, 1076-1084,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.03.287.
Pettit, L.R., C.W. Smart, M.B. Hart, M. Milazzo, and J.M. Hall-Spencer, 2015:
Seaweed fails to prevent ocean acidification impact on foraminifera along
a shallow-water CO2 gradient. Ecology and Evolution, 5(9), 1784-1793,
doi:10.1002/ece3.1475.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Pietzcker, R.C. et al., 2014: Long-term transport energy demand and climate policy:
Alternative visions on transport decarbonization in energy-economy models.
Energy, 64, 95-108, doi:10.1016/j.energy.2013.08.059.
Pode, R., 2013: Financing LED solar home systems in developing countries.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 25, 596-629,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.04.004.
Potouroglou, M. et al., 2017: Measuring the role of seagrasses in regulating
sediment surface elevation. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1-11,
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-12354-y.
Pueyo, A., F. Gonzalez, C. Dent, and S. DeMartino, 2013: The Evidence of Benefits
for Poor People of Increased Renewable Electricity Capacity: Literature Review.
Brief supporting Evidence Report 31, Institute of Development Studies (IDS),
Brighton, UK, 8 pp.
Rafaj, P., W. Schopp, P. Russ, C. Heyes, and M. Amann, 2013: Co-benefits of post2012 global climate mitigation policies. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies
for Global Change, 18(6), 801-824, doi:10.1007/s11027-012-9390-6.
Raji, B., M.J. Tenpierik, and A. van den Dobbelsteen, 2015: The impact of greening
systems on building energy performance: A literature review. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 45, 610-623,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.02.011.
Ramaker, J., J. Mackby, P.D. Marshall, and R. Geil, 2003: The final test: a history of
the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty negotiations. Provisional Technical
Secretariat, Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization, 291 pp.
Ran, Y., M. Lannerstad, M. Herrero, C.E. Van Middelaar, and I.J.M. De Boer, 2016:
Assessing water resource use in livestock production: A review of methods.
Livestock Science, 187, 68-79, doi:10.1016/j.livsci.2016.02.012.
Rao, N.D. and S. Pachauri, 2017: Energy access and living standards: some
observations on recent trends. Environmental Research Letters, 12(2), 025011,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5b0d.
Rao, N.D., K. Riahi, and A. Grubler, 2014: Climate impacts of poverty eradication.
Nature Climate Change, 4(9), 749-751, doi:10.1038/nclimate2340.
Rao, S. et al., 2013: Better air for better health: forging synergies in policies for
energy access, climate change and air pollution. Global Environmental Change,
23, 1122-1130, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.05.003.
Rao, S. et al., 2016: A multi-model assessment of the co-benefits of climate
mitigation for global air quality. Environmental Research Letters, 11(12),
124013, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/12/124013.
Raptis, C.E., M.T.H. van Vliet, and S. Pfister, 2016: Global thermal pollution of rivers
from thermoelectric power plants. Environmental Research Letters, 11(10),
104011, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/10/104011.
Ravindranath, N.H., R.K. Chaturvedi, and I.K. Murthy, 2008: Forest conservation,
afforestation and reforestation in India: Implications for forest carbon stocks.
Current Science, 95(2), 216-222.
Reiner, D.M. and W.J. Nuttall, 2011: Public Acceptance of Geological Disposal
of Carbon Dioxide and Radioactive Waste: Similarities and Differences. In:
Geological Disposal of Carbon Dioxide and Radioactive Waste: A Comparative
Assessment [Toth, F.L. (ed.)]. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
pp. 295-315, doi:10.1007/978-90-481-8712-6_10.
Riahi, K. et al., 2012: Energy Pathways for Sustainable Development. In: Global
Energy Assessment - Toward a Sustainable Future [Johansson, T.B., N.
Nakicenovic, A. Patwardhan, and L. Gomez-Echeverri (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA and the
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria,
pp. 1203-1306.
Riahi, K. et al., 2015: Locked into Copenhagen pledges - Implications of shortterm emission targets for the cost and feasibility of long-term climate goals.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 90, 8-23,
doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.016.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy,
land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: an overview. Global
Environmental Change, 42, 153-168,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Rogalsky, J., 2010: The working poor and what GIS reveals about the possibilities
of public transit. Journal of Transport Geography, 18(2), 226-237,
doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2009.06.008.
Rogelj, J., D.L. McCollum, and K. Riahi, 2013: The UN's `Sustainable Energy for All'
initiative is compatible with a warming limit of 2C. Nature Climate Change,
3(6), 545-551, doi:10.1038/nclimate1806.
Rogner, H.-H., 2010: Nuclear Power and Sustainable Development. Journal of
International Affairs, 64(1), 137-163, www.jstor.org/stable/24385190.

Chapter 5

Rose, S.K. et al., 2014: Bioenergy in energy transformation and climate
management. Climatic Change, 123(3-4), 477-493,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0965-3.
Roy, J. et al., 2018: Where is the hope? Blending modern urban lifestyle with
cultural practices in India. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 31,
96-103, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2018.01.010.
Rud, J.P., 2012: Electricity provision and industrial development: Evidence from
India. Journal of Development Economics, 97(2), 352-367,
doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2011.06.010.
Sagan, S.D., 2011: The Causes of Nuclear Weapons Proliferation. Annual Review of
Political Science, 14(1), 225-244,
doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-052209-131042.
Salvalai, G., M.M. Sesana, and G. Iannaccone, 2017: Deep renovation of multistorey multi-owner existing residential buildings: a pilot case study in Italy.
Energy and Buildings, 148, 23-36, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.05.011.
Sansoucy, R., 1995: Livestock - a driving force for food security and sustainable
development. World Animal Review, 84/85(2).
Santarius, T., H.J. Walnum, and C. Aall (eds.), 2016: Rethinking Climate and Energy
Policies: New Perspectives on the Rebound Phenomenon. Springer, Cham,
Switzerland, 294 pp., doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38807-6.
Sarin, R., M. Sharma, S. Sinharay, and R.K. Malhotra, 2007: Jatropha-Palm biodiesel
blends: An optimum mix for Asia. Fuel, 86(10-11), 1365-1371,
doi:10.1016/j.fuel.2006.11.040.
Satolo, L. and M. Bacchi, 2013: Impacts of the Recent Expansion of the Sugarcane
Sector on Municipal per Capita Income in Sao Paulo State. ISRN Economics,
2013, 828169, doi:10.1155/2013/828169.
Saunders, L.E., J.M. Green, M.P. Petticrew, R. Steinbach, and H. Roberts, 2013:
What Are the Health Benefits of Active Travel? A Systematic Review of Trials and
Cohort Studies. PLOS ONE, 8, e69912,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0069912.
Schader, C. et al., 2015: Impacts of feeding less food-competing feedstuffs to
livestock on global food system sustainability. Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 12(113), doi:10.1098/rsif.2015.0891.
Scherr, S.J., S. Shames, and R. Friedman, 2012: From climate-smart agriculture
to climate-smart landscapes. Agriculture & Food Security, 1(1), 12,
doi:10.1186/2048-7010-1-12.
Schirmer, J. and L. Bull, 2014: Assessing the likelihood of widespread landholder
adoption of afforestation and reforestation projects. Global Environmental
Change, 24, 306-320, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.11.009.
Schnelzer, M., G.P. Hammer, M. Kreuzer, A. Tschense, and B. Grosche, 2010:
Accounting for smoking in the radon-related lung cancer risk among German
uranium miners: results of a nested case-control study. Health Physics, 98(1),
20-28, doi:10.1097/hp.0b013e3181b8ce81.
Schucht, S. et al., 2015: Moving towards ambitious climate policies: Monetised
health benefits from improved air quality could offset mitigation costs in
Europe. Environmental Science & Policy, 50, 252-269,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.03.001.
Schwanitz, V.J., F. Piontek, C. Bertram, and G. Luderer, 2014: Long-term climate
policy implications of phasing out fossil fuel subsidies. Energy Policy, 67, 882-
894, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.12.015.
Schwenk-Ferrero, A., 2013: German Spent Nuclear Fuel Legacy: Characteristics
and High-Level Waste Management Issues. Science and Technology of Nuclear
Installations, 293792, doi:10.1155/2013/293792.
Schwerhoff, G. and M. Sy, 2017: Financing renewable energy in Africa - Key
challenge of the sustainable development goals. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 75, 393-401, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.004.
Scott, C.A., 2011: The water-energy-climate nexus: Resources and policy
outlook for aquifers in Mexico. Water Resources Research, 47(6),
doi:10.1029/2011wr010805.
Scott, C.A. et al., 2011: Policy and institutional dimensions of the water-energy
nexus. Energy Policy, 39(10), 6622-6630, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2011.08.013.
Scott, F.L., C.R. Jones, and T.L. Webb, 2014: What do people living in deprived
communities in the UK think about household energy efficiency interventions?
Energy Policy, 66, 335-349, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.084.
Sermage-Faure, C. et al., 2012: Childhood leukemia around French nuclear power
plants - The geocap study, 2002-2007. International Journal of Cancer, 131(5),
E769-E780, doi:10.1002/ijc.27425.
Shackley, S. and M. Thompson, 2012: Lost in the mix: will the technologies of
carbon dioxide capture and storage provide us with a breathing space as we
strive to make the transition from fossil fuels to renewables? Climatic Change,
110(1), 101-121, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0071-3.

535

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Shackley, S. et al., 2009: The acceptability of CO2 capture and storage (CCS)
in Europe: An assessment of the key determining factors: Part 2. The
social acceptability of CCS and the wider impacts and repercussions of its
implementation. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 3(3), 344-
356, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2008.09.004.
Shah, N., M. Wei, V. Letschert, and A. Phadke, 2015: Benefits of leapfrogging to
superefficiency and low global warming potential refrigerants in room air
conditioning. LBNL-1003671, Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory (LBNL), Berkeley, CA, USA, 58 pp.
Shahbaz, M., G. Rasool, K. Ahmed, and M.K. Mahalik, 2016: Considering the effect
of biomass energy consumption on economic growth: fresh evidence from
BRICS region. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 60, 1442-1450,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2016.03.037.
Sharpe, R.A., C.R. Thornton, V. Nikolaou, and N.J. Osborne, 2015: Higher energy
efficient homes are associated with increased risk of doctor diagnosed asthma
in a UK subpopulation. Environment International, 75, 234-244,
doi:10.1016/j.envint.2014.11.017.
Shaw, C., S. Hales, P. Howden-Chapman, and R. Edwards, 2014: Health co-benefits
of climate change mitigation policies in the transport sector. Nature Climate
Change, 4(6), 427-433, doi:10.1038/nclimate2247.
Shaw, C., S. Hales, R. Edwards, and P. Howden-Chapman, 2017: Health Co-Benefits
of Policies to Mitigate Climate Change in the Transport Sector: Systematic
Review. Journal of Transport & Health, 5, S107-S108,
doi:10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.268.
Shi, Y., J. Liu, H. Shi, H. Li, and Q. Li, 2017: The ecosystem service value as a new
eco-efficiency indicator for industrial parks. Journal of Cleaner Production, 164,
597-605, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.06.187.
Siirila, E.R., A.K. Navarre-Sitchler, R.M. Maxwell, and J.E. McCray, 2012: A
quantitative methodology to assess the risks to human health from CO2 leakage
into groundwater. Advances in Water Resources, 36, 146-164,
doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2010.11.005.
Sikkema, R. et al., 2014: Legal Harvesting, Sustainable Sourcing and Cascaded
Use of Wood for Bioenergy: Their Coverage through Existing Certification
Frameworks for Sustainable Forest Management. Forests, 5(9), 2163-2211,
doi:10.3390/f5092163.
Singh, B., A.H. Stromman, and E.G. Hertwich, 2011: Comparative life cycle
environmental assessment of CCS technologies. International Journal of
Greenhouse Gas Control, 5(4), 911-921, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2011.03.012.
Sippo, J.Z., D.T. Maher, D.R. Tait, C. Holloway, and I.R. Santos, 2016: Are mangroves
drivers or buffers of coastal acidification? Insights from alkalinity and dissolved
inorganic carbon export estimates across a latitudinal transect. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles, 30(5), 753-766, doi:10.1002/2015gb005324.
Sjoberg, L. and B.M.D. Sjoberg, 2009: Public risk perception of nuclear waste.
International Journal of Risk Assessment and Management, 11(3/4),
doi:10.1504/ijram.2009.023156.
Skipperud, L. et al., 2013: Environmental impact assessment of radionuclide and
metal contamination at the former U sites Taboshar and Digmai, Tajikistan.
Journal of Environmental Radioactivity, 123, 50-62,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvrad.2012.05.007.
SLoCaT, 2017: Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate Action (MPGCA) Transport
Initiatives: Stock-take on action toward implementation of the Paris Agreement
and the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development. Second Progress Report.
Partnership on Sustainable Low Carbon Transport (SLoCaT), Bonn, Germany,
72 pp.
Smetacek, V. and S.W.A. Naqvi, 2008: The next generation of iron fertilization
experiments in the Southern Ocean. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 366(1882), 3947-
3967, doi:10.1098/rsta.2008.0144.
Smith, A., A. Pridmore, K. Hampshire, C. Ahlgren, and J. Goodwin, 2016: Scoping
study on the co-benefits and possible adverse side effects of climate change
mitigation: Final report. Report to the UK Department of Energy and Climate
Change (DECC). Aether Ltd, Oxford, UK, 91 pp.
Smith, J. et al., 2014: What is the potential for biogas digesters to improve soil
fertility and crop production in Sub-Saharan Africa? Biomass and Bioenergy, 70,
58-72, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2014.02.030.
Smith, K.R. and A. Sagar, 2014: Making the clean available: escaping India's
Chulha Trap. Energy Policy, 75, 410-414, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.09.024.
Smith, P., 2013: Delivering food security without increasing pressure on land.
Global Food Security, 2(1), 18-23, doi:10.1016/j.gfs.2012.11.008.
Smith, P. et al., 2010: Competition for land. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 365, 2941-2957, doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0127.

536

Smith, P. et al., 2013: How much land-based greenhouse gas mitigation can be
achieved without compromising food security and environmental goals? Global
Change Biology, 19(8), 2285-2302, doi:10.1111/gcb.12160.
Smith, P. et al., 2016a: Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions.
Nature Climate Change, 6(1), 42-50, doi:10.1038/nclimate2870.
Smith, P. et al., 2016b: Global change pressures on soils from land use and
management. Global Change Biology, 22(3), 1008-1028,
doi:10.1111/gcb.13068.
Sola, P., C. Ochieng, J. Yila, and M. Iiyama, 2016: Links between energy access and
food security in sub Saharan Africa: an exploratory review. Food Security, 8(3),
635-642, doi:10.1007/s12571-016-0570-1.
Sommerfeld, J., L. Buys, and D. Vine, 2017: Residential consumers' experiences in
the adoption and use of solar PV. Energy Policy, 105, 10-16,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2017.02.021.
Sondak, C.F.A. et al., 2017: Carbon dioxide mitigation potential of seaweed
aquaculture beds (SABs). Journal of Applied Phycology, 29(5), 2363-2373,
doi:10.1007/s10811-016-1022-1.
Song, Y. et al., 2016: The Interplay Between Bioenergy Grass Production and Water
Resources in the United States of America. Environmental Science & Technology,
50(6), 3010-3019, doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b05239.
Stahel, W.R., 2013: Policy for material efficiency - sustainable taxation as a
departure from the throwaway society. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 371(1986),
doi:10.1098/rsta.2011.0567.
Stahel, W.R., 2016: The circular economy. Nature, 531(7595), 435-438,
doi:10.1038/531435a.
Stanley, J.K., D.A. Hensher, and C. Loader, 2011: Road transport and climate
change: Stepping off the greenhouse gas. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice, 45(10), 1020-1030, doi:10.1016/j.tra.2009.04.005.
Steenwerth, K.L. et al., 2014: Climate-smart agriculture global research
agenda: scientific basis for action. Agriculture & Food Security, 3(1), 11,
doi:10.1186/2048-7010-3-11.
Stefan, A. and L. Paul, 2008: Does It Pay to Be Green? A Systematic Overview.
Academy of Management Perspectives, 22(4), 45-62,
doi:10.5465/amp.2008.35590353.
Stehfest, E. et al., 2009: Climate benefits of changing diet. Climatic Change, 95(1-
2), 83-102, doi:10.1007/s10584-008-9534-6.
Steinfeld, H. and P. Gerber, 2010: Livestock production and the global environment:
Consume less or produce better? Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(43), 18237-18238, doi:10.1073/pnas.1012541107.
Suckall, N., E. Tompkins, and L. Stringer, 2014: Identifying trade-offs between
adaptation, mitigation and development in community responses to climate and
socio-economic stresses: Evidence from Zanzibar, Tanzania. Applied Geography,
46, 111-121, doi:10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.11.005.
Supino, S., O. Malandrino, M. Testa, and D. Sica, 2016: Sustainability in the EU
cement industry: The Italian and German experiences. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 112, 430-442, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.022.
Sweeney, J.C., J. Kresling, D. Webb, G.N. Soutar, and T. Mazzarol, 2013: Energy
saving behaviours: Development of a practice-based model. Energy Policy, 61,
371-381, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.06.121.
Tabellini, G., 2010: Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions
of Europe. Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677-716,
doi:10.1111/j.1542-4774.2010.tb00537.x.
Taniwaki, R.H. et al., 2017: Impacts of converting low-intensity pastureland to
high-intensity bioenergy cropland on the water quality of tropical streams in
Brazil. Science of The Total Environment, 584, 339-347,
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.12.150.
Taylor, L.L. et al., 2016: Enhanced weathering strategies for stabilizing climate
and averting ocean acidification. Nature Climate Change, 6(4), 402-406,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2882.
Ten Hoeve, J.E. and M.Z. Jacobson, 2012: Worldwide health effects of the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident. Energy & Environmental Science, 5(9),
8743-8757, doi:10.1039/c2ee22019a.
Terry, G., 2009: No climate justice without gender justice: an overview of the
issues. Gender and Development, 17(1), 5-18, www.jstor.org/stable/27809203.
Thornton, P.K., 2010: Livestock production: recent trends, future prospects.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
365(1554), 2853-2867, doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0134.
Tiedeman, K., S. Yeh, B.R. Scanlon, J. Teter, and G.S. Mishra, 2016: Recent Trends in
Water Use and Production for California Oil Production. Environmental Science
& Technology, 50(14), 7904-7912, doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b01240.

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Tilman, D. and M. Clark, 2014: Global diets link environmental sustainability and
human health. Nature, 515(7528), 518-522,
doi:10.1038/nature13959.
Tilman, D. et al., 2009: Beneficial Biofuels - The Food, Energy, and Environment
Trilemma. Science, 325(5938), 270-271,
doi:10.1126/science.1177970.
Tirmarche, M. et al., 2012: Risk of lung cancer from radon exposure: contribution
of recently published studies of uranium miners. Annals of the ICRP, 41(3),
368-377, doi:10.1016/j.icrp.2012.06.033.
Treasury, H.M., 2009: Green biotechnology and climate change. Euro Bio, 12 pp.
Trick, C.G. et al., 2010: Iron enrichment stimulates toxic diatom production in
high-nitrate, low-chlorophyll areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(13), 5887-5892, doi:10.1073/pnas.0910579107.
Tully, S., 2006: The Human Right to Access Electricity. The Electricity Journal, 19,
30-39, doi:10.1016/j.tej.2006.02.003.
Turpie, J., B. Warr, and J.C. Ingram, 2015: Benefits of Forest Ecosystems in Zambia
and the Role of REDD+ in a Green Economy Transformation. United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), 98 pp.
Tyler, A.N. et al., 2013: The radium legacy: Contaminated land and the committed
effective dose from the ingestion of radium contaminated materials.
Environment International, 59, 449-455,
doi:10.1016/j.envint.2013.06.016.
UN, 1989: The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. In:
United Nations - Treaty Series No. 26369. United Nations (UN), pp. 29-111.
UNSCEAR, 2011: Health effects due to radiation from the Chernobyl accident
(Annex D). In: UNSCEAR 2008 Report Vol. II: Effects. Scientific Annexes C, D
and E. United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
(UNSCEAR), New York, NY, USA, pp. 45-220.
UN-Women, UNDESA, and UNFCCCC, 2015: Implementation of gender-responsive
climate action in the context of sustainable development. EGM/GR-CR/Report,
UN-Women, UNDESA and UNFCCCC, 47 pp.
van de Walle, D., M. Ravallion, V. Mendiratta, and G. Koolwal, 2013: Long-Term
Impacts of Household Electrification in Rural India. Policy Research working
paper no. WPS 6527, World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 54 pp.
van der Horst, D. and S. Vermeylen, 2011: Spatial scale and social impacts of
biofuel production. Biomass and Bioenergy, 35(6), 2435-2443,
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2010.11.029.
van Oel, P.R. and A.Y. Hoekstra, 2012: Towards Quantification of the Water
Footprint of Paper: A First Estimate of its Consumptive Component. Water
Resources Management, 26(3), 733-749, doi:10.1007/s11269-011-9942-7.
van Sluisveld, M.A.E., S.H. Martinez, V. Daioglou, and D.P. van Vuuren, 2016:
Exploring the implications of lifestyle change in 2C mitigation scenarios using
the IMAGE integrated assessment model. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 102, 309-319, doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2015.08.013.
van Vliet, O. et al., 2012: Synergies in the Asian energy system: Climate change,
energy security, energy access and air pollution. Energy Economics, 34, Supple,
S470-S480, doi:10.1016/j.eneco.2012.02.001.
van Vuuren, D.P., J. van Vliet, and E. Stehfest, 2009: Future bio-energy potential
under various natural constraints. Energy Policy, 37(11), 4220-4230,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.05.029.
Vasconcellos, E.A. and A. Mendonca, 2016: Observatorio de Movilidad Urbana:
Informe final 2015-2016 (in Spanish). Corporacion Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Banco de Desarrollo de America Latina, 25 pp.
Vassolo, S. and P. Doll, 2005: Global-scale gridded estimates of thermoelectric
power and manufacturing water use. Water Resources Research, 41(4),
W04010, doi:10.1029/2004wr003360.
Veltman, K., B. Singh, and E.G. Hertwich, 2010: Human and Environmental Impact
Assessment of Postcombustion CO2 Capture Focusing on Emissions from AmineBased Scrubbing Solvents to Air. Environmental Science & Technology, 44(4),
1496-1502, doi:10.1021/es902116r.
Vergragt, P.J., N. Markusson, and H. Karlsson, 2011: Carbon capture and storage,
bio-energy with carbon capture and storage, and the escape from the fossil-fuel
lock-in. Global Environmental Change, 21(2), 282-292,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.01.020.
Vermeulen, S. et al., 2012: Climate change, agriculture and food security: a global
partnership to link research and action for low-income agricultural producers
and consumers. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 4(1), 128-
133, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2011.12.004.
Vidic, R.D., S.L. Brantley, J.M. Vandenbossche, D. Yoxtheimer, and J.D. Abad,
2013: Impact of Shale Gas Development on Regional Water Quality. Science,
340(6134), 1235009, doi:10.1126/science.1235009.

Chapter 5

Vierros, M., 2017: Communities and blue carbon: the role of traditional
management systems in providing benefits for carbon storage, biodiversity
conservation and livelihoods. Climatic Change, 140(1), 89-100,
doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0920-3.
Vierros, M., C. Salpin, C. Chiarolla, and S. Arico, 2015: Emerging and unresolved
issues: the example of marine genetic resources of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. In: Ocean Sustainability in the 21st Century [Arico, S. (ed.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, pp. 198-231, doi:10.1017/cbo9781316164624.012.
Visschers, V.H.M. and M. Siegrist, 2012: Fair play in energy policy decisions:
Procedural fairness, outcome fairness and acceptance of the decision to rebuild
nuclear power plants. Energy Policy, 46, 292-300,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.03.062.
von Hippel, D., T. Suzuki, J.H. Williams, T. Savage, and P. Hayes, 2011: Energy
security and sustainability in Northeast Asia. Energy Policy, 39(11), 6719-6730,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.07.001.
von Hippel, F., R. Ewing, R. Garwin, and A. Macfarlane, 2012: Time to bury
plutonium. Nature, 485, 167-168, doi:10.1038/485167a.
von Stechow, C. et al., 2016: 2C and SDGs: United they stand, divided they fall?
Environmental Research Letters, 11(3), 034022,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/034022.
Walker, G. and P. Devine-Wright, 2008: Community renewable energy: What should
it mean? Energy Policy, 36, 497-500,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2007.10.019.
Walker, R.V., M.B. Beck, J.W. Hall, R.J. Dawson, and O. Heidrich, 2014: The energywater-food nexus: Strategic analysis of technologies for transforming the
urban metabolism. Journal of Environmental Management, 141, 104-115,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.01.054.
Walks, A., 2015: The Urban Political Economy and Ecology of Automobility: Driving
Cities, Driving Inequality, Driving Politics. Routledge, London, UK, 348 pp.
Wallquist, L., V.H.M. Visschers, and M. Siegrist, 2009: Lay concepts on CCS
deployment in Switzerland based on qualitative interviews. International Journal
of Greenhouse Gas Control, 3(5), 652-657, doi:10.1016/j.ijggc.2009.03.005.
Wallquist, L., V.H.M. Visschers, and M. Siegrist, 2010: Impact of Knowledge and
Misconceptions on Benefit and Risk Perception of CCS. Environmental Science
& Technology, 44(17), 6557-6562, doi:10.1021/es1005412.
Wang, S. and P.R. Jaffe, 2004: Dissolution of a mineral phase in potable aquifers
due to CO2 releases from deep formations; effect of dissolution kinetics. Energy
Conversion and Management, 45(18-19), 2833-2848,
doi:10.1016/j.enconman.2004.01.002.
WBGU, 2013: World in Transition: Governing the Marine Heritage. German
Advisory Council on Global Change (WBGU), Berlin, Germany, 390 pp.
Webb, D., G.N. Soutar, T. Mazzarol, and P. Saldaris, 2013: Self-determination
theory and consumer behavioural change: Evidence fromahousehold energysaving behaviour study. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 35, 59-66,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.04.003.
Webster, M., P. Donohoo, and B. Palmintier, 2013: Water-CO2 trade-offs in electricity
generation planning. Nature Climate Change, 3(12), 1029-1032,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2032.
Wells, E.M. et al., 2015: Indoor air quality and occupant comfort in homes
with deep versus conventional energy efficiency renovations. Building and
Environment, 93(Part 2), 331-338, doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.06.021.
Wesseling, J.H. et al., 2017: The transition of energy intensive processing
industries towards deep decarbonization: Characteristics and implications for
future research. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 79, 1303-1313,
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.156.
West, J.J. et al., 2013: Co-benefits of Global Greenhouse Gas Mitigation for Future
Air Quality and Human Health. Nature Climate Change, 3(10), 885-889,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2009.
West, P.C. et al., 2014: Leverage points for improving global food security and
the environment. Science, 345(6194), 325-328, doi:10.1126/science.1246067.
West, T.O. and W.M. Post, 2002: Soil Organic Carbon Sequestration Rates by Tillage
and Crop Rotation. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 66, 1930-1946,
doi:10.2136/sssaj2002.1930.
WHO, 2013: Health risk assessment from the nuclear accident after the 2011 Great
East Japan earthquake and tsunami, based on a preliminary dose estimation.
World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva, Switzerland, 172 pp.
Willand, N., I. Ridley, and C. Maller, 2015: Towards explaining the health impacts of
residential energy efficiency interventions - A realist review. Part 1: Pathways.
Social Science and Medicine, 133, 191-201,
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.02.005.

537

5

Chapter 5

5

Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities

Williamson, P. et al., 2012: Ocean fertilization for geoengineering: A review of
effectiveness, environmental impacts and emerging governance. Process Safety
and Environmental Protection, 90(6), 475-488,
doi:10.1016/j.psep.2012.10.007.
Winter, E., A. Fae, and K. Frohberg, 2015: Food security, energy equity, and the
global commons: a computable village model applied to sub-Saharan Africa.
Regional Environmental Change, 15(7), 1215-1227,
doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0674-0.
Wiser, R. et al., 2011: Wind Energy. In: IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy
Sources and Climate Change Mitigation [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y.
Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen,
S. Schlomer, and C. von Stechow (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 535-608.
Wolosin, M., 2014: Quantifying Benefits of the New York Declaration on Forests.
Climate Advisers, 17 pp.
Wong-Parodi, G. and I. Ray, 2009: Community perceptions of carbon sequestration:
insights from California. Environmental Research Letters, 4(3), 034002,
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/3/034002.
Woodbury, P.B., A.R. Kemanian, M. Jacobson, and M. Langholtz, 2018: Improving
water quality in the Chesapeake Bay using payments for ecosystem services
for perennial biomass for bioenergy and biofuel production. Biomass and
Bioenergy, 114, 132-142, doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2017.01.024.
Woodcock, J. et al., 2009: Public health benefits of strategies to reduce greenhousegas emissions: urban land transport. The Lancet, 374(9705), 1930-1943,
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(09)61714-1.
Xi, Y., T. Fei, and W. Gehua, 2013: Quantifying co-benefit potentials in the Chinese
cement sector during 12th Five Year Plan: An analysis based on marginal
abatement cost with monetized environmental effect. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 58, 102-111, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.07.020.
Xylia, M. and S. Silveira, 2017: On the road to fossil-free public transport: the case
of Swedish bus fleets. Energy Policy, 100, 397-412,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2016.02.024.
Yang, L., H. Yan, and J.C. Lam, 2014: Thermal comfort and building energy
consumption implications - A review. Applied Energy, 115, 164-173,
doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.10.062.
Yanine, F.F. and E.E. Sauma, 2013: Review of grid-tie micro-generation systems
without energy storage: Towards a new approach to sustainable hybrid energy
systems linked to energy efficiency. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
26, 60-95, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.05.002.
Yim, M.-S. and J. Li, 2013: Examining relationship between nuclear proliferation
and civilian nuclear power development. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 66, 108-
114, doi:10.1016/j.pnucene.2013.03.005.
York, R. and J.A. McGee, 2017: Does Renewable Energy Development
Decouple Economic Growth from CO2 Emissions? Socius, 3,
doi:10.1177/2378023116689098.
Yu, C.-Y., 2015: How Differences in Roadways Affect School Travel Safety. Journal
of the American Planning Association, 81(3), 203-220,
doi:10.1080/01944363.2015.1080599.
Yue, T., R. Long, and H. Chen, 2013: Factors influencing energy-saving behavior
of urban households in Jiangsu Province. Energy Policy, 62, 665-675,
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.07.051.
Zeng, H., X. Chen, X. Xiao, and Z. Zhou, 2017: Institutional pressures, sustainable
supply chain management, and circular economy capability: Empirical evidence
from Chinese eco-industrial park firms. Journal of Cleaner Production, 155,
54-65, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.093.
Zenk, S.N. et al., 2015: Prepared Food Availability in U.S. Food Stores. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 49(4), 553-562,
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2015.02.025.
Zhang, S., E. Worrell, and W. Crijns-Graus, 2015: Cutting air pollution by improving
energy efficiency of China's cement industry. Energy Procedia, 83, 10-20,
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.12.191.
Zhang, Y. et al., 2017: Processes of coastal ecosystem carbon sequestration and
approaches for increasing carbon sink. Science China Earth Sciences, 60(5),
809-820, doi:10.1007/s11430-016-9010-9.
Zhao, D., A.P. McCoy, J. Du, P. Agee, and Y. Lu, 2017: Interaction effects of building
technology and resident behavior on energy consumption in residential buildings.
Energy and Buildings, 134, 223-233, doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.10.049.
Ziv, G., E. Baran, S. Nam, I. Rodriguez-Iturbe, and S.A. Levin, 2012: Trading-off
fish biodiversity, food security, and hydropower in the Mekong River Basin.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(15), 5609-5614,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1201423109.

538

Zomer, R.J., A. Trabucco, D.A. Bossio, and L. Verchot, 2008: Climate change
mitigation: A spatial analysis of global land suitability for clean development
mechanism afforestation and reforestation. Agriculture, Ecosystems &
Environment, 126(1-2), 67-80, doi:10.1016/j.agee.2008.01.014.
Zulu, L.C. and R.B. Richardson, 2013: Charcoal, livelihoods, and poverty reduction:
Evidence from sub-Saharan Africa. Energy for Sustainable Development, 17(2),
127-137, doi:10.1016/j.esd.2012.07.007.

Annexes

AI

Annex I: Glossary
Coordinating Editor:
J.B. Robin Matthews (France/UK)

Editorial Team:
Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Heleen de Coninck (Netherlands/EU), Sarah Connors (France/UK), Renee
van Diemen (UK/Netherlands), Riyanti Djalante (Japan/Indonesia), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Neville
Ellis (Australia), Andreas Fischlin (Switzerland), Tania Guillen Bolanos (Germany/Nicaragua),
Kiane de Kleijne (Netherlands/EU), Valerie Masson-Delmotte (France), Richard Millar (UK), Elvira
S. Poloczanska (Germany/UK), Hans-Otto Portner (Germany), Andy Reisinger (New Zealand), Joeri
Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Chandni Singh (India), Petra Tschakert
(Australia/Austria), Nora M. Weyer (Germany)

Notes:
Note that subterms are in italics beneath main terms.
This glossary defines some specific terms as the Lead Authors intend them to be interpreted in the
context of this report. Blue, italicized words indicate that the term is defined in the Glossary.

This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Annex I: Glossary [Matthews, J.B.R. (ed.)]. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on
the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou,
M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press

541

Annex I

1.5C pathway

AI

Glossary

See Pathways.

1.5C warmer worlds Projected worlds in which global warming
has reached and, unless otherwise indicated, been limited to 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels. There is no single 1.5C warmer world,
and projections of 1.5C warmer worlds look different depending on
whether it is considered on a near-term transient trajectory or at climate
equilibrium after several millennia, and, in both cases, if it occurs with or
without overshoot. Within the 21st century, several aspects play a role
for the assessment of risk and potential impacts in 1.5C warmer worlds:
the possible occurrence, magnitude and duration of an overshoot; the
way in which emissions reductions are achieved; the ways in which
policies might be able to influence the resilience of human and natural
systems; and the nature of the regional and sub-regional risks. Beyond
the 21st century, several elements of the climate system would continue
to change even if the global mean temperatures remain stable, including
further increases of sea level.
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development A UN resolution
in September 2015 adopting a plan of action for people, planet and
prosperity in a new global development framework anchored in 17
Sustainable Development Goals (UN, 2015). See also Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
Acceptability of policy or system change The extent to which
a policy or system change is evaluated unfavourably or favourably,
or rejected or supported, by members of the general public (public
acceptability) or politicians or governments (political acceptability).
Acceptability may vary from totally unacceptable/fully rejected to totally
acceptable/fully supported; individuals may differ in how acceptable
policies or system changes are believed to be.
Adaptability

See Adaptive capacity.

Adaptation In human systems, the process of adjustment to actual
or expected climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm or exploit
beneficial opportunities. In natural systems, the process of adjustment
to actual climate and its effects; human intervention may facilitate
adjustment to expected climate and its effects.
Incremental adaptation
Adaptation that maintains the essence and integrity of a system or
process at a given scale. In some cases, incremental adaptation can
accrue to result in transformational adaptation (Termeer et al., 2017;
Tabara et al., 2018).
Transformational adaptation
Adaptation that changes the fundamental attributes of a socioecological system in anticipation of climate change and its impacts.
Adaptation limits
The point at which an actor's objectives (or system needs) cannot be
secured from intolerable risks through adaptive actions.
* Hard adaptation limit: No adaptive actions are possible to avoid
intolerable risks.
* Soft adaptation limit: Options are currently not available to avoid
intolerable risks through adaptive action.
See also Adaptation options, Adaptive capacity and Maladaptive
actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation behaviour
Adaptation limits

See Human behaviour.

See Adaptation.

Adaptation options The array of strategies and measures that are
available and appropriate for addressing adaptation. They include a
wide range of actions that can be categorized as structural, institutional,
542

ecological or behavioural. See also Adaptation, Adaptive capacity and
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation pathways See Pathways.
Adaptive capacity The ability of systems, institutions, humans and
other organisms to adjust to potential damage, to take advantage of
opportunities, or to respond to consequences. This glossary entry builds
from definitions used in previous IPCC reports and the Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment (MEA, 2005). See also Adaptation, Adaptation
options and Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptive governance See Governance.
Aerosol A suspension of airborne solid or liquid particles, with a
typical size between a few nanometres and 10 m that reside in the
atmosphere for at least several hours. The term aerosol, which includes
both the particles and the suspending gas, is often used in this report
in its plural form to mean aerosol particles. Aerosols may be of either
natural or anthropogenic origin. Aerosols may influence climate in
several ways: through both interactions that scatter and/or absorb
radiation and through interactions with cloud microphysics and other
cloud properties, or upon deposition on snow- or ice-covered surfaces
thereby altering their albedo and contributing to climate feedback.
Atmospheric aerosols, whether natural or anthropogenic, originate from
two different pathways: emissions of primary particulate matter (PM),
and formation of secondary PM from gaseous precursors. The bulk of
aerosols are of natural origin. Some scientists use group labels that refer
to the chemical composition, namely: sea salt, organic carbon, black
carbon (BC), mineral species (mainly desert dust), sulphate, nitrate, and
ammonium. These labels are, however, imperfect as aerosols combine
particles to create complex mixtures. See also Short-lived climate forcers
(SLCF) and Black carbon (BC).
Afforestation Planting of new forests on lands that historically have
not contained forests. For a discussion of the term forest and related
terms such as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC
Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000),
information provided by the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2013) and the report on Definitions and
Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions from Direct Humaninduced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of Other Vegetation
Types (IPCC, 2003). See also Reforestation, Deforestation, and Reducing
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Agreement In this report, the degree of agreement within the
scientific body of knowledge on a particular finding is assessed based on
multiple lines of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding, theory, data,
models, expert judgement) and expressed qualitatively (Mastrandrea et
al., 2010). See also Evidence, Confidence, Likelihood and Uncertainty.
Air pollution Degradation of air quality with negative effects
on human health or the natural or built environment due to the
introduction, by natural processes or human activity, into the atmosphere
of substances (gases, aerosols) which have a direct (primary pollutants)
or indirect (secondary pollutants) harmful effect. See also Aerosol and
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Albedo The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or
object, often expressed as a percentage. Snow-covered surfaces have a
high albedo, the surface albedo of soils ranges from high to low, and
vegetation-covered surfaces and the oceans have a low albedo. The
Earth's planetary albedo changes mainly through varying cloudiness and
changes in snow, ice, leaf area and land cover.
Ambient persuasive technology Technological systems and
environments that are designed to change human cognitive processing,

Glossary

Annex I

attitudes and behaviours without the need for the user's conscious
attention.
Anomaly The deviation of a variable from its value averaged over a
reference period.
Anthropocene The `Anthropocene' is a proposed new geological
epoch resulting from significant human-driven changes to the structure
and functioning of the Earth System, including the climate system.
Originally proposed in the Earth System science community in 2000, the
proposed new epoch is undergoing a formalization process within the
geological community based on the stratigraphic evidence that human
activities have changed the Earth System to the extent of forming
geological deposits with a signature that is distinct from those of the
Holocene, and which will remain in the geological record. Both the
stratigraphic and Earth System approaches to defining the Anthropocene
consider the mid-20th Century to be the most appropriate starting date,
although others have been proposed and continue to be discussed. The
Anthropocene concept has been taken up by a diversity of disciplines
and the public to denote the substantive influence humans have had on
the state, dynamics and future of the Earth System. See also Holocene.
Anthropogenic Resulting from or produced by human activities. See
also Anthropogenic emissions and Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic emissions Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs),
precursors of GHGs and aerosols caused by human activities. These
activities include the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, land use
and land-use changes (LULUC), livestock production, fertilisation, waste
management and industrial processes. See also Anthropogenic and
Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic removals Anthropogenic removals refer to the
withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate
human activities. These include enhancing biological sinks of CO2 and
using chemical engineering to achieve long-term removal and storage.
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related
sources, which alone does not remove CO2 in the atmosphere, can reduce
atmospheric CO2 if it is combined with bioenergy production (BECCS). See
also Anthropogenic emissions, Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture
and storage (BECCS) and Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS).
Artificial intelligence (AI) Computer systems able to perform tasks
normally requiring human intelligence, such as visual perception and
speech recognition.
Atmosphere The gaseous envelope surrounding the earth, divided
into five layers - the troposphere which contains half of the Earth's
atmosphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the thermosphere,
and the exosphere, which is the outer limit of the atmosphere. The dry
atmosphere consists almost entirely of nitrogen (78.1% volume mixing
ratio) and oxygen (20.9% volume mixing ratio), together with a number
of trace gases, such as argon (0.93 % volume mixing ratio), helium and
radiatively active greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as carbon dioxide (CO2)
(0.04% volume mixing ratio) and ozone (O3). In addition, the atmosphere
contains the GHG water vapour (H2O), whose amounts are highly
variable but typically around 1% volume mixing ratio. The atmosphere
also contains clouds and aerosols. See also Troposphere, Stratosphere,
Greenhouse gas (GHG) and Hydrological cycle.
Atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) See
Climate model.
Attribution

See Detection and attribution.

Baseline scenario In much of the literature the term is also
synonymous with the term business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, although

the term BAU has fallen out of favour because the idea of business as
usual in century-long socio-economic projections is hard to fathom. In
the context of transformation pathways, the term baseline scenarios
refers to scenarios that are based on the assumption that no mitigation
policies or measures will be implemented beyond those that are already
in force and/or are legislated or planned to be adopted. Baseline
scenarios are not intended to be predictions of the future, but rather
counterfactual constructions that can serve to highlight the level of
emissions that would occur without further policy effort. Typically,
baseline scenarios are then compared to mitigation scenarios that are
constructed to meet different goals for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
atmospheric concentrations or temperature change. The term baseline
scenario is often used interchangeably with reference scenario and no
policy scenario. See also Emission scenario and Mitigation scenario.
Battery electric vehicle (BEV)

See Electric vehicle (EV).

Biochar Stable, carbon-rich material produced by heating biomass
in an oxygen-limited environment. Biochar may be added to soils to
improve soil functions and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
biomass and soils, and for carbon sequestration. This definition builds
from IBI (2018).
Biodiversity Biological diversity means the variability among living
organisms from all sources, including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and
other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they
are part; this includes diversity within species, between species and of
ecosystems (UN, 1992).
Bioenergy Energy derived from any form of biomass or its metabolic
by-products. See also Biomass and Biofuel.
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage
(BECCS) Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) technology applied
to a bioenergy facility. Note that depending on the total emissions of
the BECCS supply chain, carbon dioxide (CO2) can be removed from the
atmosphere. See also Bioenergy and Carbon dioxide capture and storage
(CCS).
Biofuel A fuel, generally in liquid form, produced from biomass.
Biofuels currently include bioethanol from sugarcane or maize, biodiesel
from canola or soybeans, and black liquor from the paper-manufacturing
process. See also Biomass and Bioenergy.
Biomass Living or recently dead organic material. See also Bioenergy
and Biofuel.
Biophilic urbanism Designing cities with green roofs, green walls
and green balconies to bring nature into the densest parts of cities in
order to provide green infrastructure and human health benefits. See also
Green infrastructure.
Black carbon (BC) Operationally defined aerosol species based on
measurement of light absorption and chemical reactivity and/or thermal
stability. It is sometimes referred to as soot. BC is mostly formed by the
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, biofuels and biomass but it also
occurs naturally. It stays in the atmosphere only for days or weeks. It is
the most strongly light-absorbing component of particulate matter (PM)
and has a warming effect by absorbing heat into the atmosphere and
reducing the albedo when deposited on snow or ice. See also Aerosol.
Blue carbon Blue carbon is the carbon captured by living organisms
in coastal (e.g., mangroves, salt marshes, seagrasses) and marine
ecosystems, and stored in biomass and sediments.
Burden sharing (also referred to as Effort sharing) In the
context of mitigation, burden sharing refers to sharing the effort of
reducing the sources or enhancing the sinks of greenhouse gases (GHGs)
543

AI

Annex I

Glossary

from historical or projected levels, usually allocated by some criteria, as
well as sharing the cost burden across countries.
Business as usual (BAU)

AI

See Baseline scenario.

Carbon budget This term refers to three concepts in the literature:
(1) an assessment of carbon cycle sources and sinks on a global level,
through the synthesis of evidence for fossil fuel and cement emissions,
land-use change emissions, ocean and land CO2 sinks, and the resulting
atmospheric CO2 growth rate. This is referred to as the global carbon
budget; (2) the estimated cumulative amount of global carbon dioxide
emissions that that is estimated to limit global surface temperature
to a given level above a reference period, taking into account global
surface temperature contributions of other GHGs and climate forcers; (3)
the distribution of the carbon budget defined under (2) to the regional,
national, or sub-national level based on considerations of equity, costs or
efficiency. See also Remaining carbon budget.
Carbon cycle The term used to describe the flow of carbon (in
various forms, e.g., as carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon in biomass, and
carbon dissolved in the ocean as carbonate and bicarbonate) through
the atmosphere, hydrosphere, terrestrial and marine biosphere and
lithosphere. In this report, the reference unit for the global carbon cycle
is GtCO2 or GtC (Gigatonne of carbon = 1 GtC = 1015 grams of carbon.
This corresponds to 3.667 GtCO2).
Carbon dioxide (CO2) A naturally occurring gas, CO2 is also a
by-product of burning fossil fuels (such as oil, gas and coal), of burning
biomass, of land-use changes (LUC) and of industrial processes (e.g.,
cement production). It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) that affects the Earth's radiative balance. It is the reference gas
against which other GHGs are measured and therefore has a global
warming potential (GWP) of 1. See also Greenhouse gas (GHG).
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) A process in which
a relatively pure stream of carbon dioxide (CO2) from industrial and
energy-related sources is separated (captured), conditioned, compressed
and transported to a storage location for long-term isolation from the
atmosphere. Sometimes referred to as Carbon capture and storage. See
also Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU), Bioenergy with carbon
dioxide capture and storage (BECCS) and Uptake.
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU) A process in which
CO2 is captured and then used to produce a new product. If the CO2 is
stored in a product for a climate-relevant time horizon, this is referred
to as carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS). Only then,
and only combined with CO2 recently removed from the atmosphere, can
CCUS lead to carbon dioxide removal. CCU is sometimes referred to as
carbon dioxide capture and use. See also Carbon dioxide capture and
storage (CCS).
Carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) See
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU).
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) Anthropogenic activities removing
CO2 from the atmosphere and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial,
or ocean reservoirs, or in products. It includes existing and potential
anthropogenic enhancement of biological or geochemical sinks and
direct air capture and storage, but excludes natural CO2 uptake not
directly caused by human activities. See also Mitigation (of climate
change), Greenhouse gas removal (GGR), Negative emissions, Direct air
carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS) and Sink.
Carbon intensity The amount of emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2)
released per unit of another variable such as gross domestic product
(GDP), output energy use or transport.

544

Carbon neutrality

See Net zero CO2 emissions.

Carbon price The price for avoided or released carbon dioxide (CO2)
or CO2-equivalent emissions. This may refer to the rate of a carbon tax,
or the price of emission permits. In many models that are used to assess
the economic costs of mitigation, carbon prices are used as a proxy to
represent the level of effort in mitigation policies.
Carbon sequestration The process of storing carbon in a carbon
pool. See also Blue carbon, Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS),
Uptake and Sink.
Carbon sink See Sink.
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) A mechanism defined
under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol through which investors
(governments or companies) from developed (Annex B) countries may
finance greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction or removal projects
in developing countries (Non-Annex B), and receive Certified Emission
Reduction Units (CERs) for doing so. The CERs can be credited towards the
commitments of the respective developed countries. The CDM is intended
to facilitate the two objectives of promoting sustainable development
(SD) in developing countries and of helping industrialised countries to
reach their emissions commitments in a cost-effective way.
Climate Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the average
weather, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of
the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period of time
ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The classical
period for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined by the World
Meteorological Organization. The relevant quantities are most often
surface variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind. Climate
in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the
climate system.
Climate change Climate change refers to a change in the state of the
climate that can be identified (e.g., by using statistical tests) by changes
in the mean and/or the variability of its properties and that persists for an
extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due
to natural internal processes or external forcings such as modulations
of the solar cycles, volcanic eruptions and persistent anthropogenic
changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that
the Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in its Article
1, defines climate change as: `a change of climate which is attributed
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the
global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability
observed over comparable time periods.' The UNFCCC thus makes a
distinction between climate change attributable to human activities
altering the atmospheric composition and climate variability attributable
to natural causes. See also Climate variability, Global warming, Ocean
acidification (OA) and Detection and attribution.
Climate change commitment Climate change commitment is
defined as the unavoidable future climate change resulting from inertia
in the geophysical and socio-economic systems. Different types of climate
change commitment are discussed in the literature (see subterms).
Climate change commitment is usually quantified in terms of the further
change in temperature, but it includes other future changes, for example
in the hydrological cycle, in extreme weather events, in extreme climate
events, and in sea level.
Constant composition commitment
The constant composition commitment is the remaining climate change
that would result if atmospheric composition, and hence radiative forcing,
were held fixed at a given value. It results from the thermal inertia of the
ocean and slow processes in the cryosphere and land surface.

Glossary

Annex I

Constant emissions commitment
The constant emissions commitment is the committed climate change
that would result from keeping anthropogenic emissions constant.
Zero emissions commitment
The zero emissions commitment is the climate change commitment
that would result from setting anthropogenic emissions to zero. It is
determined by both inertia in physical climate system components
(ocean, cryosphere, land surface) and carbon cycle inertia.
Feasible scenario commitment
The feasible scenario commitment is the climate change that corresponds
to the lowest emission scenario judged feasible.
Infrastructure commitment
The infrastructure commitment is the climate change that would result
if existing greenhouse gas and aerosol emitting infrastructure were used
until the end of its expected lifetime.
Climate-compatible development (CCD) A form of development
building on climate strategies that embrace development goals and
development strategies that integrate climate risk management,
adaptation and mitigation. This definition builds from Mitchell and
Maxwell (2010).
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event) The
occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above (or below) a
threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the range of observed
values of the variable. For simplicity, both extreme weather events and
extreme climate events are referred to collectively as `climate extremes'.
See also Extreme weather event.
Climate feedback An interaction in which a perturbation in one
climate quantity causes a change in a second and the change in the
second quantity ultimately leads to an additional change in the first. A
negative feedback is one in which the initial perturbation is weakened
by the changes it causes; a positive feedback is one in which the initial
perturbation is enhanced. The initial perturbation can either be externally
forced or arise as part of internal variability.
Climate governance
Climate justice

See Governance.

See Justice.

Climate model A numerical representation of the climate system
based on the physical, chemical and biological properties of its
components, their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting
for some of its known properties. The climate system can be represented
by models of varying complexity; that is, for any one component or
combination of components a spectrum or hierarchy of models can be
identified, differing in such aspects as the number of spatial dimensions,
the extent to which physical, chemical or biological processes are
explicitly represented, or the level at which empirical parametrizations
are involved. There is an evolution towards more complex models
with interactive chemistry and biology. Climate models are applied as
a research tool to study and simulate the climate and for operational
purposes, including monthly, seasonal and interannual climate
predictions. See also Earth system model (ESM).

greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols, generally derived using climate
models. Climate projections are distinguished from climate predictions
by their dependence on the emission/concentration/radiative forcing
scenario used, which is in turn based on assumptions concerning, for
example, future socioeconomic and technological developments that
may or may not be realized.
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) Trajectories
that strengthen sustainable development and efforts to eradicate
poverty and reduce inequalities while promoting fair and cross-scalar
adaptation to and resilience in a changing climate. They raise the ethics,
equity and feasibility aspects of the deep societal transformation needed
to drastically reduce emissions to limit global warming (e.g., to 1.5C)
and achieve desirable and liveable futures and well-being for all.
Climate-resilient pathways Iterative processes for managing
change within complex systems in order to reduce disruptions and
enhance opportunities associated with climate change. See also
Development pathways (under Pathways), Transformation pathways
(under Pathways), and Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs).
Climate sensitivity Climate sensitivity refers to the change in the
annual global mean surface temperature in response to a change in the
atmospheric CO2 concentration or other radiative forcing.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity
Refers to the equilibrium (steady state) change in the annual global
mean surface temperature following a doubling of the atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration. As a true equilibrium is challenging
to define in climate models with dynamic oceans, the equilibrium climate
sensitivity is often estimated through experiments in AOGCMs where CO2
levels are either quadrupled or doubled from pre-industrial levels and
which are integrated for 100-200 years. The climate sensitivity parameter
(units: C (W m-2)-1) refers to the equilibrium change in the annual global
mean surface temperature following a unit change in radiative forcing.
Effective climate sensitivity
An estimate of the global mean surface temperature response to a
doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration that is
evaluated from model output or observations for evolving non-equilibrium
conditions. It is a measure of the strengths of the climate feedbacks at a
particular time and may vary with forcing history and climate state, and
therefore may differ from equilibrium climate sensitivity.
Transient climate response
The change in the global mean surface temperature, averaged over a
20-year period, centered at the time of atmospheric CO2 doubling, in a
climate model simulation in which CO2 increases at 1% yr-1 from preindustrial. It is a measure of the strength of climate feedbacks and the
timescale of ocean heat uptake.
Climate services Climate services refers to information and products
that enhance users' knowledge and understanding about the impacts of
climate change and/or climate variability so as to aid decision-making of
individuals and organizations and enable preparedness and early climate
change action. Products can include climate data products.

Climate neutrality Concept of a state in which human activities
result in no net effect on the climate system. Achieving such a state would
require balancing of residual emissions with emission (carbon dioxide)
removal as well as accounting for regional or local biogeophysical effects
of human activities that, for example, affect surface albedo or local
climate. See also Net zero CO2 emissions.

Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) Climate-smart agriculture (CSA)
is an approach that helps to guide actions needed to transform and
reorient agricultural systems to effectively support development and
ensure food security in a changing climate. CSA aims to tackle three main
objectives: sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes,
adapting and building resilience to climate change, and reducing and/or
removing greenhouse gas emissions, where possible (FAO, 2018).

Climate projection A climate projection is the simulated response
of the climate system to a scenario of future emission or concentration of

Climate system The climate system is the highly complex system
consisting of five major components: the atmosphere, the hydrosphere,
545

AI

Annex I

the cryosphere, the lithosphere and the biosphere and the interactions
between them. The climate system evolves in time under the influence
of its own internal dynamics and because of external forcings such as
volcanic eruptions, solar variations and anthropogenic forcings such as
the changing composition of the atmosphere and land-use change.

AI

Climate target Climate target refers to a temperature limit,
concentration level, or emissions reduction goal used towards the aim of
avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.
For example, national climate targets may aim to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by a certain amount over a given time horizon, for example
those under the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate variability Climate variability refers to variations in
the mean state and other statistics (such as standard deviations, the
occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the climate on all spatial and temporal
scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability may be due to
natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability),
or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external
variability). See also Climate change.
CO2 equivalent (CO2-eq) emission The amount of carbon dioxide
(CO2) emission that would cause the same integrated radiative forcing
or temperature change, over a given time horizon, as an emitted amount
of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a mixture of GHGs. There are a number
of ways to compute such equivalent emissions and choose appropriate
time horizons. Most typically, the CO2-equivalent emission is obtained by
multiplying the emission of a GHG by its global warming potential (GWP)
for a 100-year time horizon. For a mix of GHGs it is obtained by summing
the CO2-equivalent emissions of each gas. CO2-equivalent emission is
a common scale for comparing emissions of different GHGs but does
not imply equivalence of the corresponding climate change responses.
There is generally no connection between CO2-equivalent emissions and
resulting CO2-equivalent concentrations.
Co-benefits The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed at
one objective might have on other objectives, thereby increasing the total
benefits for society or the environment. Co-benefits are often subject
to uncertainty and depend on local circumstances and implementation
practices, among other factors. Co-benefits are also referred to as
ancillary benefits.
Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective
Capabilities (CBDR-RC) Common but Differentiated Responsibilities
and Respective Capabilities (CBDR-RC) is a key principle in the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that
recognises the different capabilities and differing responsibilities of
individual countries in tacking climate change. The principle of CBDR-
RC is embedded in the 1992 UNFCCC treaty. The convention states:
"... the global nature of climate change calls for the widest possible
cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and
appropriate international response, in accordance with their common but
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and their social
and economic conditions." Since then the CBDR-RC principle has guided
the UN climate negotiations.
Conference of the Parties (COP) The supreme body of UN
conventions, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising parties with a right to vote that
have ratified or acceded to the convention. See also United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Confidence The robustness of a finding based on the type, amount,
quality and consistency of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding,
theory, data, models, expert judgment) and on the degree of agreement
across multiple lines of evidence. In this report, confidence is expressed
546

Glossary

qualitatively (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See Section 1.6 for the list of
confidence levels used. See also Agreement, Evidence, Likelihood and
Uncertainty.
Conservation agriculture A coherent group of agronomic and soil
management practices that reduce the disruption of soil structure and
biota.
Constant composition
commitment.

commitment

See Climate change

Constant emissions commitment See Climate change commitment.
Coping capacity The ability of people, institutions, organizations,
and systems, using available skills, values, beliefs, resources, and
opportunities, to address, manage, and overcome adverse conditions in
the short to medium term. This glossary entry builds from the definition
used in UNISDR (2009) and IPCC (2012a). See also Resilience.
Cost-benefit analysis Monetary assessment of all negative and
positive impacts associated with a given action. Cost-benefit analysis
enables comparison of different interventions, investments or strategies
and reveals how a given investment or policy effort pays off for a particular
person, company or country. Cost-benefit analyses representing society's
point of view are important for climate change decision-making, but
there are difficulties in aggregating costs and benefits across different
actors and across timescales. See also Discounting.
Cost-effectiveness A measure of the cost at which policy goal or
outcome is achieved. The lower the cost the greater the cost-effectiveness.
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) The Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) is a climate modelling activity
from the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) which coordinates
and archives climate model simulations based on shared model inputs by
modelling groups from around the world. The CMIP3 multimodel data set
includes projections using SRES scenarios. The CMIP5 data set includes
projections using the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The
CMIP6 phase involves a suite of common model experiments as well as
an ensemble of CMIP-endorsed model intercomparison projects (MIPs).
Cumulative emissions The total amount of emissions released over
a specified period of time. See also Carbon budget, and Transient climate
response to cumulative CO2 emissions (TCRE).
Decarbonization The process by which countries, individuals or
other entities aim to achieve zero fossil carbon existence. Typically
refers to a reduction of the carbon emissions associated with electricity,
industry and transport.
Decoupling Decoupling (in relation to climate change) is where
economic growth is no longer strongly associated with consumption of
fossil fuels. Relative decoupling is where both grow but at different rates.
Absolute decoupling is where economic growth happens but fossil fuels
decline.
Deforestation Conversion of forest to non-forest. For a discussion
of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, reforestation
and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use
Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000). See also information provided by the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC,
2013) and the report on Definitions and Methodological Options to
Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests
and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003). See also
Afforestation, Reforestation and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Deliberative governance See Governance.

Glossary

Annex I

Demand- and supply-side measures
Demand-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing the demand for goods and/
or services. In the energy sector, demand-side management aims at
reducing the demand for electricity and other forms of energy required
to deliver energy services.
Supply-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing how a certain demand for
goods and/or services is met. In the energy sector, for example, supplyside mitigation measures aim at reducing the amount of greenhouse gas
emissions emitted per unit of energy produced.
See also Mitigation measures.
Demand-side measures
Detection

See Demand- and supply-side measures.

See Detection and attribution.

Detection and attribution Detection of change is defined as the
process of demonstrating that climate or a system affected by climate
has changed in some defined statistical sense, without providing a
reason for that change. An identified change is detected in observations
if its likelihood of occurrence by chance due to internal variability alone is
determined to be small, for example, <10%. Attribution is defined as the
process of evaluating the relative contributions of multiple causal factors
to a change or event with a formal assessment of confidence.
Development pathways

See Pathways.

Direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS) Chemical
process by which CO2 is captured directly from the ambient air, with
subsequent storage. Also known as direct air capture and storage (DACS).
Disaster Severe alterations in the normal functioning of a community
or a society due to hazardous physical events interacting with vulnerable
social conditions, leading to widespread adverse human, material,
economic or environmental effects that require immediate emergency
response to satisfy critical human needs and that may require external
support for recovery. See also Hazard and Vulnerability.
Disaster risk management (DRM) Processes for designing,
implementing, and evaluating strategies, policies, and measures to
improve the understanding of disaster risk, foster disaster risk reduction
and transfer, and promote continuous improvement in disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery practices, with the explicit purpose
of increasing human security, well-being, quality of life, and sustainable
development.
Discount rate

See Discounting.

Discounting A mathematical operation that aims to make monetary
(or other) amounts received or expended at different times (years)
comparable across time. The discounter uses a fixed or possibly timevarying discount rate from year to year that makes future value worth
less today (if the discount rate is positive). The choice of discount rate(s)
is debated as it is a judgement based on hidden and/or explicit values.
(Internal) Displacement Internal displacement refers to the forced
movement of people within the country they live in. Internally displaced
persons (IDPs) are `Persons or groups of persons who have been forced or
obliged to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in
particular as a result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict,
situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural
or human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally
recognized State border.' (UN, 1998). See also Migration.

Disruptive innovation Disruptive innovation is demand-led
technological change that leads to significant system change and is
characterized by strong exponential growth.
Distributive equity

See Equity.

Distributive justice

See Justice.

Double dividend The extent to which revenues generated by policy
instruments, such as carbon taxes or auctioned (tradeable) emission
permits can (1) contribute to mitigation and (2) offset part of the
potential welfare losses of climate policies through recycling the revenue
in the economy by reducing other distortionary taxes.
Downscaling
Downscaling is a method that derives local- to
regional-scale (up to 100 km) information from larger-scale models or
data analyses. Two main methods exist: dynamical downscaling and
empirical/statistical downscaling. The dynamical method uses the output
of regional climate models, global models with variable spatial resolution,
or high-resolution global models. The empirical/statistical methods are
based on observations and develop statistical relationships that link the
large-scale atmospheric variables with local/regional climate variables. In
all cases, the quality of the driving model remains an important limitation
on quality of the downscaled information. The two methods can be
combined, e.g., applying empirical/statistical downscaling to the output
of a regional climate model, consisting of a dynamical downscaling of a
global climate model.
Drought A period of abnormally dry weather long enough to cause a
serious hydrological imbalance. Drought is a relative term, therefore any
discussion in terms of precipitation deficit must refer to the particular
precipitation-related activity that is under discussion. For example,
shortage of precipitation during the growing season impinges on crop
production or ecosystem function in general (due to soil moisture drought,
also termed agricultural drought), and during the runoff and percolation
season primarily affects water supplies (hydrological drought). Storage
changes in soil moisture and groundwater are also affected by increases
in actual evapotranspiration in addition to reductions in precipitation.
A period with an abnormal precipitation deficit is defined as a
meteorological drought. See also Soil moisture.
Megadrought
A megadrought is a very lengthy and pervasive drought, lasting much
longer than normal, usually a decade or more.
Early warning systems (EWS) The set of technical, financial and
institutional capacities needed to generate and disseminate timely and
meaningful warning information to enable individuals, communities and
organizations threatened by a hazard to prepare to act promptly and
appropriately to reduce the possibility of harm or loss. Dependent upon
context, EWS may draw upon scientific and/or Indigenous knowledge.
EWS are also considered for ecological applications e.g., conservation,
where the organization itself is not threatened by hazard but the
ecosystem under conservation is (an example is coral bleaching alerts),
in agriculture (for example, warnings of ground frost, hailstorms) and in
fisheries (storm and tsunami warnings). This glossary entry builds from
the definitions used in UNISDR (2009) and IPCC (2012a).
Earth system feedbacks

See Climate feedback.

Earth system model (ESM) A coupled atmosphere-ocean general
circulation model in which a representation of the carbon cycle is
included, allowing for interactive calculation of atmospheric CO2
or compatible emissions. Additional components (e.g., atmospheric
chemistry, ice sheets, dynamic vegetation, nitrogen cycle, but also urban
or crop models) may be included. See also Climate model.

547

AI

Annex I

AI

Glossary

Ecosystem An ecosystem is a functional unit consisting of living
organisms, their non-living environment and the interactions within and
between them. The components included in a given ecosystem and its
spatial boundaries depend on the purpose for which the ecosystem is
defined: in some cases they are relatively sharp, while in others they
are diffuse. Ecosystem boundaries can change over time. Ecosystems
are nested within other ecosystems and their scale can range from very
small to the entire biosphere. In the current era, most ecosystems either
contain people as key organisms, or are influenced by the effects of
human activities in their environment. See also Ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services Ecological processes or functions having
monetary or non-monetary value to individuals or society at large. These
are frequently classified as (1) supporting services such as productivity
or biodiversity maintenance, (2) provisioning services such as food
or fibre, (3) regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon
sequestration, and (4) cultural services such as tourism or spiritual and
aesthetic appreciation.
Effective climate sensitivity
Effective radiative forcing

See Climate sensitivity.
See Radiative forcing.

El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) The term El Nino was
initially used to describe a warm-water current that periodically flows
along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the local fishery. It has
since become identified with warming of the tropical Pacific Ocean east
of the dateline. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation of
a global-scale tropical and subtropical surface pressure pattern called
the Southern Oscillation. This coupled atmosphere-ocean phenomenon,
with preferred time scales of two to about seven years, is known as the
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). It is often measured by the surface
pressure anomaly difference between Tahiti and Darwin and/or the sea
surface temperatures in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific. During
an ENSO event, the prevailing trade winds weaken, reducing upwelling
and altering ocean currents such that the sea surface temperatures
warm, further weakening the trade winds. This phenomenon has a great
impact on the wind, sea surface temperature and precipitation patterns
in the tropical Pacific. It has climatic effects throughout the Pacific region
and in many other parts of the world, through global teleconnections. The
cold phase of ENSO is called La Nina.
Electric vehicle (EV)
mostly by electricity.

A vehicle whose propulsion is powered fully or

Battery electric vehicle (BEV)
A vehicle whose propulsion is entirely electric without any internal
combustion engine.
Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV)
A vehicle whose propulsion is mostly electric with batteries re-charged
from an electric source but extra power and distance are provided by a
hybrid internal combustion engine.
Emission pathways See Pathways.
Emission scenario A plausible representation of the future
development of emissions of substances that are radiatively active (e.g.,
greenhouse gases (GHGs), aerosols) based on a coherent and internally
consistent set of assumptions about driving forces (such as demographic
and socio-economic development, technological change, energy and land
use) and their key relationships. Concentration scenarios, derived from
emission scenarios, are often used as input to a climate model to compute
climate projections. See also Baseline scenario, Mitigation scenario,
Socio-economic scenario, Scenario, Representative Concentration
Pathways (RCPs) (under Pathways), Shared Socio-economic Pathways
(SSPs) (under Pathways) and Transformation pathways (under Pathways).
548

Emission trajectories A projected development in time of the
emission of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or group of GHGs, aerosols, and
GHG precursors. See also Emission pathways (under Pathways).
Emissions trading A market-based instrument aiming at meeting
a mitigation objective in an efficient way. A cap on GHG emissions is
divided in tradeable emission permits that are allocated by a combination
of auctioning and handing out free allowances to entities within the
jurisdiction of the trading scheme. Entities need to surrender emission
permits equal to the amount of their emissions (e.g., tonnes of CO2).
An entity may sell excess permits to entities that can avoid the same
amount of emissions in a cheaper way. Trading schemes may occur at
the intra-company, domestic, or international level (e.g., the flexibility
mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol and the EU-ETS) and may apply
to carbon dioxide (CO2), other greenhouse gases (GHGs), or other
substances.
Enabling conditions Conditions that affect the feasibility of
adaptation and mitigation options, and can accelerate and scale-up
systemic transitions that would limit temperature increase to 1.5C and
enhance capacities of systems and societies to adapt to the associated
climate change, while achieving sustainable development, eradicating
poverty and reducing inequalities. Enabling conditions include finance,
technological innovation, strengthening policy instruments, institutional
capacity, multilevel governance, and changes in human behaviour
and lifestyles. They also include inclusive processes, attention to
power asymmetries and unequal opportunities for development and
reconsideration of values. See also Feasibility.
Energy efficiency The ratio of output or useful energy or energy
services or other useful physical outputs obtained from a system,
conversion process, transmission or storage activity to the input of energy
(measured as kWh kWh-1, tonnes kWh-1 or any other physical measure
of useful output like tonne-km transported). Energy efficiency is often
described by energy intensity. In economics, energy intensity describes
the ratio of economic output to energy input. Most commonly energy
efficiency is measured as input energy over a physical or economic unit,
i.e., kWh USD-1 (energy intensity), kWh tonne-1. For buildings, it is often
measured as kWh m-2, and for vehicles as km liter-1 or liter km-1. Very often
in policy `energy efficiency' is intended as the measures to reduce energy
demand through technological options such as insulating buildings, more
efficient appliances, efficient lighting, efficient vehicles, etc.
Energy security The goal of a given country, or the global community
as a whole, to maintain an adequate, stable and predictable energy supply.
Measures encompass safeguarding the sufficiency of energy resources to
meet national energy demand at competitive and stable prices and the
resilience of the energy supply; enabling development and deployment
of technologies; building sufficient infrastructure to generate, store and
transmit energy supplies; and ensuring enforceable contracts of delivery.
Enhanced weathering Enhancing the removal of carbon dioxide
(CO2) from the atmosphere through dissolution of silicate and carbonate
rocks by grinding these minerals to small particles and actively applying
them to soils, coasts or oceans.
(Model) Ensemble A group of parallel model simulations
characterising historical climate conditions, climate predictions, or
climate projections. Variation of the results across the ensemble members
may give an estimate of modelling-based uncertainty. Ensembles made
with the same model but different initial conditions only characterize
the uncertainty associated with internal climate variability, whereas
multimodel ensembles including simulations by several models
also include the impact of model differences. Perturbed parameter
ensembles, in which model parameters are varied in a systematic

Glossary

Annex I

manner, aim to assess the uncertainty resulting from internal model
specifications within a single model. Remaining sources of uncertainty
unaddressed with model ensembles are related to systematic model
errors or biases, which may be assessed from systematic comparisons
of model simulations with observations wherever available. See also
Climate projection.
Equality A principle that ascribes equal worth to all human beings,
including equal opportunities, rights, and obligations, irrespective of origins.
Inequality
Uneven opportunities and social positions, and processes of discrimination
within a group or society, based on gender, class, ethnicity, age, and (dis)
ability, often produced by uneven development. Income inequality refers
to gaps between highest and lowest income earners within a country
and between countries. See also Equity, Ethics and Fairness.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity

See Climate sensitivity.

Equity Equity is the principle of fairness in burden sharing and is a
basis for understanding how the impacts and responses to climate
change, including costs and benefits, are distributed in and by society in
more or less equal ways. It is often aligned with ideas of equality, fairness
and justice and applied with respect to equity in the responsibility for, and
distribution of, climate impacts and policies across society, generations,
and gender, and in the sense of who participates and controls the
processes of decision-making.
Distributive equity
Equity in the consequences, outcomes, costs and benefits of actions or
policies. In the case of climate change or climate policies for different
people, places and countries, including equity aspects of sharing burdens
and benefits for mitigation and adaptation.
Gender equity
Ensuring equity in that women and men have the same rights, resources
and opportunities. In the case of climate change gender equity recognizes
that women are often more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change
and may be disadvantaged in the process and outcomes of climate
policy.
Inter-generational equity
Equity between generations that acknowledges that the effects of past
and present emissions, vulnerabilities and policies impose costs and
benefits for people in the future and of different age groups.
Procedural equity
Equity in the process of decision-making, including recognition and
inclusiveness in participation, equal representation, bargaining power,
voice and equitable access to knowledge and resources to participate.

Extratropical cyclone Any cyclonic-scale storm that is not a tropical
cyclone. Usually refers to a middle- or high-latitude migratory storm system
formed in regions of large horizontal temperature variations. Sometimes
called extratropical storm or extratropical low. See also Tropical cyclone.
Extreme weather event An extreme weather event is an event that
is rare at a particular place and time of year. Definitions of rare vary, but
an extreme weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the
10th or 90th percentile of a probability density function estimated from
observations. By definition, the characteristics of what is called extreme
weather may vary from place to place in an absolute sense. When a
pattern of extreme weather persists for some time, such as a season,
it may be classed as an extreme climate event, especially if it yields an
average or total that is itself extreme (e.g., drought or heavy rainfall over
a season). See also Heatwave and Climate extreme (extreme weather or
climate event).
Extreme weather or climate event
weather or climate event).

See Climate extreme (extreme

Fairness Impartial and just treatment without favouritism or
discrimination in which each person is considered of equal worth with
equal opportunity. See also Equity, Equality and Ethics.
Feasibility The degree to which climate goals and response options
are considered possible and/or desirable. Feasibility depends on
geophysical, ecological, technological, economic, social and institutional
conditions for change. Conditions underpinning feasibility are dynamic,
spatially variable, and may vary between different groups. See also
Enabling conditions.
Feasible scenario commitment

See Climate change commitment.

Feedback See Climate feedback.
Flexible governance See Governance.
Flood The overflowing of the normal confines of a stream or other
body of water, or the accumulation of water over areas that are not
normally submerged. Floods include river (fluvial) floods, flash floods,
urban floods, pluvial floods, sewer floods, coastal floods, and glacial lake
outburst floods.
Food security A situation that exists when all people, at all times,
have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and
nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for
an active and healthy life (FAO, 2001).
Food wastage Food wastage encompasses food loss (the loss of
food during production and transportation) and food waste (the waste of
food by the consumer) (FAO, 2013).

See also Equality, Ethics and Fairness.

Forcing See Radiative forcing.

Ethics Ethics involves questions of justice and value. Justice is
concerned with right and wrong, equity and fairness, and, in general,
with the rights to which people and living beings are entitled. Value is a
matter of worth, benefit, or good. See also Equality, Equity and Fairness.

Forest A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many definitions of the
term forest are in use throughout the world, reflecting wide differences in
biogeophysical conditions, social structure and economics. For a discussion
of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, reforestation
and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use
Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000). See also information provided by the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC,
2013) and the Report on Definitions and Methodological Options to
Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests
and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003). See also
Afforestation, Deforestation and Reforestation.

Evidence Data and information used in the scientific process to
establish findings. In this report, the degree of evidence reflects the
amount, quality and consistency of scientific/technical information on
which the Lead Authors are basing their findings. See also Agreement,
Confidence, Likelihood and Uncertainty.
Exposure The presence of people; livelihoods; species or ecosystems;
environmental functions, services, and resources; infrastructure; or
economic, social, or cultural assets in places and settings that could be
adversely affected. See also Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability.

Fossil fuels Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits,
including coal, oil, and natural gas.

549

AI

Annex I

AI

Glossary

Framework Convention on Climate Change See United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

ecosystem services and common pool natural resources, particularly in
situations of complexity and uncertainty.

Gender equity See Equity.

Climate governance
Purposeful mechanisms and measures aimed at steering social systems
towards preventing, mitigating, or adapting to the risks posed by climate
change (Jagers and Stripple, 2003).

General purpose technologies (GPT) General purpose technologies
can be or are used pervasively in a wide range of sectors in ways that
fundamentally change the modes of operation of those sectors (Helpman,
1998). Examples include the steam engine, power generator and motor,
ICT, and biotechnology.
Geoengineering In this report, separate consideration is given to
the two main approaches considered as `geoengineering' in some of the
literature: solar radiation modification (SRM) and carbon dioxide removal
(CDR). Because of this separation, the term `geoengineering' is not used
in this report. See also Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and Solar radiation
modification (SRM).
Glacier A perennial mass of ice, and possibly firn and snow,
originating on the land surface by the recrystallisation of snow and
showing evidence of past or present flow. A glacier typically gains mass
by accumulation of snow, and loses mass by melting and ice discharge
into the sea or a lake if the glacier terminates in a body of water. Land ice
masses of continental size (>50,000 km2) are referred to as ice sheets.
See also Ice sheet.
Global climate model (also referred to as general circulation
model, both abbreviated as GCM) See Climate model.
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) Estimated global
average of near-surface air temperatures over land and sea-ice, and
sea surface temperatures over ice-free ocean regions, with changes
normally expressed as departures from a value over a specified reference
period. When estimating changes in GMST, near-surface air temperature
over both land and oceans are also used.1 See also Land surface air
temperature, Sea surface temperature (SST) and Global mean surface air
temperature (GSAT).
Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT) Global average of
near-surface air temperatures over land and oceans. Changes in GSAT are
often used as a measure of global temperature change in climate models
but are not observed directly. See also Global mean surface temperature
(GMST) and Land surface air temperature.
Global warming The estimated increase in global mean surface
temperature (GMST) averaged over a 30-year period, or the 30-year
period centered on a particular year or decade, expressed relative to
pre-industrial levels unless otherwise specified. For 30-year periods that
span past and future years, the current multi-decadal warming trend is
assumed to continue. See also Climate change and Climate variability.
Governance A comprehensive and inclusive concept of the full range
of means for deciding, managing, implementing and monitoring policies
and measures. Whereas government is defined strictly in terms of the
nation-state, the more inclusive concept of governance recognizes the
contributions of various levels of government (global, international,
regional, sub-national and local) and the contributing roles of the private
sector, of nongovernmental actors, and of civil society to addressing the
many types of issues facing the global community.
Adaptive governance
An emerging term in the literature for the evolution of formal and
informal institutions of governance that prioritize social learning in
planning, implementation and evaluation of policy through iterative
social learning to steer the use and protection of natural resources,
1

Deliberative governance
Deliberative governance involves decision-making through inclusive
public conversation, which allows opportunity for developing policy
options through public discussion rather than collating individual
preferences through voting or referenda (although the latter governance
mechanisms can also be proceeded and legitimated by public deliberation
processes).
Flexible governance
Strategies of governance at various levels, which prioritize the use
of social learning and rapid feedback mechanisms in planning and
policy making, often through incremental, experimental and iterative
management processes.
Governance capacity
The ability of governance institutions, leaders, and non-state and civil
society to plan, co-ordinate, fund, implement, evaluate and adjust
policies and measures over the short, medium and long term, adjusting
for uncertainty, rapid change and wide-ranging impacts and multiple
actors and demands.
Multilevel governance
Multilevel governance refers to negotiated, non-hierarchical exchanges
between institutions at the transnational, national, regional and local
levels. Multilevel governance identifies relationships among governance
processes at these different levels. Multilevel governance does include
negotiated relationships among institutions at different institutional
levels and also a vertical `layering' of governance processes at
different levels. Institutional relationships take place directly between
transnational, regional and local levels, thus bypassing the state level
(Peters and Pierre, 2001)
Participatory governance
A governance system that enables direct public engagement in decisionmaking using a variety of techniques for example, referenda, community
deliberation, citizen juries or participatory budgeting. The approach can be
applied in formal and informal institutional contexts from national to local,
but is usually associated with devolved decision-making. This definition
builds from Fung and Wright (2003) and Sarmiento and Tilly (2018).
Governance capacity

Green infrastructure The interconnected set of natural and
constructed ecological systems, green spaces and other landscape
features. It includes planted and indigenous trees, wetlands, parks,
green open spaces and original grassland and woodlands, as well as
possible building and street-level design interventions that incorporate
vegetation. Green infrastructure provides services and functions in the
same way as conventional infrastructure. This definition builds from
Culwick and Bobbins (2016).
Greenhouse gas (GHG) Greenhouse gases are those gaseous
constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that
absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of
terrestrial radiation emitted by the Earth's surface, the atmosphere itself
and by clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour
(H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and

Past IPCC reports, reflecting the literature, have used a variety of approximately equivalent metrics of GMST change.

550

See Governance.

Glossary

ozone (O3) are the primary GHGs in the Earth's atmosphere. Moreover,
there are a number of entirely human-made GHGs in the atmosphere,
such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing
substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Beside CO2, N2O and
CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the GHGs sulphur hexafluoride (SF6),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). See also Carbon
dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), Nitrous oxide (N2O) and Ozone (O3).
Greenhouse gas removal (GGR) Withdrawal of a GHG and/or
a precursor from the atmosphere by a sink. See also Carbon dioxide
removal (CDR) and Negative emissions.
Gross domestic product (GDP) The sum of gross value added,
at purchasers' prices, by all resident and non-resident producers in the
economy, plus any taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the
value of the products in a country or a geographic region for a given
period, normally one year. GDP is calculated without deducting for
depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation of natural
resources.
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) One component of the GDP
that corresponds to the total value of acquisitions, minus disposals of
fixed assets during one year by the business sector, governments and
households, plus certain additions to the value of non-produced assets
(such as subsoil assets or major improvements in the quantity, quality or
productivity of land).
Halocarbons A collective term for the group of partially halogenated
organic species, which includes the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), halons,
methyl chloride and methyl bromide. Many of the halocarbons have
large global warming potentials. The chlorine and bromine-containing
halocarbons are also involved in the depletion of the ozone layer.
Hazard The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced
physical event or trend that may cause loss of life, injury, or other
health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure,
livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems and environmental resources.
See also Disaster, Exposure, Risk, and Vulnerability.
Heatwave A period of abnormally hot weather. Heatwaves and warm
spells have various and in some cases overlapping definitions. See also
Extreme weather event.
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) Heating,
ventilation and air conditioning technology is used to control temperature
and humidity in an indoor environment, be it in buildings or in vehicles,
providing thermal comfort and healthy air quality to the occupants. HVAC
systems can be designed for an isolated space, an individual building or
a distributed heating and cooling network within a building structure or
a district heating system. The latter provides economies of scale and also
scope for integration with solar heat, natural seasonal cooling/heating etc.
Holocene The Holocene is the current interglacial geological epoch,
the second of two epochs within the Quaternary period, the preceding
being the Pleistocene. The International Commission on Stratigraphy
defines the start of the Holocene at 11,650 years before 1950. See also
Anthropocene.
Human behaviour The way in which a person acts in response to a
particular situation or stimulus. Human actions are relevant at different
levels, from international, national, and sub-national actors, to NGO, firmlevel actors, and communities, households, and individual actions.
Adaptation behaviour
Human actions that directly or indirectly affect the risks of climate
change impacts.

Annex I

Mitigation behaviour
Human actions that directly or indirectly influence mitigation.
Human behavioural change A transformation or modification of
human actions. Behaviour change efforts can be planned in ways that
mitigate climate change and/or reduce negative consequences of climate
change impacts.
Human rights Rights that are inherent to all human beings, universal,
inalienable, and indivisible, typically expressed and guaranteed by law.
They include the right to life; economic, social, and cultural rights;
and the right to development and self-determination. Based upon the
definition by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(UNOHCHR, 2018).
Procedural rights
Rights to a legal procedure to enforce substantive rights.
Substantive rights
Basic human rights, including the right to the substance of being human
such as life itself, liberty and happiness.
Human security A condition that is met when the vital core of human
lives is protected, and when people have the freedom and capacity to live
with dignity. In the context of climate change, the vital core of human
lives includes the universal and culturally specific, material and nonmaterial elements necessary for people to act on behalf of their interests
and to live with dignity.
Human system Any system in which human organizations and
institutions play a major role. Often, but not always, the term is
synonymous with society or social system. Systems such as agricultural
systems, urban systems, political systems, technological systems and
economic systems are all human systems in the sense applied in this
report.
Hydrological cycle The cycle in which water evaporates from the
oceans and the land surface, is carried over the earth in atmospheric
circulation as water vapour, condenses to form clouds, precipitates as
rain or snow, which on land can be intercepted by trees and vegetation,
potentially accumulates as snow or ice, provides runoff on the land
surface, infiltrates into soils, recharges groundwater, discharges into
streams, flows out into the oceans, and ultimately evaporates again
from the ocean or land surface. The various systems involved in the
hydrological cycle are usually referred to as hydrological systems.
Ice sheet A mass of land ice of continental size that is sufficiently
thick to cover most of the underlying bed, so that its shape is mainly
determined by its dynamics (the flow of the ice as it deforms internally
and/or slides at its base). An ice sheet flows outward from a high central
ice plateau with a small average surface slope. The margins usually slope
more steeply, and most ice is discharged through fast flowing ice streams
or outlet glaciers, in some cases into the sea or into ice shelves floating
on the sea. There are only two ice sheets in the modern world, one on
Greenland and one on Antarctica. During glacial periods there were
others. See also Glacier.
(climate change) Impact assessment The practice of identifying
and evaluating, in monetary and/or non-monetary terms, the effects of
climate change on natural and human systems.
Impacts (consequences, outcomes) The consequences of
realized risks on natural and human systems, where risks result from
the interactions of climate-related hazards (including extreme weather
and climate events), exposure, and vulnerability. Impacts generally
refer to effects on lives; livelihoods; health and well-being; ecosystems
and species; economic, social and cultural assets; services (including

551

AI

Annex I

AI

Glossary

ecosystem services); and infrastructure. Impacts may be referred to
as consequences or outcomes, and can be adverse or beneficial. See
also Adaptation, Exposure, Hazard, Loss and Damage, and losses and
damages, and Vulnerability.

and management training to support integrated planning and decisionmaking processes between organizations and people, as well as
empowerment, social capital, and an enabling environment, including
the culture, values and power relations (Willems and Baumert, 2003).

Incremental adaptation

Integrated assessment A method of analysis that combines results
and models from the physical, biological, economic and social sciences
and the interactions among these components in a consistent framework
to evaluate the status and the consequences of environmental change
and the policy responses to it. See also Integrated assessment model
(IAM).

See Adaptation.

Indigenous knowledge Indigenous knowledge refers to the
understandings, skills and philosophies developed by societies with
long histories of interaction with their natural surroundings. For many
Indigenous peoples, Indigenous knowledge informs decision-making
about fundamental aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer
term actions. This knowledge is integral to cultural complexes, which also
encompass language, systems of classification, resource use practices,
social interactions, values, ritual and spirituality. These distinctive ways
of knowing are important facets of the world's cultural diversity. This
definition builds on UNESCO (2018).
Indirect land-use change (iLUC)

See Land-use change (LUC).

Industrial revolution A period of rapid industrial growth with farreaching social and economic consequences, beginning in Britain during
the second half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe and later to
other countries, including the United States. The invention of the steam
engine was an important trigger of this development. The industrial
revolution marks the beginning of a strong increase in the use of fossil
fuels, initially coal, and hence emission of carbon dioxide (CO2). See also
Pre-industrial.
Industrialized/developed/developing countries There are a
diversity of approaches for categorizing countries on the basis of their
level of development, and for defining terms such as industrialized,
developed, or developing. Several categorizations are used in this report.
(1) In the United Nations system, there is no established convention for
designation of developed and developing countries or areas. (2) The
United Nations Statistics Division specifies developed and developing
regions based on common practice. In addition, specific countries are
designated as Least Developed Countries (LDC), landlocked developing
countries, small island developing states, and transition economies. Many
countries appear in more than one of these categories. (3) The World
Bank uses income as the main criterion for classifying countries as low,
lower middle, upper middle and high income. (4) The UNDP aggregates
indicators for life expectancy, educational attainment, and income into a
single composite Human Development Index (HDI) to classify countries
as low, medium, high or very high human development.
Inequality

See Equality.

Information and communication technology (ICT) An umbrella
term that includes any information and communication device or
application, encompassing: computer systems, network hardware and
software, cell phones, etc.
Infrastructure commitment

See Climate change commitment.

Institution Institutions are rules and norms held in common by social
actors that guide, constrain and shape human interaction. Institutions
can be formal, such as laws and policies, or informal, such as norms and
conventions. Organizations - such as parliaments, regulatory agencies,
private firms and community bodies - develop and act in response to
institutional frameworks and the incentives they frame. Institutions can
guide, constrain and shape human interaction through direct control,
through incentives, and through processes of socialization. See also
Institutional capacity.
Institutional capacity Institutional capacity comprises building
and strengthening individual organizations and providing technical

552

Integrated assessment model (IAM) Integrated assessment
models (IAMs) integrate knowledge from two or more domains into
a single framework. They are one of the main tools for undertaking
integrated assessments.
One class of IAM used in respect of climate change mitigation may
include representations of: multiple sectors of the economy, such as
energy, land use and land-use change; interactions between sectors; the
economy as a whole; associated GHG emissions and sinks; and reduced
representations of the climate system. This class of model is used to assess
linkages between economic, social and technological development and
the evolution of the climate system.
Another class of IAM additionally includes representations of the costs
associated with climate change impacts, but includes less detailed
representations of economic systems. These can be used to assess
impacts and mitigation in a cost-benefit framework and have been used
to estimate the social cost of carbon.
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) A process
which promotes the coordinated development and management of
water, land and related resources in order to maximize economic and
social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the
sustainability of vital ecosystems.
Inter-generational equity

See Equity.

Inter-generational justice

See Justice.

Internal variability

See Climate variability.

Internet of Things (IoT) The network of computing devices
embedded in everyday objects such as cars, phones and computers,
connected via the internet, enabling them to send and receive data.
Iron fertilization

See Ocean fertilization.

Irreversibility A perturbed state of a dynamical system is defined as
irreversible on a given timescale, if the recovery time scale from this state
due to natural processes is substantially longer than the time it takes for
the system to reach this perturbed state. See also Tipping point.
Justice Justice is concerned with ensuring that people get what is due
to them, setting out the moral or legal principles of fairness and equity in
the way people are treated, often based on the ethics and values of society.
Climate justice
Justice that links development and human rights to achieve a humancentred approach to addressing climate change, safeguarding the rights
of the most vulnerable people and sharing the burdens and benefits of
climate change and its impacts equitably and fairly. This definition builds
upon the one used by the Mary Robinson Foundation - Climate Justice
(MRFCJ, 2018).
Distributive justice
Justice in the allocation of economic and non-economic costs and
benefits across society.

Glossary

Inter-generational justice
Justice in the distribution of economic and non-economic costs and
benefits across generations.
Procedural justice
Justice in the way outcomes are brought about including who participates
and is heard in the processes of decision-making.
Social justice
Just or fair relations within society that seek to address the distribution
of wealth, access to resources, opportunity, and support according to
principles of justice and fairness.
See also Equity, Ethics, Fairness, and Human rights.
Kyoto Protocol The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is an international treaty
adopted in December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, at the Third Session of the
Conference of the Parties (COP3) to the UNFCCC. It contains legally
binding commitments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC.
Countries included in Annex B of the Protocol (mostly OECD countries
and countries with economies in transition) agreed to reduce their
anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (carbon dioxide
(CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6)) by at least 5%
below 1990 levels in the first commitment period (2008-2012). The
Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February 2005 and as of May
2018 had 192 Parties (191 States and the European Union). A second
commitment period was agreed in December 2012 at COP18, known as
the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in which a new set of Parties
committed to reduce GHG emissions by at least 18% below 1990 levels
in the period from 2013 to 2020. However, as of May 2018, the Doha
Amendment had not received sufficient ratifications to enter into force.
See also United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) and Paris Agreement.
Land surface air temperature The near-surface air temperature
over land, typically measured at 1.25-2 m above the ground using
standard meteorological equipment.
Land use Land use refers to the total of arrangements, activities and
inputs undertaken in a certain land cover type (a set of human actions).
The term land use is also used in the sense of the social and economic
purposes for which land is managed (e.g., grazing, timber extraction,
conservation and city dwelling). In national greenhouse gas inventories,
land use is classified according to the IPCC land use categories of forest
land, cropland, grassland, wetland, settlements, other. See also Land-use
change (LUC).
Land-use change (LUC) Land-use change involves a change from
one land use category to another.
Indirect land-use change (iLUC)
Refers to market-mediated or policy-driven shifts in land use that cannot
be directly attributed to land-use management decisions of individuals
or groups. For example, if agricultural land is diverted to fuel production,
forest clearance may occur elsewhere to replace the former agricultural
production.
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF)
In the context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the
UNFCCC, LULUCF is a GHG inventory sector that covers anthropogenic
emissions and removals of GHG from carbon pools in managed lands,
excluding non-CO2 agricultural emissions. Following the 2006 IPCC
Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, `anthropogenic' land-related
GHG fluxes are defined as all those occurring on `managed land', i.e.,
`where human interventions and practices have been applied to perform

Annex I

production, ecological or social functions'. Since managed land may
include CO2 removals not considered as `anthropogenic' in some of the
scientific literature assessed in this report (e.g., removals associated with
CO2 fertilization and N deposition), the land-related net GHG emission
estimates included in this report are not necessarily directly comparable
with LULUCF estimates in National GHG Inventories.
See also Afforestation, Deforestation, Reforestation, and the IPCC Special
Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000).
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) See Land-use
change (LUC).
Life cycle assessment (LCA) Compilation and evaluation of the
inputs, outputs and the potential environmental impacts of a product or
service throughout its life cycle. This definition builds from ISO (2018).
Likelihood The chance of a specific outcome occurring, where this
might be estimated probabilistically. Likelihood is expressed in this report
using a standard terminology (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See Section 1.6
for the list of likelihood qualifiers used. See also Agreement, Evidence,
Confidence and Uncertainty.
Livelihood The resources used and the activities undertaken in order
to live. Livelihoods are usually determined by the entitlements and assets
to which people have access. Such assets can be categorised as human,
social, natural, physical or financial.
Local knowledge Local knowledge refers to the understandings
and skills developed by individuals and populations, specific to the
places where they live. Local knowledge informs decision-making about
fundamental aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer-term
actions. This knowledge is a key element of the social and cultural systems
which influence observations of, and responses to climate change; it also
informs governance decisions. This definition builds on UNESCO (2018).
Lock-in A situation in which the future development of a system,
including infrastructure, technologies, investments, institutions, and
behavioural norms, is determined or constrained (`locked in') by historic
developments.
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF) Long-lived climate forcers refer
to a set of well-mixed greenhouse gases with long atmospheric lifetimes.
This set of compounds includes carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous oxide
(N2O), together with some fluorinated gases. They have a warming effect
on climate. These compounds accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal
to centennial time scales, and their effect on climate hence persists for
decades to centuries after their emission. On time scales of decades to
a century, already emitted emissions of long-lived climate forcers can
only be abated by greenhouse gas removal (GGR). See also Short-lived
climate forcers (SLCF).
Loss and Damage, and losses and damages Research has taken
Loss and Damage (capitalized letters) to refer to political debate under
the UNFCCC following the establishment of the Warsaw Mechanism
on Loss and Damage in 2013, which is to `address loss and damage
associated with impacts of climate change, including extreme events
and slow onset events, in developing countries that are particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.' Lowercase letters
(losses and damages) have been taken to refer broadly to harm from
(observed) impacts and (projected) risks (see Mechler et al., in press).
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation) Actions that may lead
to increased risk of adverse climate-related outcomes, including via
increased GHG emissions, increased vulnerability to climate change, or
diminished welfare, now or in the future. Maladaptation is usually an
unintended consequence.

553

AI

Annex I

Glossary

Market exchange rate (MER) The rate at which a currency of
one country can be exchanged with the currency of another country. In
most economies such rates evolve daily while in others there are official
conversion rates that are adjusted periodically. See also Purchasing
power parity (PPP).

AI

Market failure When private decisions are based on market prices
that do not reflect the real scarcity of goods and services but rather
reflect market distortions, they do not generate an efficient allocation
of resources but cause welfare losses. A market distortion is any event
in which a market reaches a market clearing price that is substantially
different from the price that a market would achieve while operating
under conditions of perfect competition and state enforcement of legal
contracts and the ownership of private property. Examples of factors
causing market prices to deviate from real economic scarcity are
environmental externalities, public goods, monopoly power, information
asymmetry, transaction costs and non-rational behaviour.
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV)
Measurement
`Processes of data collection over time, providing basic datasets, including
associated accuracy and precision, for the range of relevant variables.
Possible data sources are field measurements, field observations,
detection through remote sensing and interviews.' (UN-REDD, 2009).
Reporting
`The process of formal reporting of assessment results to the UNFCCC,
according to predetermined formats and according to established
standards, especially the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change] Guidelines and GPG [Good Practice Guidance].' (UN-REDD,
2009)
Verification
`The process of formal verification of reports, for example the established
approach to verify national communications and national inventory
reports to the UNFCCC.' (UN-REDD, 2009)
Megadrought

See Drought.

Methane (CH4) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be
mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol and is the major component of
natural gas and associated with all hydrocarbon fuels. Significant
emissions occur as a result of animal husbandry and agriculture, and
their management represents a major mitigation option.
Migrant See Migration.
Migration The International Organization for Migration (IOM)
defines migration as `The movement of a person or a group of persons,
either across an international border, or within a State. It is a population
movement, encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever
its length, composition and causes; it includes migration of refugees,
displaced persons, economic migrants, and persons moving for other
purposes, including family reunification.' (IOM, 2018).
Migrant
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) defines a migrant
as `any person who is moving or has moved across an international
border or within a State away from his/her habitual place of residence,
regardless of (1) the person's legal status; (2) whether the movement is
voluntary or involuntary; (3) what the causes for the movement are; or
(4) what the length of the stay is.' (IOM, 2018).
See also (Internal) Displacement.
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) A set of eight timebound and measurable goals for combating poverty, hunger, disease,

554

illiteracy, discrimination against women and environmental degradation.
These goals were agreed at the UN Millennium Summit in 2000 together
with an action plan to reach the goals by 2015.
Mitigation (of climate change) A human intervention to reduce
emissions or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.
Mitigation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Mitigation measures In climate policy, mitigation measures are
technologies, processes or practices that contribute to mitigation, for
example, renewable energy (RE) technologies, waste minimization
processes and public transport commuting practices. See also Mitigation
option, and Policies (for climate change mitigation and adaptation).
Mitigation option A technology or practice that reduces GHG
emissions or enhances sinks.
Mitigation pathways See Pathways.
Mitigation scenario A plausible description of the future that
describes how the (studied) system responds to the implementation of
mitigation policies and measures. See also Emission scenario, Pathways,
Socio-economic scenario and Stabilization (of GHG or CO2-equivalent
concentration).
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) Monitoring and evaluation
refers to mechanisms put in place at national to local scales to respectively
monitor and evaluate efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and/
or adapt to the impacts of climate change with the aim of systematically
identifying, characterizing and assessing progress over time.
Motivation (of an individual) An individual's reason or reasons for
acting in a particular way; individuals may consider various consequences
of actions, including financial, social, affective and environmental
consequences. Motivation can come from outside (extrinsic) or from
inside (intrinsic) the individual.
Multilevel governance See Governance.
Narratives Qualitative descriptions of plausible future world
evolutions, describing the characteristics, general logic and developments
underlying a particular quantitative set of scenarios. Narratives are also
referred to in the literature as `storylines'. See also Scenario, Scenario
storyline and Pathways.
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) A term used under
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
whereby a country that has joined the Paris Agreement outlines its plans
for reducing its emissions. Some countries' NDCs also address how
they will adapt to climate change impacts, and what support they need
from, or will provide to, other countries to adopt low-carbon pathways
and to build climate resilience. According to Article 4 paragraph 2
of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall prepare, communicate and
maintain successive NDCs that it intends to achieve. In the lead up to
21st Conference of the Parties in Paris in 2015, countries submitted
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs). As countries join
the Paris Agreement, unless they decide otherwise, this INDC becomes
their first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). See also United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Paris
Agreement.
Negative emissions Removal of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from
the atmosphere by deliberate human activities, i.e., in addition to the
removal that would occur via natural carbon cycle processes. See also
Net negative emissions, Net zero emissions, Carbon dioxide removal
(CDR) and Greenhouse gas removal (GGR).

Glossary

Annex I

Net negative emissions A situation of net negative emissions is
achieved when, as result of human activities, more greenhouse gases
are removed from the atmosphere than are emitted into it. Where
multiple greenhouse gases are involved, the quantification of negative
emissions depends on the climate metric chosen to compare emissions
of different gases (such as global warming potential, global temperature
change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). See
also Negative emissions, Net zero emissions and Net zero CO2 emissions.
Net zero CO2 emissions Net zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
are achieved when anthropogenic CO2 emissions are balanced globally
by anthropogenic CO2 removals over a specified period. Net zero CO2
emissions are also referred to as carbon neutrality. See also Net zero
emissions and Net negative emissions.
Net zero emissions Net zero emissions are achieved when
anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere are
balanced by anthropogenic removals over a specified period. Where
multiple greenhouse gases are involved, the quantification of net zero
emissions depends on the climate metric chosen to compare emissions
of different gases (such as global warming potential, global temperature
change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). See
also Net zero CO2 emissions, Negative emissions and Net negative
emissions.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be
mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol. The main anthropogenic source of
N2O is agriculture (soil and animal manure management), but important
contributions also come from sewage treatment, fossil fuel combustion,
and chemical industrial processes. N2O is also produced naturally from a
wide variety of biological sources in soil and water, particularly microbial
action in wet tropical forests.
Non-CO2 emissions and radiative forcing Non-CO2 emissions
included in this report are all anthropogenic emissions other than CO2
that result in radiative forcing. These include short-lived climate forcers,
such as methane (CH4), some fluorinated gases, ozone (O3) precursors,
aerosols or aerosol precursors, such as black carbon and sulphur dioxide,
respectively, as well as long-lived greenhouse gases, such as nitrous
oxide (N2O) or other fluorinated gases. The radiative forcing associated
with non-CO2 emissions and changes in surface albedo is referred to as
non-CO2 radiative forcing.
Non-overshoot pathways

See Pathways.

Ocean acidification (OA) Ocean acidification refers to a reduction
in the pH of the ocean over an extended period, typically decades or
longer, which is caused primarily by uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2) from
the atmosphere, but can also be caused by other chemical additions or
subtractions from the ocean. Anthropogenic ocean acidification refers to
the component of pH reduction that is caused by human activity (IPCC,
2011, p. 37).
Ocean fertilization Deliberate increase of nutrient supply to
the near-surface ocean in order to enhance biological production
through which additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere is
sequestered. This can be achieved by the addition of micro-nutrients or
macro-nutrients. Ocean fertilization is regulated by the London Protocol.
Overshoot See Temperature overshoot.
Overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Ozone (O3) Ozone, the triatomic form of oxygen (O3), is a gaseous
atmospheric constituent. In the troposphere, it is created both naturally
and by photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human
activities (smog). Tropospheric ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the

stratosphere, it is created by the interaction between solar ultraviolet
radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric ozone plays a
dominant role in the stratospheric radiative balance. Its concentration is
highest in the ozone layer.
Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted on
December 2015 in Paris, France, at the 21st session of the Conference
of the Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC. The agreement, adopted by 196
Parties to the UNFCCC, entered into force on 4 November 2016 and as
of May 2018 had 195 Signatories and was ratified by 177 Parties. One
of the goals of the Paris Agreement is `Holding the increase in the global
average temperature to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels
and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above
pre-industrial levels', recognising that this would significantly reduce
the risks and impacts of climate change. Additionally, the Agreement
aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with the impacts
of climate change. The Paris Agreement is intended to become fully
effective in 2020. See also United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), Kyoto Protocol and Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs).
Participatory governance See Governance.
Pathways The temporal evolution of natural and/or human systems
towards a future state. Pathway concepts range from sets of quantitative
and qualitative scenarios or narratives of potential futures to solutionoriented decision-making processes to achieve desirable societal goals.
Pathway approaches typically focus on biophysical, techno-economic,
and/or socio-behavioural trajectories and involve various dynamics, goals
and actors across different scales.
1.5C pathway
A pathway of emissions of greenhouse gases and other climate forcers
that provides an approximately one-in-two to two-in-three chance, given
current knowledge of the climate response, of global warming either
remaining below 1.5C or returning to 1.5C by around 2100 following
an overshoot. See also Temperature overshoot.
Adaptation pathways
A series of adaptation choices involving trade-offs between short-term
and long-term goals and values. These are processes of deliberation to
identify solutions that are meaningful to people in the context of their
daily lives and to avoid potential maladaptation.
Development pathways
Development pathways are trajectories based on an array of social,
economic, cultural, technological, institutional and biophysical features
that characterise the interactions between human and natural systems
and outline visions for the future, at a particular scale.
Emission pathways
Modelled trajectories of global anthropogenic emissions over the 21st
century are termed emission pathways.
Mitigation pathways
A mitigation pathway is a temporal evolution of a set of mitigation
scenario features, such as greenhouse gas emissions and socio-economic
development.
Overshoot pathways
Pathways that exceed the stabilization level (concentration, forcing, or
temperature) before the end of a time horizon of interest (e.g., before
2100) and then decline towards that level by that time. Once the target
level is exceeded, removal by sinks of greenhouse gases is required. See
also Temperature overshoot.

555

AI

Annex I

Non-overshoot pathways
Pathways that stay below the stabilization level (concentration, forcing,
or temperature) during the time horizon of interest (e.g., until 2100).

AI

Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)
Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concentrations of
the full suite of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols and chemically
active gases, as well as land use/land cover (Moss et al., 2008). The
word representative signifies that each RCP provides only one of many
possible scenarios that would lead to the specific radiative forcing
characteristics. The term pathway emphasizes the fact that not only the
long-term concentration levels but also the trajectory taken over time to
reach that outcome are of interest (Moss et al., 2010). RCPs were used to
develop climate projections in CMIP5.
* RCP2.6: One pathway where radiative forcing peaks at
approximately 3 W m-2 and then declines to be limited at 2.6 W m-2
in 2100 (the corresponding Extended Concentration Pathway, or
ECP, has constant emissions after 2100).
* RCP4.5 and RCP6.0: Two intermediate stabilization pathways
in which radiative forcing is limited at approximately 4.5 W m-2
and 6.0 W m-2 in 2100 (the corresponding ECPs have constant
concentrations after 2150).
* RCP8.5: One high pathway which leads to >8.5 W m-2 in 2100
(the corresponding ECP has constant emissions after 2100 until
2150 and constant concentrations after 2250).
See also Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) and Shared
Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs).
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) were developed to complement
the RCPs with varying socio-economic challenges to adaptation and
mitigation (O'Neill et al., 2014). Based on five narratives, the SSPs
describe alternative socio-economic futures in the absence of climate
policy intervention, comprising sustainable development (SSP1), regional
rivalry (SSP3), inequality (SSP4), fossil-fuelled development (SSP5) and
middle-of-the-road development (SSP2) (O'Neill, 2000; O'Neill et al.,
2017; Riahi et al., 2017). The combination of SSP-based socio-economic
scenarios and Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)-based
climate projections provides an integrative frame for climate impact and
policy analysis.
Transformation pathways
Trajectories describing consistent sets of possible futures of greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions, atmospheric concentrations, or global mean
surface temperatures implied from mitigation and adaptation actions
associated with a set of broad and irreversible economic, technological,
societal and behavioural changes. This can encompass changes in the
way energy and infrastructure are used and produced, natural resources
are managed and institutions are set up and in the pace and direction of
technological change.
See also Scenario, Scenario storyline, Emission scenario, Mitigation
scenario, Baseline scenario, Stabilization (of GHG or CO2-equivalent
concentration) and Narratives.
Peri-urban areas Peri-urban areas are those parts of a city that
appear to be quite rural but are in reality strongly linked functionally to
the city in its daily activities.
Permafrost Ground (soil or rock and included ice and organic
material) that remains at or below 0C for at least two consecutive years.
pH pH is a dimensionless measure of the acidity of a solution given by
its concentration of hydrogen ions ([H+]). pH is measured on a logarithmic
scale where pH = -log10[H+]. Thus, a pH decrease of 1 unit corresponds to
a 10-fold increase in the concentration of H+, or acidity.
556

Glossary

Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) See Electric vehicle (EV).
Policies (for climate change mitigation and adaptation)
Policies are taken and/or mandated by a government - often in conjunction
with business and industry within a single country, or collectively with other
countries - to accelerate mitigation and adaptation measures. Examples of
policies are support mechanisms for renewable energy supplies, carbon or
energy taxes, fuel efficiency standards for automobiles, etc.
Political economy The set of interlinked relationships between
people, the state, society and markets as defined by law, politics,
economics, customs and power that determine the outcome of trade and
transactions and the distribution of wealth in a country or economy.
Poverty Poverty is a complex concept with several definitions
stemming from different schools of thought. It can refer to material
circumstances (such as need, pattern of deprivation or limited resources),
economic conditions (such as standard of living, inequality or economic
position) and/or social relationships (such as social class, dependency,
exclusion, lack of basic security or lack of entitlement). See also Poverty
eradication.
Poverty eradication A set of measures to end poverty in all its
forms everywhere. See also Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Precursors Atmospheric compounds that are not greenhouse
gases (GHGs) or aerosols, but that have an effect on GHG or aerosol
concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical processes regulating
their production or destruction rates. See also Aerosol and Greenhouse
gas (GHG).
Pre-industrial The multi-century period prior to the onset of largescale industrial activity around 1750. The reference period 1850-1900
is used to approximate pre-industrial global mean surface temperature
(GMST). See also Industrial revolution.
Procedural equity See Equity.
Procedural justice See Justice.
Procedural rights

See Human rights.

Projection A projection is a potential future evolution of a quantity
or set of quantities, often computed with the aid of a model. Unlike
predictions, projections are conditional on assumptions concerning, for
example, future socio-economic and technological developments that
may or may not be realized. See also Climate projection, Scenario and
Pathways.
Purchasing power parity (PPP) The purchasing power of a currency
is expressed using a basket of goods and services that can be bought
with a given amount in the home country. International comparison of,
for example, gross domestic products (GDPs) of countries can be based
on the purchasing power of currencies rather than on current exchange
rates. PPP estimates tend to lower the gap between the per capita GDP in
industrialized and developing countries. See also Market exchange rate
(MER).
Radiative forcing Radiative forcing is the change in the net,
downward minus upward, radiative flux (expressed in W m-2) at the
tropopause or top of atmosphere due to a change in a driver of climate
change, such as a change in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2)
or the output of the Sun. The traditional radiative forcing is computed
with all tropospheric properties held fixed at their unperturbed values,
and after allowing for stratospheric temperatures, if perturbed, to
readjust to radiative-dynamical equilibrium. Radiative forcing is called
instantaneous if no change in stratospheric temperature is accounted for.
The radiative forcing once rapid adjustments are accounted for is termed

Glossary

Annex I

the effective radiative forcing. Radiative forcing is not to be confused
with cloud radiative forcing, which describes an unrelated measure of
the impact of clouds on the radiative flux at the top of the atmosphere.

identity and structure while also maintaining the capacity for adaptation,
learning and transformation. This definition builds from the definition
used by Arctic Council (2013). See also Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability.

Reasons for Concern (RFCs) Elements of a classification
framework, first developed in the IPCC Third Assessment Report, which
aims to facilitate judgments about what level of climate change may be
dangerous (in the language of Article 2 of the UNFCCC) by aggregating
risks from various sectors, considering hazards, exposures, vulnerabilities,
capacities to adapt, and the resulting impacts.

Risk The potential for adverse consequences where something of
value is at stake and where the occurrence and degree of an outcome
is uncertain. In the context of the assessment of climate impacts, the
term risk is often used to refer to the potential for adverse consequences
of a climate-related hazard, or of adaptation or mitigation responses to
such a hazard, on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, ecosystems
and species, economic, social and cultural assets, services (including
ecosystem services), and infrastructure. Risk results from the interaction
of vulnerability (of the affected system), its exposure over time (to the
hazard), as well as the (climate-related) hazard and the likelihood of its
occurrence.

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD+) An effort to create financial value for the carbon stored in
forests, offering incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions
from forested lands and invest in low-carbon paths to sustainable
development (SD). It is therefore a mechanism for mitigation that results
from avoiding deforestation. REDD+ goes beyond deforestation and
forest degradation, and includes the role of conservation, sustainable
management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.
The concept was first introduced in 2005 in the 11th Session of the
Conference of the Parties (COP) in Montreal and later given greater
recognition in the 13th Session of the COP in 2007 at Bali and inclusion
in the Bali Action Plan, which called for `policy approaches and positive
incentives on issues relating to reducing emissions from deforestation
and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD) and the role of
conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement
of forest carbon stock in developing countries.' Since then, support for
REDD has increased and has slowly become a framework for action
supported by a number of countries.
Reference period The period relative to which anomalies are
computed. See also Anomaly.
Reference scenario

See Baseline scenario.

Reforestation Planting of forests on lands that have previously
contained forests but that have been converted to some other use. For
a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use,
Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000), information provided by
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC,
2013), the report on Definitions and Methodological Options to
Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests
and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003). See also
Deforestation, Afforestation and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Region A region is a relatively large-scale land or ocean area
characterized by specific geographical and climatological features. The
climate of a land-based region is affected by regional and local scale
features like topography, land use characteristics and large water
bodies, as well as remote influences from other regions, in addition to
global climate conditions. The IPCC defines a set of standard regions for
analyses of observed climate trends and climate model projections (see
Figure 3.2; AR5, SREX).
Remaining carbon budget Estimated cumulative net global
anthropogenic CO2 emissions from the start of 2018 to the time that
anthropogenic CO2 emissions reach net zero that would result, at some
probability, in limiting global warming to a given level, accounting for the
impact of other anthropogenic emissions.
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) See Pathways.
Resilience The capacity of social, economic and environmental
systems to cope with a hazardous event or trend or disturbance,
responding or reorganizing in ways that maintain their essential function,

Risk assessment The qualitative and/or quantitative scientific
estimation of risks. See also Risk, Risk management and Risk perception.
Risk management Plans, actions, strategies or policies to reduce the
likelihood and/or consequences of risks or to respond to consequences.
See also Risk, Risk assessment and Risk perception.
Risk perception The subjective judgment that people make about
the characteristics and severity of a risk. See also Risk, Risk assessment
and Risk management.
Runoff The flow of water over the surface or through the subsurface,
which typically originates from the part of liquid precipitation and/or
snow/ice melt that does not evaporate or refreeze, and is not transpired.
See also Hydrological cycle.
Scenario A plausible description of how the future may develop
based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions
about key driving forces (e.g., rate of technological change, prices) and
relationships. Note that scenarios are neither predictions nor forecasts,
but are used to provide a view of the implications of developments
and actions. See also Baseline scenario, Emission scenario, Mitigation
scenario and Pathways.
Scenario storyline A narrative description of a scenario (or family of
scenarios), highlighting the main scenario characteristics, relationships
between key driving forces and the dynamics of their evolution. Also
referred to as `narratives' in the scenario literature. See also Narratives.
SDG-interaction score A seven-point scale (Nilsson et al., 2016)
used to rate interactions between mitigation options and the SDGs.
Scores range from +3 (indivisible) to -3 (cancelling), with a zero score
indicating `consistent' but with neither a positive or negative interaction.
The scale, as applied in this report, also includes direction (whether the
interaction is uni- or bi-directional) and confidence as assessed per IPCC
guidelines.
Sea ice Ice found at the sea surface that has originated from the freezing
of seawater. Sea ice may be discontinuous pieces (ice floes) moved on the
ocean surface by wind and currents (pack ice), or a motionless sheet
attached to the coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice concentration is the fraction
of the ocean covered by ice. Sea ice less than one year old is called firstyear ice. Perennial ice is sea ice that survives at least one summer. It may
be subdivided into second-year ice and multi-year ice, where multi-year
ice has survived at least two summers.
Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall) Sea level can
change, both globally and locally (relative sea level change) due to (1) a
change in ocean volume as a result of a change in the mass of water in
the ocean, (2) changes in ocean volume as a result of changes in ocean
water density, (3) changes in the shape of the ocean basins and changes

557

AI

Annex I

AI

Glossary

in the Earth's gravitational and rotational fields, and (4) local subsidence
or uplift of the land. Global mean sea level change resulting from change
in the mass of the ocean is called barystatic. The amount of barystatic
sea level change due to the addition or removal of a mass of water is
called its sea level equivalent (SLE). Sea level changes, both globally and
locally, resulting from changes in water density are called steric. Density
changes induced by temperature changes only are called thermosteric,
while density changes induced by salinity changes are called halosteric.
Barystatic and steric sea level changes do not include the effect of
changes in the shape of ocean basins induced by the change in the ocean
mass and its distribution.
Sea surface temperature (SST) The sea surface temperature is
the subsurface bulk temperature in the top few meters of the ocean,
measured by ships, buoys, and drifters. From ships, measurements of
water samples in buckets were mostly switched in the 1940s to samples
from engine intake water. Satellite measurements of skin temperature
(uppermost layer; a fraction of a millimeter thick) in the infrared or
the top centimeter or so in the microwave are also used, but must be
adjusted to be compatible with the bulk temperature.
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction The Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 outlines seven clear
targets and four priorities for action to prevent new, and to reduce
existing, disaster risks. The voluntary, non-binding agreement recognizes
that the State has the primary role to reduce disaster risk but that
responsibility should be shared with other stakeholders, including local
government and the private sector. Its aim is to achieve `substantial
reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and
in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of
persons, businesses, communities and countries.'
Sequestration

See Uptake.

Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)

See Pathways.

Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) Short-lived climate forcers
refers to a set of compounds that are primarily composed of those with
short lifetimes in the atmosphere compared to well-mixed greenhouse
gases, and are also referred to as near-term climate forcers. This set
of compounds includes methane (CH4), which is also a well-mixed
greenhouse gas, as well as ozone (O3) and aerosols, or their precursors,
and some halogenated species that are not well-mixed greenhouse gases.
These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal to
centennial time scales, and so their effect on climate is predominantly
in the first decade after their emission, although their changes can still
induce long-term climate effects such as sea level change. Their effect
can be cooling or warming. A subset of exclusively warming short-lived
climate forcers is referred to as short-lived climate pollutants. See also
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF).
Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) See Short-lived climate
forcers (SLCF).
Sink A reservoir (natural or human, in soil, ocean, and plants) where a
greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas is stored.
Note that UNFCCC Article 1.8 refers to a sink as any process, activity or
mechanism which removes a greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor
of a greenhouse gas from the atmosphere. See also Uptake.
Small island developing states (SIDS) Small island developing
states (SIDS), as recognised by the United Nations OHRLLS (Office of
the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States), are a distinct
group of developing countries facing specific social, economic and
environmental vulnerabilities (UN-OHRLLS, 2011). They were recognized

558

as a special case both for their environment and development at the
Rio Earth Summit in Brazil in 1992. Fifty-eight countries and territories
are presently classified as SIDS by the UN OHRLLS, with 38 being UN
member states and 20 being Non-UN Members or Associate Members of
the Regional Commissions (UN-OHRLLS, 2018).
Social cost of carbon (SCC) The net present value of aggregate
climate damages (with overall harmful damages expressed as a number
with positive sign) from one more tonne of carbon in the form of carbon
dioxide (CO2), conditional on a global emissions trajectory over time.
Social costs The full costs of an action in terms of social welfare
losses, including external costs associated with the impacts of this action
on the environment, the economy (GDP, employment) and on the society
as a whole.
Social-ecological systems An integrated system that includes
human societies and ecosystems, in which humans are part of nature.
The functions of such a system arise from the interactions and
interdependence of the social and ecological subsystems. The system's
structure is characterized by reciprocal feedbacks, emphasising that
humans must be seen as a part of, not apart from, nature. This definition
builds from Arctic Council (2016) and Berkes and Folke (1998).
Social inclusion A process of improving the terms of participation
in society, particularly for people who are disadvantaged, through
enhancing opportunities, access to resources, and respect for rights (UN
DESA, 2016).
Social justice

See Justice.

Social learning A process of social interaction through which people
learn new behaviours, capacities, values and attitudes.
Social value of mitigation activities (SVMA) Social, economic
and environmental value of mitigation activities that include, in addition
to their climate benefits, their co-benefits to adaptation and sustainable
development objectives.
Societal (social) transformation

See Transformation.

Socio-economic scenario A scenario that describes a possible
future in terms of population, gross domestic product (GDP), and other
socio-economic factors relevant to understanding the implications of
climate change. See also Baseline scenario, Emission scenario, Mitigation
scenario and Pathways.
Socio-technical transitions Socio-technical transitions are where
technological change is associated with social systems and the two are
inextricably linked.
Soil carbon sequestration (SCS) Land management changes
which increase the soil organic carbon content, resulting in a net removal
of CO2 from the atmosphere.
Soil moisture Water stored in the soil in liquid or frozen form. Rootzone soil moisture is of most relevance for plant activity.
Solar radiation management See Solar radiation modification (SRM).
Solar radiation modification (SRM) Solar radiation modification
refers to the intentional modification of the Earth's shortwave radiative
budget with the aim of reducing warming. Artificial injection of
stratospheric aerosols, marine cloud brightening and land surface albedo
modification are examples of proposed SRM methods. SRM does not
fall within the definitions of mitigation and adaptation (IPCC, 2012b, p.
2). Note that in the literature SRM is also referred to as solar radiation
management or albedo enhancement.

Glossary

Annex I

Stabilization (of GHG or CO2-equivalent concentration) A
state in which the atmospheric concentrations of one greenhouse gas
(GHG) (e.g., carbon dioxide) or of a CO2-equivalent basket of GHGs (or a
combination of GHGs and aerosols) remains constant over time.
Stranded assets Assets exposed to devaluations or conversion to
`liabilities' because of unanticipated changes in their initially expected
revenues due to innovations and/or evolutions of the business context,
including changes in public regulations at the domestic and international
levels.
Stratosphere The highly stratified region of the atmosphere above
the troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9 km at high
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50 km altitude. See
also Atmosphere, and Troposphere.
Sub-national actor Sub-national actors include state/provincial,
regional, metropolitan and local/municipal governments as well as nonparty stakeholders, such as civil society, the private sector, cities and other
sub-national authorities, local communities and indigenous peoples.
Substantive rights See Human rights.
Supply-side measures

See Demand- and supply-side measures.

Surface temperature See Global mean surface temperature (GMST),
Land surface air temperature, Global mean surface air temperature
(GSAT) and Sea surface temperature (SST).
Sustainability A dynamic process that guarantees the persistence of
natural and human systems in an equitable manner.
Sustainable development (SD) Development that meets the needs
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs (WCED, 1987) and balances social, economic and
environmental concerns. See also Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and Development pathways (under Pathways).
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The 17 global goals
for development for all countries established by the United Nations
through a participatory process and elaborated in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including ending poverty and hunger; ensuring
health and well-being, education, gender equality, clean water and
energy, and decent work; building and ensuring resilient and sustainable
infrastructure, cities and consumption; reducing inequalities; protecting
land and water ecosystems; promoting peace, justice and partnerships;
and taking urgent action on climate change. See also Sustainable
development (SD).
Technology transfer The exchange of knowledge, hardware and
associated software, money and goods among stakeholders, which
leads to the spread of technology for adaptation or mitigation. The
term encompasses both diffusion of technologies and technological
cooperation across and within countries.
Temperature overshoot The temporary exceedance of a specified
level of global warming, such as 1.5C. Overshoot implies a peak followed
by a decline in global warming, achieved through anthropogenic removal
of CO2 exceeding remaining CO2 emissions globally. See also Overshoot
pathways and Non-overshoot pathways (both under Pathways).
Tipping point A level of change in system properties beyond which
a system reorganizes, often abruptly, and does not return to the initial
state even if the drivers of the change are abated. For the climate system,
it refers to a critical threshold when global or regional climate changes
from one stable state to another stable state. See also Irreversibility.
Transformation A change in the fundamental attributes of natural
and human systems.

Societal (social) transformation
A profound and often deliberate shift initiated by communities toward
sustainability, facilitated by changes in individual and collective values
and behaviours, and a fairer balance of political, cultural, and institutional
power in society.
Transformation pathways

See Pathways.

Transformational adaptation

See Adaptation.

AI

Transformative change A system-wide change that requires more
than technological change through consideration of social and economic
factors that, with technology, can bring about rapid change at scale.
Transient climate response

See Climate sensitivity.

Transient climate response to cumulative CO2 emissions
(TCRE) The transient global average surface temperature change per
unit cumulative CO2 emissions, usually 1000 GtC. TCRE combines both
information on the airborne fraction of cumulative CO2 emissions (the
fraction of the total CO2 emitted that remains in the atmosphere, which
is determined by carbon cycle processes) and on the transient climate
response (TCR). See also Transient climate response (under Climate
sensitivity).
Transit-oriented development (TOD) An approach to urban
development that maximizes the amount of residential, business and
leisure space within walking distance of efficient public transport, so as
to enhance mobility of citizens, the viability of public transport and the
value of urban land in mutually supporting ways.
Transition The process of changing from one state or condition
to another in a given period of time. Transition can be in individuals,
firms, cities, regions and nations, and can be based on incremental or
transformative change.
Tropical cyclone The general term for a strong, cyclonic-scale
disturbance that originates over tropical oceans. Distinguished from
weaker systems (often named tropical disturbances or depressions) by
exceeding a threshold wind speed. A tropical storm is a tropical cyclone
with one-minute average surface winds between 18 and 32 m s-1. Beyond
32 m s-1, a tropical cyclone is called a hurricane, typhoon, or cyclone,
depending on geographic location. See also Extratropical cyclone.
Troposphere The lowest part of the atmosphere, from the surface
to about 10 km in altitude at mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km at high
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average), where clouds and weather
phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures generally decrease
with height. See also Atmosphere and Stratosphere.
Uncertainty A state of incomplete knowledge that can result from
a lack of information or from disagreement about what is known or
even knowable. It may have many types of sources, from imprecision in
the data to ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, incomplete
understanding of critical processes, or uncertain projections of human
behaviour. Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative
measures (e.g., a probability density function) or by qualitative
statements (e.g., reflecting the judgment of a team of experts) (see Moss
and Schneider, 2000; IPCC, 2004; Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See also
Confidence and Likelihood.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) The UNFCCC was adopted in May 1992 and opened for
signature at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. It entered into force
in March 1994 and as of May 2018 had 197 Parties (196 States and the
European Union). The Convention's ultimate objective is the `stabilisation
of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that
would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
559

Annex I

Glossary

system.' The provisions of the Convention are pursued and implemented
by two treaties: the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. See also
Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement.
Uptake The addition of a substance of concern to a reservoir. See also
Carbon sequestration and Sink.
AI

Vulnerability The propensity or predisposition to be adversely
affected. Vulnerability encompasses a variety of concepts and elements
including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope
and adapt. See also Exposure, Hazard and Risk.
Water cycle

See Hydrological cycle.

Well-being A state of existence that fulfils various human needs,
including material living conditions and quality of life, as well as the
ability to pursue one's goals, to thrive, and feel satisfied with one's life.
Ecosystem well-being refers to the ability of ecosystems to maintain their
diversity and quality.
Zero emissions commitment

560

See Climate change commitment.

Glossary

Annex I

References
Arctic Council, 2013: Glossary of terms. In: Arctic Resilience Interim Report 2013.
Stockholm Environment Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm,
Sweden, pp. viii.
Carson, M. and G. Peterson (eds.), 2016: Arctic Resilience Report 2016. Stockholm Environment Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden, 218 pp.
Berkes, F. and C. Folke, 1998: Linking Social and Ecological Systems: Management
Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 459 pp.
Culwick, C. and K. Bobbins, 2016: A Framework for a Green Infrastructure Planning
Approach in the Gauteng City-Region. GCRO Research Report No. 04, Gauteng
City-Region Observatory (GRCO), Johannesburg, South Africa, 127 pp.
FAO, 2001: Glossary. In: The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2001. Food and
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, pp. 49-50.
FAO, 2013: Food wastage footprint: Impacts on natural resources. Summary report.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy,
63 pp.
FAO, 2018: Climate-Smart Agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO). Retrieved from: www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture.
Fung, A. and E.O. Wright (eds.), 2003: Deepening Democracy: Institutional Innovations in Empowered Participatory Governance. Verso, London, UK, 312 pp.
Helpman, E. (ed.), 1998: General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 315 pp.
IBI, 2018: Frequently Asked Questions About Biochar: What is biochar? International
Biochar Initiative (IBI). Retrieved from: https://biochar-international.org/faqs.
IOM, 2018: Key Migration Terms. International Organization for Migration (IOM).
Retrieved from: www.iom.int/key-migration-terms.
IPCC, 2000: Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry: A Special Report of the
IPCC. [Watson, R.T., I.R. Noble, B. Bolin, N.H. Ravindranath, D.J. Verardo, and D.J.
Dokken (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 375 pp.
IPCC, 2003: Definitions and Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions from
Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of Other
Vegetation Types. [Penman, J., M. Gytarsky, T. Hiraishi, T. Krug, D. Kruger, R. Pipatti,
L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, K. Tanabe, and F. Wagner (eds.)]. Institute for
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES), Hayama, Kanagawa, Japan, 32 pp.
IPCC, 2004: IPCC Workshop on Describing Scientific Uncertainties in Climate Change
to Support Analysis of Risk of Options. Workshop Report. Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 138 pp.
IPCC, 2011: Workshop Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Workshop on Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Marine Biology and Ecosystems. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner,
M.D. Mastrandrea, M. Tignor, and K.L. Ebi (eds.)]. IPCC Working Group II Technical Support Unit, Carnegie Institution, Stanford, California, United States of
America, 164 pp.
IPCC, 2012a: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). [Field, C.B., V. Barros,
T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K.
Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.
IPCC, 2012b: Meeting Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Expert Meeting on Geoengineering. IPCC Working Group III Technical Support
Unit, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam, Germany, 99 pp.
ISO, 2018: ISO 14044:2006. Environmental management - Life cycle assessment
- Requirements and guidelines. International Standards Organisation (ISO).
Retrieved from: www.iso.org/standard/38498.html.
Jagers, S.C. and J. Stripple, 2003: Climate Governance Beyond the State. Global
Governance, 9(3), 385-399, www.jstor.org/stable/27800489.
Mastrandrea, M.D. et al., 2010: Guidance Note for Lead Authors of the IPCC Fifth
Assessment Report on Consistent Treatment of Uncertainties. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 6 pp.
MEA, 2005: Appendix D: Glossary. In: Ecosystems and Human Well-being:
Current States and Trends. Findings of the Condition and Trends Working Group
[Hassan, R., R. Scholes, and N. Ash (eds.)]. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(MEA). Island Press, Washington DC, USA, pp. 893-900.
Mechler, R., L.M. Bouwer, T. Schinko, S. Surminski, and J. Linnerooth-Bayer (eds.), in
press: Loss and Damage from Climate Change: Concepts, Methods and Policy
Options. Springer International Publishing, 561 pp.

Mitchell, T. and S. Maxwell, 2010: Defining climate compatible development. CDKN
ODI Policy Brief November 2010/A, Climate & Development Knowledge
Network (CDKN), 6 pp.
Moss, R.H. and S.H. Schneider, 2000: Uncertainties in the IPCC TAR: Recommendations to Lead Authors for More Consistent Assessment and Reporting. In: Guidance Papers on the Cross Cutting Issues of the Third Assessment Report of the
IPCC [Pachauri, R., T. Taniguchi, and K. Tanaka (eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 33-51.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2008: Towards New Scenarios for Analysis of Emissions, Climate
Change, Impacts, and Response Strategies. Technical Summary. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 25 pp.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2010: The next generation of scenarios for climate change research
and assessment. Nature, 463(7282), 747-756, doi:10.1038/nature08823.
MRFCJ, 2018: Principles of Climate Justice. Mary Robinson Foundation For Climate
Justice (MRFCJ). Retrieved from: www.mrfcj.org/principles-of-climate-justice.
Nilsson, M., D. Griggs, and M. Visbeck, 2016: Policy: Map the interactions between Sustainable Development Goals. Nature, 534(7607), 320-322, doi:10.1038/534320a.
O'Neill, B.C., 2000: The Jury is Still Out on Global Warming Potentials. Climatic
Change, 44(4), 427-443, doi:10.1023/A:1005582929198.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research:
the concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 122(3), 387-
400, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0905-2.
O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 169-180, doi:10.1016j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
Peters, B.G. and J. Pierre, 2001: Developments in intergovernmental relations:
towards multi-level governance. Policy & Politics, 29(2), 131-135,
doi:10.1332/0305573012501251.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land
use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global Environmental Change, 42, 153-168, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Sarmiento, H. and C. Tilly, 2018: Governance Lessons from Urban Informality. Politics
and Governance, 6(1), 199-202, doi:10.17645/pag.v6i1.1169.
Tabara, J.D., J. Jager, D. Mangalagiu, and M. Grasso, 2018: Defining transformative
climate science to address high-end climate change. Regional Environmental
Change, 1-12, doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1288-8.
Termeer, C.J.A.M., A. Dewulf, and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational change:
governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a continuous
change perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
60(4), 558-576, doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
UN, 1992: Article 2: Use of Terms. In: Convention on Biological Diversity. United
Nations (UN), pp. 3-4.
UN, 1998: Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2,
United Nations (UN) Economic and Social Council, 14 pp.
UN, 2015: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A/
RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New York, NY, USA, 35 pp.
UN DESA, 2016: Identifying social inclusion and exclusion. In: Leaving no one behind:
the imperative of inclusive development. Report on the World Social Situation
2016. ST/ESA/362, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UN DESA), New York, NY, USA, pp. 17-31.
UNESCO, 2018: Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
Retrieved from: www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/priority-areas/
links/related-information/what-is-local-and-indigenous-knowledge.
UNFCCC, 2013: Reporting and accounting of LULUCF activities under the Kyoto Protocol. United Nations Framework Convention on Climatic Change (UNFCCC), Bonn,
Germany. Retrieved from: http://unfccc.int/methods/lulucf/items/4129.php.
UNISDR, 2009: 2009 UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. United
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva,
Switzerland, 30 pp.
UNOHCHR, 2018: What are Human rights? UN Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (UNOHCHR). Retrieved from:
www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Pages/whatarehumanrights.aspx.
UN-OHRLLS, 2011: Small Island Developing States: Small Islands Big(ger) Stakes.
Office for the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS),
New York, NY, USA, 32 pp.

561

AI

Annex I

AI

UN-OHRLLS, 2018: Small Island Developing States: Country profiles. Office for the
High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS). Retrieved from:
http://unohrlls.org/about-sids/country-profiles.
UN-REDD, 2009: Measurement, Assessment, Reporting and Verification (MARV):
Issues and Options for REDD. Draft Discussion Paper, United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (UN-REDD), Geneva, Switzerland, 12 pp.
WCED, 1987: Our Common Future. World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), Geneva, Switzerland, 400 pp., doi:10.2307/2621529.
Willems, S. and K. Baumert, 2003: Institutional Capacity and Climate Actions. COM/
ENV/EPOC/IEA/SLT(2003)5, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 50 pp.

562

Glossary

AII

Annex II: Acronyms

This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Annex II: Acronyms. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context
of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. MoufoumaOkia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor,
and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

563

Annex II

AII

Acronyms

atm

Microatmospheres

1.5DS

1.5 Degree Scenario

2DS

2 Degree Scenario

ACCESS

Australian Community
Climate and Earth-System Simulator

ACCMIP

Atmospheric Chemistry and
Climate Model Intercomparison Project

ACCRN

The Asian Cities Climate
Change Resilience Network

ACOLA

Australian Council of Learned Academies

ACs

Air Conditioners

ADB

Asian Development Bank

ADVANCE

Advanced Model Development and Validation
for the Improved Analysis of Costs and Impacts
of Mitigation Policies

BET

Basic Energy systems, Economy, Environment,
and End-use Technology Model

BEV

Battery Electric Vehicle

BNEF

Bloomberg New Energy Finance

BNU

Beijing Normal University

BRT

Bus Rapid Transit

cm

Centimetres

C

Carbon

CA

Conservation Agriculture

CAF

Corporacion Andina de Fomento
(Development Bank of Latin America)

CAM

Central America/Mexico
or Community Atmosphere Model

CAMx

Comprehensive Air Quality Model with Extensions

CanESM

Canadian Earth System Model

CanRCM

Canadian Regional Climate Model

CAR

Small Islands Regions Caribbean

CAS

Central Asia

Cat-HM

Catchment-scale Hydrological Models

CbA

Community-based Adaptation

CBA

Cost-Benefit Analysis

CBD

Convention on Biological Diversity

CBDR-RC

Common But Differentiated Responsibilities
and Respective Capabilities

CBS & GNH

Centre for Bhutan Studies
and Gross National Happiness Research

AEZ

Agro-Ecological Zone

AfDB

African Development Bank

AFOLU

Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land-Use

AGCM

Atmospheric General Circulation Model

AI

Artificial Intelligence

AIM

Asia-Pacific Integrated Model

ALA

Alaska/Northwest Canada

AMAP

Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme

AMOC

Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation

AMP

Adjusting Mitigation Pathway

AMZ

Amazon

ANT

Antarctica

CC

Carbon Capture

APEX

Air Pollutants Exposure Model

CCAM

Conformal Cubic Atmospheric Model

AR

Afforestation and Reforestation

CCC

Constant Composition Commitment

AR4

IPCC Fourth Assessment Report

CCCma

AR5

IPCC Fifth Assessment Report

Canadian Centre for Climate
Modelling and Analysis

AR6

IPCC Sixth Assessment Report

CCRIF

Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility

ARC

Arctic

CCS

Carbon dioxide Capture and Storage

ASEAN

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

CCSM

Community Climate System Model

ASIA

Non-OECD Asia

CCT

Cirrus Cloud Thinning

AUD

Australian Dollar

CCU

Carbon dioxide Capture and Utilisation

B2DS

Beyond 2 Degrees Scenario

CCUS

Carbon dioxide Capture, Utilisation and Storage

BASIC

Brazil, South Africa, India, China

CDD

Consecutive Dry Days

BC

Black Carbon

CD-LINKS

BCC-CSM

Beijing Climate Center Climate System Model

Linking Climate and Development Policies
- Leveraging International
Networks and Knowledge Sharing

BCM

Bergen Climate Model

CDM

Clean Development Mechanism

BECCS

Bioenergy with Carbon
dioxide Capture and Storage

CDP

Carbon Disclosure Project

CDR

Carbon Dioxide Removal

564

Acronyms

Annex II

CEA

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis

CEC

Clean Energy Council

CEDS

Community Emissions Data System

CEMICS

Contextualizing Climate Engineering and Mitigation:
Illusion, Complement or Substitute?

CES

Constant Elasticity of Substitution

CESM

Community Earth System Model

CEU

Central Europe

CFCs

Chlorofluorocarbons

CGCM

Coupled Global Climate Model

CGE

Computable General Equilibrium

CGI

Canada/Greenland/Iceland

CGIAR

Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research

CH4

Methane

CHP

Combined Heat and Power

CI

Confidence Interval

CIRED

Centre International de Recherche sur
l'Environnement et le Developpement

CRISPR

Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeats

C-ROADS

Climate Rapid Overview And Decision-support
Simulator

CRU

Climatic Research Unit

CSA

Climate-Smart Agriculture

CSC

Climate Service Center Germany

CSDI

Cold Spell Duration Index

CSIRO

Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation

CSP

Concentrated Solar Power

CSR

Corporate Social Responsibility

CTC

Covenant Territorial Coordinator

CWD

Consecutive Wet Days

DACCS

Direct Air Carbon dioxide Capture and Storage

DACS

Direct Air Capture and Storage

DALY

Disability Adjusted Life Year

DICE

Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy model

DJF

December, January, February

AII

CISL

Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership

DM8H

Daily Maximum 8-Hour exposure

CLM

Climate Limited-area Modelling

DNE21+

Dynamic New Earth 21 model

CMAQ

Community Multiscale Air Quality Modeling System

DOE

Department of Energy (USA)

CMIP3

Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 3

DRI

Direct Reduced Iron

CMIP5

Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5

DRM

Disaster Risk Management

CMIP6

Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6

DTU

Technical University of Denmark

CNA

Central North America

E

Equilibrium, Evaporation or Evapotranspiration

CNRM

Centre National de Recherches Meteorologiques

EAF

East Africa

CO

Carbon monoxide

EAIS

East Antarctic Ice Sheet

CO2

Carbon dioxide

EAS

East Asia

CO2e

Carbon dioxide equivalent

EbA

Ecosystems-based Adaptation

CO2eq

Carbon dioxide equivalent

EC

European Commission

CoM

Covenant of Mayors

ECF

European Climate Foundation

COP

Conference of the Parties

ECMWF

COPPE-COFFEE

Programa de Planejamento Energetico -
COmputable Framework For Energy and
the Environment

European Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasts

ECS

Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity

EDGAR

Emission Database for Global Atmospheric
Research

EEA

European Environment Agency

EGMAM

ECHO-G Middle Atmosphere Model

E-HYPE

European Hydrological Predictions
for the Environment

EJ

Exajoules

EMEP

European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme

CORDEX

Coordinated Regional
Climate Downscaling Experiment

COSMO

Consortium for Small-scale Modeling

CRCM

Canadian Regional Climate Model

CRDPs

Climate-Resilient Development Pathways

CRIEPI

Institut Central de Recherche des Industries
Electriques

565

Annex II

AII

Acronyms

EMF

Energy Modeling Forum

F-gas

Fluorinated gases

EMIC

Earth-system Model of Intermediate Complexity

FGOALS

ENA

East North America

Flexible Global Ocean-Atmosphere-Land
System model

ENSO

El Nino-Southern Oscillation

FIO

First Institute of Oceanography

EOR

Enhanced Oil Recovery

FMNR

Farmer Managed Natural Regeneration

EPA

Environmental Protection Agency (USA)

FUND

Climate Framework for Uncertainty,
Negotiation, and Distribution model

EPIs

Energy-Intensive Processing Industries

FUSSR

Former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

ERA

ECMWF ReAnalysis

g

Grams

ERF

Effective Radiative Forcing

GAMS

General Algebraic Modeling System

ERFaci

Effective Radiative Forcing from aerosol-cloud
interactions

GBAM

Ground-Based Albedo Modification

ERFari

Effective Radiative Forcing from aerosol-radiation
interactions

GCAM

Global Change Assessment Model

GCC

Gulf Cooperative Council

ESCOs

Energy Service Companies

GCEC

Global Commission on the Economy and Climate

ESL

Extreme Sea Level

GCM

General Circulation Model or Global Climate Model

ESM

Earth System Model

GCP

Global Carbon Project

ESR

Empirical Scaling Relationship

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

ESRB ASC

European Systemic Risk Board Advisory
Scientific Committee

GE

General Equilibrium

GEA

Global Energy Assessment

ESRL

NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory

GEM-E3

Eta-CPTEC

Eta Centro de Previsao do Tempo e
Estudos Climaticos

General Equilibrium Model for Economy Energy - Environment

GENeSYS-MOD

Global Energy System Model

ETP

Pacific Islands region [3] or Energy Technology
Perspectives model

GeSI

Global e-Sustainability Initiative

ETS

Emission Trading Scheme

GFCF

Gross Fixed Capital Formation

EU

European Union

GFDL

Geophysical Fluid Dynamic Laboratory

EU-FP6

European Union Sixth Framework Programme

GFR

Grid Flexibility Resources

EUG4

France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom

Gha

Gigahectares

EURO-CORDEX

European branch of the Coordinated Regional
Climate Downscaling Experiment

GHCNDEX

Global Historical Climatology Network -
Daily climate Extremes

EV

Electric Vehicle

GHGs

Greenhouse Gases

EW

Enhanced Weathering

GHM

Global Hydrological Models

FAIR

Finite Amplitude Impulse Response model

GIS

Greenland Ice Sheet

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations

GISS

Goddard Institute for Space Studies

GISTEMP

Database Collection of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations

Goddard Institute for Space Studies Surface
Temperature Analysis

GJ

Gigajoules

FAQ

Frequently Asked Questions

GLEAM

Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model

FARM

Future Agricultural Resources Model

Glob-HM

Global Hydrological Model

Fe

Iron

GLOBIOM

GLObal BIOsphere Management model

FE

Final Energy

GLOFs

Glacial Lake Outburst Floods

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency (USA)

GM

Genetically Modified

FF

Fossil Fuel

GMO

Genetically Modified Organism

FF&I

Fossil-Fuel combustion and Industrial processes

GMSL

Global Mean Sea Level

FAOSTAT

566

Acronyms

Annex II

GMST

Global Mean Surface Temperature

ICSU

International Council for Science

GMT

Global Mean Temperature

ICT

Information and Communication Technology

GNHI

Gross National Happiness Index

IEA

International Energy Agency

GPP

Gross Primary Productivity

IEAGHG

IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme

GPT

General Purpose Technologies

IFAD

International Fund for Agricultural Development

GRAPE

Global Relationship Assessment to Protect
the Environment model

IFPRI

International Food Policy Research Institute

IGCC

Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle

GSAT

Global mean Surface Air Temperature

IIASA

International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis

Gt

Gigatonne

IIF

Institute of International Finance

GTP

Global Temperature-change Potential

iLUC

Indirect Land-Use Change

GWA

Government of Western Australia

IMACLIM-NLU

GWP

Global Warming Potential or Gross World Product

IMpact Assessment of CLIMate policies model -
Nexus Land-Use model

ha

Hectares

IMAGE

Integrated Model to Assess the Global Environment

H2

Hydrogen

IMF

International Monetary Fund

HadCM

Hadley Centre Coupled Model

IMO

International Maritime Organization

HadCRUT

Hadley Centre Climatic Research Unit Gridded
Surface Temperature Data Set

IMPACT2C

Quantifying Projected Impacts under 2C Warming

INDCs

Intended Nationally Determined Contributions

HadEX

Hadley Centre Global Climate Extremes index

INM

Russian Institute for Numerical Mathematics

HadGEM

Hadley Centre Global Environmental Model

IOM

International Organization for Migration

HadRM

Hadley Centre Regional Model

IoT

Internet of Things

HAPPI

Half a degree Additional warming,
Prognosis and Projected Impacts

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

HDV

Heavy-Duty Vehicle

IPSL

Institute Pierre Simon Laplace

HEV

Hybrid Electric Vehicle

IRENA

International Renewable Energy Agency

HFCs

Hydrofluorocarbons

ISIMIP

Inter-Sectoral Impact Model Intercomparison
Project

HLCCP

High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices

ISO

International Standards Organisation

HLPE

High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security
and Nutrition

ISSC

International Social Science Council

HSRTF

Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force

ITF

International Transport Forum

HTM

Holocene Thermal Maximum

IUCN

International Union for Conservation of Nature

HYMOD

HYdrological MODel

IWG

Interagency Working Group on Social Cost
of Greenhouse Gases

IAEA

International Atomic Energy Agency

IWRM

Integrated Water Resources Management

IAMC

Integrated Assessment Modelling Consortium

JeDi

Jena Diversity-Dynamic Global Vegetation Model

IAMs

Integrated Assessment Models

JJA

June, July, August

IBA

International Bar Association

JMA

Japan Meteorological Agency

IBI

International Biochar Initiative

JRA-55

Japanese 55-year Reanalysis

ICAMS

Integrated Climate and Air Quality
Modeling System

JRC

European Commission - Joint Research Centre

ICEM

International Centre for Environmental
Management

ICLEI

International Council for Local Environmental
Initiatives

ICPDR

International Commission for the Protection
of the Danube River

JULES

Joint United Kingdom Land Environment Simulator

kcal cap day

Kilocalories per capita per day

km

Kilometres

kt

Kilotonnes

kWh

Kilowatt hours

-1

-1

567

AII

Annex II

AII

Acronyms

MER

Market Exchange Rates

MERET

Managing Environmental Resources to
Enable Transitions

MERGE-ETL

Model for Evaluating Regional and Global Effects
of greenhouse gas reduction policies -
Endogenous Technology Learning

MESSAGE

Model for Energy Supply Systems And their
General Environmental impact

Mha

Megahectare

MIROC

Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate

MISI

Marine Ice Sheet Instability

MIT IGSM

Massachusetts Institute of Technology Integrated
Global System Model

Last Interglacial

MJ

Megajoules

LLCFs

Long-Lived Climate Forcers

MoCC

LNG

Liquefied Natural Gas

Ministry of Climate Change and Adaptation
(Government of Vanuatu)

LPG

Liquefied Petroleum Gas

MOHC

Met Office Hadley Centre

LPJmL

Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land model

MOPEX

Model Parameter Estimation Experiment

LTA

Land Transport Authority of Singapore

MPAs

Marine Protected Areas

LTGG

Long-Term Global Goal

MPI

Max-Planck-Institut fur Meteorologie
(Max Planck Institute for Meteorology)

LUC

Land-Use Change

MPWP

Mid Pliocene Warm Period

LULUCF

Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry

MRFCJ

Mary Robinson Foundation - Climate Justice

m

Metres

MRI

m3 cap-1 yr-1

Cubic metres per capita per year

Meteorological Research Institute of
Japan Meteorological Agency

mg

Milligrams

MRV

Measurement, Reporting and Verification

mL

Millilitres

MSR

Multi-Sector Risk score

mm

Millimetres

Mt

Megatonnes

M&E

Monitoring and Evaluation

N

Nitrogen

Ma

Million years ago

N2O

Nitrous oxide

MAC

Marginal Abatement Cost

NAP

National Adaptation Plan

MacPDM

Macroscale - ProbabilityDistributed Moisture
Model

NAS

North Asia

NASA

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

MAGICC

Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse Gas
Induced Climate Change

NASEM

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine

MAgPIE

Model of Agricultural Production and its Impact
on the Environment

NAU

North Australia

MAM

March, April, May

NCAR

National Center for Atmospheric Research

MCB

Marine Cloud Brightening

NCCARF

National Climate Change Adaptation Research
Facility

MCCA

Mercado Comun Centroamericano

NCE

New Climate Economy

MDB

Group of Multilateral Development Banks

NDCs

Nationally Determined Contributions

MDGs

Millennium Development Goals

NEA

Nuclear Energy Agency

MEA

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment

NEB

North-East Brazil

MED

South Europe/Mediterranean

NEC

MEPS

Minimum Energy Performance Standards

National Environment Commission
(Royal Government of Bhutan)

KNMI

Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch Instituut
(Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute)

L

Litres

L&D

Loss and Damage

LAM

Latin America and Caribbean

LDCs

Least Developed Countries

LDMz-INCA

Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique
- INteractions between Chemistry and Aerosols

LDV

Light-Duty Vehicle

LE

Limited Evidence

LED

Low Energy Demand or Light Emitting Diode

LGM

Last Glacial Maximum

LIG

568

Acronyms

Annex II

PDSI

Palmer Drought Severity Index

PE

Primary Energy or Partial Equilibrium

PET

Physiologically Equivalent Temperature or
Potential Evapo-Transpiration

Non-Governmental Organization

PFCs

Perfluorocarbons

NH3

Ammonia

Pg

Petagrams

NHD

Number of Hot Days

PHEV

Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle

NITI Aayog

National Institution for Transforming India

PIK

NMVOC

Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds

Potsdam-Institut fur Klimafolgenforschung
(Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research)

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

PM10

Particulate Matter with Aerodynamic
Diameter <10 m

NorESM

Norwegian Earth System Model

NOx

Nitrogen oxides

PM2.5

Particulate Matter with Aerodynamic
Diameter <2.5 m

NPCC

New York City Panel on Climate Change

POLES

NPP

Net Primary Productivity

Prospective Outlook on Long-term
Energy Systems model

NPV

Net Present Value

PPP

Purchasing Power Parity

NRC

National Research Council

PR

Probability Ratio

NSR

Northern Sea Route

PV

Photovoltaics

NTP

Pacific Islands region [2]

R&D

Research and Development

NYC

New York City

RCA

Rossby Centre Regional Atmospheric Model

NZAGRC

New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas
Research Center

RCI

Rotterdam Climate Initiative

RCM

Regional Climate Model

NETL

National Energy Technology Laboratory
(US Department of Energy)

NEU

North Europe

NF3

Nitrogen trifluoride

NGO

AII

O2

Oxygen

RCPs

Representative Concentration Pathways

O3

Ozone

REDD+

OA

Ocean Acidification or Ocean Alkalinization

OC

Organic Carbon

OECD

Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
forest Degradation; and the role of conservation,
sustainable management of forests and
enhancement of forest carbon stocks in
developing countries

ReEDS-IPM

OGCC

Optimal Gasification Combined Cycle

Regional Electricity Deployment System model -
Integrated Planning Model

OHCHR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

RegCM

Regional Climate Model system

REMIND

REgional Model of INvestments and Development

OIF

Ocean Iron Fertilisation

REN21

ORCHIDEE

ORganising Carbon and Hydrology In Dynamic
EcosystEms model

Renewable Energy Policy Network for
the 21st Century

RF

Radiative Forcing

ORR

NYC Mayor's Office of Recovery & Resiliency

RFC

Reason for Concern

OS

Overshoot

RGoB

Royal Government of Bhutan

pp

People

RMI

Rocky Mountain Institute

ppb

Parts per billion

RNCFC

Reference Non-CO2 Forcing Contribution

ppm

Parts per million

RNCTC

Reference Non-CO2 Temperature Contribution

ppt

Parts per thousand

Rx1day

Annual maximum 1-day precipitation

P

Precipitation or Phosphorous

Rx5day

Annual maximum 5-day precipitation

PAGE

Policy Analysis of the Greenhouse Effect model

SAF

Southern Africa

PAHO

Pan American Health Organization

SAH

Sahara

PCM

Parallel Climate Model

SAI

Stratospheric Aerosol Injection

569

Annex II

AII

Acronyms

SREX

IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risks of
Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaptation

SRM

Solar Radiation Modification

SROCC

IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere
in a Changing Climate

SSA

Southeastern South America

SSPs

Shared Socioeconomic Pathways

SST

Sea Surface Temperature

STP

Southern Tropical Pacific

SWAT

Soil & Water Assessment Tool

SWF

Social Welfare Function

SYR

IPCC Synthesis Report

t

Tonnes

tDM

Tonnes Dry Matter

tril$

Trillion dollars

T

Temperature or Transient

T&D

Transmission and Distribution

TCR

Transient Climate Response

TCRE

Transient Climate Response to cumulative
CO2 Emissions

Small Island Developing States

TEAP

Technology and Economic Assessment Panel

SIFMA

Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association

TFE

Thematic Focus Element

TFP

Total Factor Productivity

SLCFs

Short-Lived Climate Forcers

Tg

Teragrams

SLCPs

Short-Lived Climate Pollutants

TIB

Tibetan Plateau

SLR

Sea Level Rise

TNn

Coldest night-time temperature of the year

SM

Supplementary Material

TOD

Transit Oriented Development

SMA

Soil Moisture Anomalies

TS

Technical Summary

SMHI

Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute

Tt

Teratonnes

SO2

Sulphur dioxide

TTs

Transition Towns

SOLARIS HEPPA

SOLARIS High Energy Particle Precipitation
in the Atmosphere

TXx

Hottest daytime temperature of the year

SON

September, October, November

UCCRN

Urban Climate Change Research Network

SOx

Sulphur oxides

UHI

Urban Heat Islands

SPAs

Shared climate Policy Assumptions

UITP

Union Internationale des Transports Publics
(International Association of Public Transport)

SPC

Secretariat of the Pacific Community

UKCP

United Kingdom Climate Projections

SPEI

Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration
Index

UN

United Nations

SPI

Standardised Precipitation Index

UN DESA

United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs

SPM

Summary for Policymakers

UNCBD

United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity

SR1.5

IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

SRCCL

IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Land

UNEP

UN Environment

SRES

IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios

SAMS

South American Monsoon System

SAR

IPCC Second Assessment Report

SAS

South Asia

SAT

Surface Air Temperature

SAU

South Australia/New Zealand

SBSTA

Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological
Advice (UNFCCC)

SCC

Social Cost of Carbon

SCS

Soil Carbon Sequestration

SD

Sustainable Development

SDGs

Sustainable Development Goals

SDGVM

Sheffield Dynamic Global Vegetation Model

SDII

Simple Daily Intensity Index

SDSN

Sustainable Development Solutions Network

SEA

Southeast Asia

SEAPs

Sustainable Energy Action Plans

SED

Structured Expert Dialogue

SEM

Semi-Empirical Model

SF6

Sulphur hexafluoride

SFM

Sustainable Forest Management

SIDS

570

Acronyms

Annex II

UNEP-WCMC

UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre

WGII

IPCC Working Group II

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultura
Organization

WGIII

IPCC Working Group III

WHO

World Health Organization

UNFCCC

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change

WIM

Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss
and Damage

UNGA

United Nations General Assembly

WIO

West Indian Ocean

UNICEF

United Nations International Children's
Emergency Fund

WITCH

World Induced Technical Change Hybrid Model

UNISDR

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction

WMGHGs

Well-Mixed Greenhouse Gases

UN-OHRLLS

Office of the High Representative for the Least
Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States

WMO

World Meteorological Organization

WNA

West North America

WRF

Weather Research and Forecasting

WSA

West Coast South America

WSDI

Warm Spell Duration Index

WTO

World Trade Organization

UNRISD

United Nations Research Institute for
Social Development

UNSCEAR

United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation

UNU

United Nations University

yr

Year

UNU-EHS

United Nations University - Institute for
Environment and Human Security

ZEC

Zero Emissions Commitment

USD

United States Dollars

UV

Ultraviolet

VISIT

Vegetation Integrative Simulator for Trace Gases

VKT

Vehicle Kilometres of Travel

VOCs

Volatile Organic Compounds

w/

With

w/o

Without

w.r.t.

With respect to

W

Watts

WAF

West Africa

WAIS

West Antarctic Ice Sheet

WAS

West Asia

WBCSD

World Business Council for Sustainable Development

WBGU

Wissenschaftlicher Beirat der Bundesregierung
Globale Umweltveranderungen (German Advisory
Council on Global Change)

WBM

Water Balance Model

WCED

World Commission on Environment
and Development

WCRP

World Climate Research Programme

WEC

World Energy Council

WEF

Water-Energy-Food or World Economic Forum

WEM

World Energy Model

WEO

World Energy Outlook

WFP

World Food Programme

WGI

IPCC Working Group I

AII

571

AIII

Annex III: Contributors
to the IPCC Special Report
on Global Warming of 1.5C

This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Annex III: Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C. In: Global Warming of
1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels and related
global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of
climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O.
Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews,
Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

573

Annex III

AIII

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

ABDUL HALIM, Sharina
Institute for Environment and
Development-LESTARI
Malaysia

BERRY, Peter
Climate Change and Innovation Bureau
Health Canada
Canada

CHEN, Yang
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences
China

ABDULLA, Amjad
Climate Change Department
Ministry of Environment and Energy
Maldives

BERTOLDI, Paolo
European Commission
Italy

CHEUNG, William
University of British Columbia
Canada

ACHLATIS, Michelle
University of Queensland
Australia/ Greece

BHASKAR CHOUDHARY, Bishwa
National Institute of Agricultural
Economics and Policy Research
India

CONNORS, Sarah
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/UK

ALEXANDER, Lisa
University of New South Wales
Australia

BINDI, Marco
University of Florence
Italy

ALLEN, Myles R.
University of Oxford
UK

BOER, Rizaldi
Center for Climate Risk and
Opportunity Management
Indonesia

CORREIA DE OLIVEIRA DE
PORTUGAL PEREIRA, Joana
IPCC WGIII Technical Support Unit
Imperial College London's Centre
for Environmental Policy
UK/Portugal

ANTWI-AGYEI, Philip
Kwame Nkrumah University of
Science and Technology
Ghana
ARAGON-DURAND, Fernando
Institute for Environmental Studies
Program on Sustainable Development
El Colegio de Mexico
Mexico
ARAOS, Malcolm
Ministry of Environment and Energy
Canada
BABIKER, Mustafa
Saudi Aramco
Sudan

BOYER, Christopher
University of Washington
USA
BRILLI, Lorenzo
University of Florence
IBIMET-CNR
Italy
BROWN, Sally
University of Southampton
UK
BUCKERIDGE, Marcos
University of Sao Paulo
Biosciences Institute
Brazil

CRAIG, Marlies
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
School of Life Sciences
University of KwaZulu-Natal
South Africa
CRAMER, Wolfgang
CNRS
Mediterranean Institute for
Biodiversity and Ecology
Aix-Marseille University
France/Germany
DASGUPTA, Dipak
The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)
India
DASGUPTA, Purnamita
Institute of Economic Growth
India

BYERS, Edward
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/Brazil

DE CONINCK, Heleen
Radboud University
Netherlands/EU

CALVIN, Katherine
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
USA

DE KLEIJNE, Kiane
Radboud University
Netherlands/EU

BELFER, Ella
McGill University
USA

CAMILLONI, Ines
Centro de Investigaciones del
Mar y la Atmosfera
University of Buenos Aires
Argentina

DEL MAR ZAMORA DOMINGUEZ, Maria
Mercator Research Institute on Global
Commons and Climate Change
Mexico

BENTON, Tim
University of Leeds
UK

CARTWRIGHT, Anton
African Centre for Cities
South Africa

BAKKER, Stefan
Netherlands
BANGALORE, Mook
London School of Economics
USA
BAZAZ, Amir
Indian Institute for Human Settlements
India

574

DEN ELZEN, Michel
PBL Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency
Netherlands

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

DIEDHIOU, Arona
Institut de Recherche pour le Developpement
Ivory Coast/Senegal

FIGUEROA, Maria
Copenhagen Business School
Danmark/Venezuela

DJALANTE, Riyanti
United Nations University
Institute for the Advanced Study
of Sustainability (UNU-IAS)
Japan/Indonesia

FINON, Dominique
Centre International de Recherches sur
l'Environnement et le Developpement
France

DONG, Wenjie
Sun Yat-sen University
China
DUBE, Opha Pauline
University of Botswana
Botswana
EAKIN, Hallie
Julie Ann Wrigley Global
Institute of Sustainability
USA
EBI, Kristie L.
University of Washington
USA
EDELENBOSCH, Oreane
Politecnico di Milano
Italy/Netherlands
ELGIZOULI IDRIS, Ismail
Private Consultancy
Sudan
ELLIS, Neville
University of Western Australia
Australia
EMMERLING, Johannes
Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei
Italy/Germany
ENGELBRECHT, Francois
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
South Africa
EVANS, Jason
University of New South Wales
Australia
FERRAT, Marion
IPCC WGIII Technical Support Unit
Imperial College London's Centre
for Environmental Policy
UK/France
FIFITA, Solomone
Pacific Community
Fiji/Tonga

FISCHER, Hubertus
Universitat Bern
Switzerland
FISCHLIN, Andreas
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Switzerland
FLATO, Greg
Environment and Climate Change Canada
Canada
FORD, James
University of Leeds
UK/ Canada
FORSTER, Piers
University of Leeds
UK
FRAEDRICH, Klaus
Universitat Hamburg
Germany
FUGLESTVEDT, Jan
CICERO Center for International
Climate Research
Norway

Annex III

GHERSI, Frederic
Centre International de Recherches sur
l'Environnement et le Developpement (CIRED)
CNRS
France
GILLETT, Nathan
Environment and Climate Change Canada
Canada
GINZBURG, Veronika
Institute of Global Climate and
Ecology Roshydromet
Russian Federation
GRANDIS, Adriana
University of Sao Paulo
Biosciences Institute
Brazil
GREVE, Peter
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/Germany
GUILLEN BOLANOS, Tania
Climate Service Center (GERICS)
Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht
Germany/Nicaragua

AIII

GUIOT, Joel
CNRS
Aix-Marseille University
France
GUPTA, Mukesh
Asian University for Women of Bangladesh
India

FUSS, Sabine
Mercator Research Institute on Global
Commons and Climate Change
Germany

HANASAKI, Naota
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan

GANASE, Anjani
University of Queensland
Australia/Trinidad and Tobago

HANDA, Collins
Technical University of Kenya
Kenya

GAO, Xuejie
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
China

HAROLD, Jordan
University of East Anglia
UK

GASSER, Thomas
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/France

HASEGAWA, Tomoko
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan

GATTUSO, Jean-Pierre
Institut du developpement durable et
des relations internationales (IDDRI)
CNRS
Sorbonne Universite
France

HAUGHEY, Eamon
School of Natural Sciences
Trinity College Dublin
Ireland
HAYES, Katie
University of Toronto
Canada

575

Annex III

HAYWARD, Bronwyn
University of Canterbury
New Zealand
HE, Chenmin
Peking University
China
HERTWICH, Edgar
Yale University
USA/Austria
HIJIOKA, Yasuaki
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan
HINGE SALILI, Diana
University of the South Pacific Laucala Campus
Vanuatu
HIRSCH, Annette
ETH Zurich
University of New South Wales
Switzerland/Australia
AIII

HOEGH-GULDBERG, Ove
Global Change Institute
University of Queensland
Australia
HOGLUND-ISAKSSON, Lena
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/Sweden
HOURCADE, Jean-Charles
Centre International de Recherches sur
l'Environnement et le Developpement (CIRED)
CNRS
France
HOWDEN, Mark
Climate Change Institute
Australian National University
Australia
HUMPHREYS, Stephen
London School of Economics
and Political Science
UK/Ireland
HUPPMANN, Daniel
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria

HUQ, Saleemul
International Centre for Climate
Change & Development
UK/Bengladesh

576

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

JACOB, Daniela
Climate Service Center Germany (GERICS)
Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht (HZG)
Germany
JAMES, Rachel
Environmental Change Institute
University of Oxford
UK
JIANG, Kejun
Energy Research Institute
China
JOHANSEN, Tom Gabriel
Infodesign Lab
Norway
JONES, Chris
Met Office Hadley Centre
UK
JUNG, Thomas
Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Centre for Polar
and Marine Research
Germany

KRINNER, Gerhard
Institut de Geosciences de l'Environnement
France
LAWRENCE, David
National Center for Athmospheric Research
USA
LENTON, Tim
University of Exeter
UK
LEY, Debora
Latinoamerica Renovable
Guatemala/Mexico
LIVERMAN, Diana
University of Arizona
USA
LUDERER, Gunnar
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany
MAHOWALD, Natalie
Cornell University
USA

KAINUMA, Mikiko
Institute for Global Environmental Strategies
Japan

MARCOTULLIO, Peter
CUNY Institute for Sustainable Cities
USA

KALA, Jatin
Murdoch University
Australia

MARENGO, Jose Antonio
National Centre for Monitoring and
Warning of Natural Disasters
Brazil/Peru

KANNINEN, Markku
University of Helsinki
Finland
KHESHGI, Haroon
ExxonMobil Research and
Engineering Company
USA
KLEIN, Richard
Stockholm Environment Institute
Netherlands/Germany
KOBAYASHI, Shigeki
Transport Institute of Central Japan
Japan
KRAKOVSKA, Svitlana
Ukrainian Hydrometeorological Institute
Ukraine
KRIEGLER, Elmar
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany

MARKANDYA, Anil
Basque Centre for Climate Change
Spain/UK
MASSERA, Omar
Instituto de Investigaciones en
Ecosistemas y Sustentabilidad
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico
Mexico
MASSON-DELMOTTE, Valerie
Co-Chair IPCC WGI
France
MATTHEWS, J. B. Robin
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/UK
MCCOLLUM, David
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/USA

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

MCINNES, Kathleen
Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation
Australia
MECHLER, Reinhard
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Germany
MEDHIN, Haileselassie Amaha
Ethiopian Development Research Institute
Ethiopia
MEHROTRA, Shagun
The World Bank
The New School
USA, India

Annex III

MUNDACA, Luis
Lund University
Sweden/Chile

PAZ, Shlomit
University of Haifa
Israel

NEWMAN, Peter
Curtin University
Australia

PEREIRA, Joy
Institute for Environment and Development
Malaysia

NICOLAI, Maike
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany

PEREZ, Rosa
Manila Observatory
Philippines

NOTZ, Dirk
Max-Planck-Institut fur Meteorologie
Germany

PETERSEN, Juliane
Climate Service Center Germany (GERICS)
Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht
Germany

NURSE, Leonard
The University of West Indies
Barbados

PETZOLD, Jan
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany

MEISSNER, Katrin J.
University of New South Wales Sydney
Australia

OKEM, Andrew
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
School of Life Sciences
University of KwaZulu Natal
South Africa/Nigeria

PICHS-MADRUGA, Ramon
Centre for World Economy Studies
Cuba

MILLAR, Richard
University of Oxford
UK

OKEREKE Chukwumerije
University of Reading
UK, Nigeria

PIDCOCK, Roz
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/UK

MINTENBECK, Katja
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany

OLSSON, Lennart
Uppsala University
Sweden

PINHO, Patricia Fernanda
University of Sao Paulo
Brazil

OPIO, Carolyn
Food and Agriculture Organization
Uganda

PIRANI, Anna
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
The Abdus Salam International
Centre for Theoretical Physics
Italy/UK

MEINSHAUSEN, Malte
The University of Melbourne
Australia/Germany

MITCHELL, Dann
University of Bristol
UK
MIX, Alan C
Oregon State University
USA
MORELLI, Angela
Infodesign Lab
Norway
MOUFOUMA-OKIA, Wilfran
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/Congo
MRABET, Rachid
National Institute of Agricultural
Research (INRA)
Morocco
MULUGETTA, Yacob
University College London
UK/Ethiopia

OPPENHEIMER, Michael
Princeton University
USA
PAIVA HENRIQUE, Karen
University of Western Australia
Brazil
PARKINSON, Simon
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Canada
PATHAK, Minal
IPCC WGIII Technical Support Unit
Ahmedabad University
India
PAYNE, Antony
University of Bristol
UK

AIII

PLAZZOTTA, Maxime
Meteo-France
Centre Naional de Recherches
Meteorologiques
France
POLOCZANSKA, Elvira
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany, UK
POPP, Alexander
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany
PORTNER, Hans-Otto
Co-Chair IPCC WGII
Germany

577

Annex III

PREUSCHMANN, Swantje
Climate Service Center Germany (GERICS)
Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht
Germany

ROGELJ, Joeri
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Belgium/Austria

PUROHIT, Pallay
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/India

ROJAS, Maisa
University of Chile
Chile

RAGA, Graciela
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico
Mexico/Argentina
RAHMAN, Mohammad Feisal
International Centre for Climate
Change and Development
Bengladesh
REISINGER, Andy
New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse
Gas Research Centre
New Zealand

AIII

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

REVI, Aromar
Indian Institute for Human Settlements
India
REVOKATOVA, Anastasia
Hydrometeorological Research
Centre of Russian Federation
Russian Federation
RHINEY, Kevon
Rutgers University
Jamaica
RIAHI, Keywan
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria
RIBES, Aurelien
Centre National de Recherches
Meteorologiques
France
RICHARDSON, Mark
USA/UK
RICKELS, Wilfried
Kiel Institute for the World Economy
Germany
ROBERTS, Debra
Co-Chair IPCC WGII
South Africa
ROBERTS, Timmons
Brown University
USA

578

SENEVIRATNE, Sonia I.
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Switzerland
SHERSTYUKOV, Boris
Russian Research Institute of
Hydrometeorological Information
World Data Centre
Russian Federation

ROY, Joyashree
Jadavpur University
Asian Institute of Technology
Thailand/India

SHINDELL, Drew
Duke University
USA

SANCHEZ, Roberto
El Colegio de la Frontera Norte
Mexico

SHUKLA, Priyadarshi R.
Co-Chair IPCC WGIII
India

SAUNDERS, Harry
Independent
Canada/USA

SILLMANN, Jana
Center for International Climate Research
Germany/Norway

SCHADEL, Christina
Northern Arizona University
USA/Switzerland

SINGH, Chandni
Indian Institute for Human Settlements
India

SCHAEFFER, Roberto
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Brazil

SKEA, Jim
Co-Chair IPCC WGIII
UK

SCHEUFFELE, Hanna
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany

SLADE, Raphael
IPCC WGIII Technical Support Unit
Imperial College London's Centre
for Environmental Policy
UK

SCHIPPER, Lisa
Environmental Change Institute
University of Oxford
UK/Sweden
SCHLEUSSNER, Carl-Friedrich
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Humboldt University
Germany
SCHMIDT, Jorn
Christian-Albrechts-Universitat zu Kiel
Germany
SCHULTZ, Seth
C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group
USA
SCOTT, Daniel
University of Waterloo
Canada
SEFERIAN, Roland
Centre National de Recherches
Meteorologiques
France

SMITH, Chris
University of Leeds
UK
SMITH, Christopher
UK
SMITH, Pete
University of Aberdeen
UK
SOLECKI, William
City University of New York
USA
SOME, Shreya
Jadavpur University
India
SPAROVEK, Gerd
Universidade de Sao Paulo
Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz
Brazil

Contributors to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

STEFFEN, Will
The Australian National University
Australia
STEG, Linda
University of Groningen
Netherlands
STEPHENSON, Kimberly
The University of the West Indies
Jamaica

URGE-VORSATZ, Diana
Department of Environmental
Sciences and Policy
Central European University
Hungary
URQUHART, Penny
Freelance climate resilient
development specialist
South Africa

Annex III

WEYER, Nora M
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany
WHYTE, Felicia
The University of the West Indies
Jamaica
WOLLENBERG, Eva
University of Vermont and the CGIAR
Research Program on Climate Change
Agriculture and Food Security
USA

STEPHENSON, Tannecia
The University of the West Indies
Jamaica

VAN DIEMEN, Renee
IPCC WGIII Technical Support Unit
Imperial College London's Centre
for Environmental Policy
UK/Netherlands

SUAREZ RODRIGUEZ, Avelino G.
Research Center for the World Economy
Cuba

VAN ROOIJ, Arjan
Netherlands

XIU, Yang
National Center for Climate Change
Strategy and International Cooperation
China

SUAREZ, Pablo
Red Cross Climate Centre
Argentina

VAN VALKENGOED, Anne
University of Groningen
Netherlands

YOHE, Gary
Wesleyan University
USA

SUGIYAMA, Taishi
The Canon Institute for Global Studies
Japan

VAUTARD, Robert
Laboratory for Sciences of
Climate and Environment
France

ZHAI, Panmao
Co-Chair IPCC WGI
China

SYLLA, Mouhamadou B
West African Science Service Center on
Climate Change and Adapted Land Use
Senegal
TAYLOR, Michael
The University of the West Indies
Jamaica
TEARIKI-RUATU, Nenenteiti
University of the South Pacific Laucala Campus
Kiribati
TEBBOTH, Mark
University of East Anglia
UK
THOMAS, Adelle
University of The Bahamas
Bahamas
THORNE, Peter
Maynooth University
Ireland/UK
TRUTNEVYTE, Evelina
University of Geneva
Switzerland/Lithuania
TSCHAKERT, Petra
University of Western Australia
Australia/Austria

VILARINO, Maria Virginia
Argentinean Business Council for
Sustainable Development
Argentina
WAIRIU, Morgan
University of the South Pacific
Solomon Islands
WAISMAN, Henri
Institut du developpement durable et
des relations internationales (IDDRI)
France
WARREN, Rachel
Tyndall Centre and School of
Environmental Sciences
UK
WARTENBURGER, Richard
ETH Zurich
Switzerland/Germany

AIII

ZHANG, Xuebin
Environment and Climate Change Canada
Canada
ZHOU, Guangsheng
Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences
China
ZHOU, Wenji
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/China
ZICKFELD, Kirsten
Simon Fraser University
Canada/Germany
ZOUGMORE, Robert B
Consultative Group for International
Agricultural Research
International Crops Research Institute
for the Semi-Arid Tropics
Burkina Faso/Mali

WEHNER, Michael
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
USA
WEWERINKE-SINGH, Margaretha
University of Leiden
Netherlands

579

AIV

Annex IV: Expert Reviewers
of the IPCC Special Report
on Global Warming of 1.5C

This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Annex IV: Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C. In: Global
Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels
and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to
the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V.,
P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

581

Annex IV

AAMAAS, Borgar
Center for International Climate Research
Norway

ALBEROLA, Emilie
Eco-Act
France

ARIKAN, Yunus
ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability
Germany

ABABNEH, Linah
Swedish University of Agriculture
and Cornell University
USA

ALCARAZ, Olga
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Spain

ARIMA, Jun
University of Tokyo
Japan

ALDRICH, Elizabeth
USA

ARTINANO, Begona
Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas
Medioambientales y Tecnologicas
Spain

ABANADES Carlos,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas
Spain
ACOSTA NAVARRO, Juan Camilo
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Spain
ADU-BOATENG, Afua
Training and Research Network
UK
ADVANI, Nikhil
World Wildlife Fund
USA
AGUILAR-AMUCHASTEGUI, Naikoa
World Wildlife Fund
USA

AIV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

AHMAD, Ijaz
Applied Systems Analysis Division
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission
Pakistan
AHMADI, Mohammad
Regional Meteorological MetOffice
Iran
AHN, Young-Hwan
Korea Energy Economics Institute
Republic of Korea
AKHTAR, Farhan
U.S. Department of State
Office of Global Change
USA
AKIMOTO, Keigo
Research Institute of Innovative
Technology for the Earth
Japan
AKPAN, Archibong
University of Ibadan
Nigeria
ALAM, Lubna
Institute for Environment and
Development (LESTARI)
Bangladesh

582

ALEXEEVA, Victoria
International Atomic Energy Agency
Austria
ALFIERI, Lorenzo
European Commission
Italy
ALI, Shaukat
Global Change Impact Studies Centre
Ministry of climate change
Pakistan
ALLEN, Myles
University of Oxford
Environmental Change Institute
UK
ALLWRIGHT, Gavin
International Windship Association
UK
ALPERT, Alice
United States Department of State
USA
AN, Nazan
Bogazici University Center for Climate
Change and Policy Studies
Turkey
ANDERSON, Cheryl
LeA International Consultants Ltd
New Zealand
ANDERSSON, Peter
Uppsala University
Sweden
ANDREWS, Nadine
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany/UK
ANORUO, Chukwuma
Imo State University Owerri
Nigeria
AQUINO, Sergio
University of British Columbia
Canada

AYEB-KARLSSON, Sonja
University of Sussex
UNU-EHS
UK
AZEITEIRO, Ulisses
Departamento de Biologia & CESAM
University of Aveiro
Portugal
BABAEIAN, Iman
Climatological Research Institute
Iran
BABIKER, Mustafa
Saudi Aramco
Sudan
BAHAMONDES DOMINGUEZ,
Angela Andrea
University of Southampton
UK/Chile
BAKHTIARI, Fatemeh
Researcher at UNEP DTU partnership
Denmark
BALA, Govindasamy
Indian Institute of Science
India
BARAU, Aliyu
Faculty of Earth and Environmental Sciences
Bayero University Kano
Nigeria
BARBOSA ARAUJO SOARES
SNIEHOTTA, Vera
Newcastle University
UK
BARDHAN, Suchandra
Jadavpur University
India
BARKER, Timothy
DIYNGO.org
UK

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

Annex IV

BLUM, Mareike
University of Freiburg
Germany

BREYER, Christian
Lappeenranta University of Technology
Finland

BOBIN, Jean Louis
Universite Pierre et Marie Curie
France

BRICENO-ELIZONDO, Elemer
Instituto Tecnologico de Costa Rica
Costa Rica

BODMAN, Roger
The University of Melbourne
Australia

BROWN, Louis
Manchester Business School
UK

BONDUELLE, Antoine
E&E Consultant
France

BROWN, Sally
University of Southampton
UK

BAUER, Nico
Potsdam Institut for Climate Impact Research
Germany

BOONEEADY, Prithiviraj
Mauritius Meteorological Services
Mauritius

BRUCKNER, Thomas
University of Leipzig
Germany

BAYAS, Dilipsing
International Consultant (Roster)
UN Global Pulse Lab
India

BOOTH, Mary
Partnership for Policy Integrity
USA

BRUNNER, Beat
Lightning MultiCom SA
Switzerland

BELLAMY, Rob
University of Oxford
UK

BORGES LANDAEZ, Pedro Alfredo
Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research
UNFCCC Technology Executive Committee
Venezuela

BUDINIS, Sara
Imperial College London
Sustainable Gas Institute
UK

BENNACEUR, Kamel
Abu Dhabi National Oil Company
United Arab Emirates

BORGFORD-PARNELL, Nathan
Climate and Clean Air Coalition
Switzerland

BULLOCK, Simon
Friends of the Earth, England,
Wales and Northern Ireland
UK

BENNETT, Simon
International Energy Agency
France

BOSETTI, Valentina
Bocconi University
Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei
Italy

BARRETT, Ko
National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration
USA
BASTOS, Ana
Laboratoire des sciences du climat
et de l'environnement
France
BATAILLE, Christopher
Institute for Sustainable Development
and International Relations
Simon Fraser University
Canada

BENTO, Nuno
ISCTE-Instituto Universitario de Lisboa
Portugal
BENVENISTE, Helene
Woodrow Wilson School of Public
and International Affairs
Princeton University
USA
BERDALET, Elisa
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas
Spain
BERTOLDI, Paolo
European Commission
Italy
BISHOP, Justin
University of Cambridge
UK
BLOK, Kornelis
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands

BOUCHER, Olivier
Institut Pierre Simon Laplace
France
BOYER-VILLEMAIRE, Ursule
Universite du Quebec a Montreal
Canada
BRANDAO, Miguel
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
Sweden
BRANDER, Keith
DTU Aqua
Denmark
BREGMAN, Bram
Radboud University
The Netherlands
BREON, Francois-Marie
Laboratoire des sciences du climat
et de l'environnement
France

AIV

BUZASI, Attila
Budapest University of
Technology and Economics
Hungary
BYERS, Edward
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria
BUTT, Nathalie
The University of Queensland
Australia
CAESAR, John
Met Office Hadley Centre
UK
CAI, Rongshuo
Third Institute of Oceanography
State Oceanic Administration of China
China
CALLEN, Jessica
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria

583

Annex IV

CAMES, Martin
Oko-Institut
Germany

CASTANEDA, Fatima
Konrad Adenauer S.
Guatemala

CHOI, Woonsup
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
USA

CAMPBELL, Donovan
Jamaica

CAZZOLA, Pierpaolo
International Energy Agency
France

CHOW, Winston
National University of Singapore
Singapore

CEARRETA, Alejandro
Universidad del Pais Vasco/EHU
Spain

CHRISTOPHER, Barrington-Leigh
McGill University
Canada

CENTELLA, Abel
Instituto de Meteorologia
Cuba

CHUST, Guillem
AZTI Marine Research Division
Spain

CERDA, Emilio
University Complutense of Madrid
Spain

CIOT, Marco
Italian Peace Civil Corps FOCSIV
Italy

CANEY, Simon
University of Warwick
UK

CHACON, Noemi
Instituto Venezolano de
Investigaciones Cientificas
Venezuela

CLARK, Christopher
US Government
USA

CAPSTICK, Stuart
Cardiff University
UK

CHADBURN, Sarah
University of Leeds
UK

CARAZO ORTIZ, Maria Pia
University for Peace
Germany

CHAN, Yi-Chieh
Delta Electronics Foundation
China

CARNICER, Jofre
University of Barcelona
Spain

CHARPENTIER LJUNGQVIST, Fredrik
Stockholm University
Sweden

CARPENTER, Mike
Gassnova
Norway

CHEN, Wenting
Norwegian Institute for Water Research
Norway

CARRASCO, Jorge
Universidad de Magallanes
Chile

CHEN, Wenying
Tsinghua University
China

CARTER, Peter
Climate Emergency Institute
Canada

CHEN, Ying
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
China

CARTER, Timothy
Finnish Environment Institute (SYKE)
Finland

CHERKAOUI, Ayman Bel Hassan
Center for International Sustainable
Development Law
Morocco

CAMPBELL, Kristin
Institute for Governance and
Sustainable Development
USA
CAMPBELL-DURUFLE, Christopher
Center for International Sustainable
Development Law
Canada
CANEILL, Jean-Yves
IETA non-profit business organisation
France

AIV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

CARTWRIGHT, Anton
African Centre for Cities
University of Cape Town
South Africa
CASSOTTA, Sandra
Denmark

584

CHERNOKULSKY, Alexander
A.M. Obukhov Institute of Atmospheric Physics
Russian Academy of Sciences
Russian Federation
CHINWEZE, Chizoba
Chemtek Associates Limited
Nigeria

CLARKE, David
Canada
CLARKE, Jamie
Climate Outreach
UK
CLAYTON, Susan
The College of Wooster
USA
CLEMMER, Steve
Union of Concerned Scientists
USA
COLLINS, Mat
University of Exeter
UK
COLLINS, William
University of Reading
UK
CONNORS, Sarah
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/UK
CONVERSI, Alessandra
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
Italy
COOK, Lindsey
Friends World Committee for Consultation
Germany

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

COOPER, David
Convention on Biological Diversity
Canada
CORFEE-MORLOT, Jan
New Climate Economy
France
CORNELIUS, Stephen
World Wildlife Fund
UK
COROBOV, Roman
Eco-Tiras International Association
of River Keepers
Republic of Moldova
COULTER, Liese
Griffith University
Australia
COURAULT, Romain
Sorbonne-Universites Paris IV
France
CREMADES, Roger
Climate Service Center Germany (GERICS)
Germany
CREUTZIG, Felix
Mercator Research Institute on Global
Commons and Climate Change
Technical University Berlin
Germany
CURRIE-ALDER, Bruce
International Development Research Centre
Canada
CUSACK, Geraldine Ann
Siemens Ltd
Ireland
CUTTING, Hunter
Cimate Nexus/Climate Signals
USA
CZERNICHOWSKI-LAURIOL, Isabelle
Bureau de recherches geologiques et minieres
France
DAALDER, Henk
Pak de Wind
Netherlands
DAGNET, Yamide
World Resources Institute
USA

DAIOGLOU, Vassilis
PBL Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency
Netherlands
DALIAKOPOULOS, Ioannis
Technical University of Crete
Greece
DAMASSA, Thomas
Oxfam America
USA
DANO, Elenita
Action Group on Erosion
Technology and Concentration
Philippines
DAVIES, Elizabeth Penelope
Ford Foundation
USA
DE BEAUVILLE-SCOTT, Susanna
Sustainable Development Department
Government of Saint Lucia
Saint Lucia
DE CONINCK, Heleen
Radboud University
Netherlands
DE FRENNE, Pieter
Ghent University
Belgium
DE OLIVEIRA, Gabriel
University of Kansas
Brazil
DEISSENBERG, Christophe
Aix-Marseille University
Groupement de recherche en
economie quantitative
Luxembourg
DELUSCA, Kenel
Institut des sciences, des technologies
et des etudes avancees d'Haiti
University of Montreal
Haiti
DEMKINE, Volodymyr
Kenya
DEN ELZEN, Michel
PBL Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency
Netherlands

Annex IV

DENG, Xiangzheng
Institute of Geographic Sciences
and Natural Resources Research
Chinese Academy of Sciences
China
DENIS-RYAN, Amandine
Monash University
Australia
DESCONSI, Cristiano
Federal University of Goias
Brazil
DI BELLA, Jose
ParlAmericas
Canada
DIAZ, Julio
National School of Public Health
Carlos III Institute of Health
Spain
DIOP, Cherif
Agence nationale de l'aviation
civile et de la meteorologie
Senegal
DIOSEY RAMON, Lugo-Morin
Universidad Intercultural del Estado de Puebla
Mexico
DIXON, Tim
IEA Greenhouse Gas
UK

AIV

DOCQUIER, David
Universite catholique de Louvain
Belgium
DOELLE, Meinhard
Dalhousie University
Canada
DONEV, Jason
University of Calgary
Canada
DONNELLY, Chantal
Bureau of Meteorology
Australia
DOOLEY, Kate
University of Melbourne
Australia
DOYLE, Paul
BC Rivers Consulting Ltd
Canada

DAI, Zhen
Harvard University
USA/China

585

Annex IV

DRIOUECH, Fatima
Direction de la meteorologie nationale
Morocco
DROEGE, Susanne
German Institute for International
and Security Affairs (SWP)
Germany
DUBE, Lokesh Chandra
Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change
India
DUNPHY, Brendon
The University of Auckland
New Zealand
DURAND, Frederic
Toulouse II University
France
DYKEMA, John
Paulson School
Harvard University
USA
EASTHAM, Sebastian
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
USA/UK
EGBENDEWE, Aklesso
University of Lome
Togo
AIV

EHARA, Makoto
Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute
Japan
EHSANI, Nima
Saint Louis University
USA
EISEN, Olaf
Alfred-Wegener-Institut
Helmholtz-Zentrum fur Polarund Meeresforschung
Germany
EKHOLM, Tommi
Aalto University
Finland
EL ZEREY, Wael
Djillali Liabes University
Algeria
ELBASIOUNY, Heba
Al-Azhar University
Egypt

586

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

ELBEHIRY, Fathy
Central laboratory for Environmental Studies
Kafrelsheikh University
Egypt

FINNVEDEN, Goran
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
Fortum Varme
Sweden

ELBEHRI, Aziz
Italy

FISCHLIN, Andreas
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

ELSHAROUNY, Mohamed
Cairo University
Egypt
EMORI, Seita
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan
ENOMOTO, Hiroyuki
Japan
ERB, Karlheinz
Austria
ERIKSSON, Flintull Annica
Statistics Denmark
Sweden
ERLANIA, Erlania
Center for Fisheries Research
Indonesia
ESPARTA, Adelino Ricardo Jacintho
Universidade de Sao Paulo
Brazil
FAEHN, Taran
Statistics Norway Research Department
Norway
FANG, Kai
Zhejiang University
China
FARAGO, Tibor
Eotvos L. University (ELTE)
Hungary
FARIA, Sergio Henrique
Basque Centre for Climate Change (BC3)
Spain
FAST, Stewart
Institute for Science, Society and Policy
University of Ottawa
Canada
FAUSET, Sophie
University of Leeds
UK
FICHERA, Alberto
University of Catania
Italy

FLATO, Greg
Canadian Centre for Climate
Modelling and Analysis
Environment Canada
Canada
FLEMING, John
Center for Biological Diversity
USA
FLEMING, Sean
University of British Columbia
USA
FODA, Rabiz
Hydro One Networks Inc.
Canada
FOLTESCU, Valentin
United Nations Environment
France
FORD, James
Department of Geography
McGill University
Canada
FORSTER, Piers
University of Leeds
UK
FREI, Thomas
Research and Consulting
Switzerland
FUGLESTVEDT, Jan
Center for International Climate Research
Norway
FUHR, Lili
Heinrich Boll Foundation
Germany
FUJIMORI, Shinichiro
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan
FUSS, Sabine
Mercator Research Institute on Global
Commons and Climate Change
Germany

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

GADIAN, Alan
National Centre for Atmospheric Sciences
University of Leeds
UK
GAILL, Francoise
Plateforme ocean climat
France
GAJJAR, Sumetee Pahwa
Indian Institute for Human Settlements
India
GALOS, Borbala
University of Sopron
Hungary
GALYNA, Trypolska
Institute for Economics and Forecasting, UNAS
Ukraine
GAN, Thian
University of Alberta
Canada
GARCI SOTO, Carlos
Spanish Institute of Ocenography
Spain
GECK, Angela
Institute of Political Science
University of Freiburg
Germany
GEDEN, Oliver
German Institute for International and Security
Affairs (Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik)
Germany
GEORGIADIS, Teodoro
Italian national Research Council
Instituto of Biometeorology (CNR-IBIMET)
Italy
GIARDINO, Alessio
Deltares
Netherlands
GIAROLA, Sara
Imperial College London
UK
GILLE, Sarah
Scripps Institution of Oceanography
University of California San Diego
USA
GILLETT, Nathan
Environment and Climate Change Canada
Canada

GLENN, Aaron
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
Canada
GOLSTON, Levi
Princeton University
USA
GOMEZ CANTERO, Jonathan
Universidad de Alicante
Castilla-La Mancha Media
Spain
GONZALEZ, Miguel
Global Education and
Infrastructure Services Ltd
Nigeria

Annex IV

GUPTA, Himangana
NATCOM Cell
Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change
India
HABERL, Helmut
Institute of Social Ecology
University of Natural Resources
and Life Sciences (BOKU)
Austria
HAFEZ, Marwa
Institute for Graduate Studies & Research
Alexandria Governor office
Egypt

GONZALEZ, Patrick
University of California
USA

HAGEN, Achim
Resource Economics Group
Humboldt-Universitat
Germany

GONZALEZ-EGUINO, Mikel
Basque Centre for Climate Change
Spain

HAITES, Erik
Margaree Consultants Inc.
Canada

GOODWIN, Philip
University of Southampton
UK

HALLAM, Samantha
University of Southampton
UK

GORNER, Marine
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, International Energy Agency
France

HALSNAES, Kirsten
The Danish Technical University
Denmark

GRANT, Jonathan
PwC
UK

HAMDI, Rafiq
Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium
Belgium

AIV

GRASSI, Giacomo
Italy

HANN, Veryan
University of Tasmania
Australia

GRAU, Marion
MF Norwegian School of Theology
Norway

HARA, Masayuki
Center for Environmental Science in Saitama
Japan

GRILLAKIS, Manolis
Technical University of Crete
Greece

HARE, Bill
Climate Analytics
Germany

GROVER, Samantha
La Trobe University
Australia

HARMELING, Sven
CARE International
Germany

GUIVARCH, Celine
Centre international de recherche sur
l'environnement et le developpement,
Ecole des Ponts ParisTech
France

HAROLD, Jordan
University of East Anglia
UK
HARPER, Anna
University of Exeter
UK

587

Annex IV

HARRISON, Jonathan
University of Southampton
UK

HIRVONEN, Janne
Aalto University
Finland

HASEGAWA, Tomoko
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan

HITE, Kristen
American University
School of International Service
USA

HASHIMOTO, Shoji
Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute
Japan
HAYMAN, Garry
NERC
Centre for Ecology & Hydrology
UK
HAYWOOD, Jim
University of Exeter
UK
HEAD, Erica
Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Canada
HEBBINGHAUS, Heike
Landesamt fur Natur, Umwelt und
Verbraucherschutz NordrheinWestfalen (LANUV)
Germany
HENSON, Stephanie
National Oceanography Centre
UK
AIV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

HERBERT, Annika
University of Sydney
Australia
HERRALA, Risto
International Monetary Fund
USA
HERTWICH, Edgar
Yale University
USA
HEYD, Thomas
University of Victoria
Canada
HIDALGO, Julia
National Center of Scientific Research
France
HILDEN, Mikael
Finnish Environment Institute
Finland
HILMI, Nathalie
France

588

HOF, Andries
PBL Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency
Netherlands
HOLZ, Christian
Climate Equity Reference Project
Canada

HUEBENER, Heike
Hessian Agency for Nature Conservation,
Environment and Geology
Germany
HURTADO ALBIR, Francisco Javier
European Patent Office
Germany
HUSSEIN, Amal
National Research Centre
Egypt
IGLESIAS BRIONES, Maria Jesus
Universidad de Vigo
Spain

HONDA, Yasushi
Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences
University of Tsukuba
Japan

IIZUMI, Toshichika
Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences
National Agriculture and Food
Research Organization
Japan

HONEGGER, Matthias
Research Scientist at Institute for Advanced
Sustainability Studies Potsdam
Germany

INFIELD, David
University of Strathclyde
UK

HONG, Jinkyu
Department of Atmospheric Sciences
Yonsei University
Republic of Korea

INSAROV, Gregory
Institute of Geography
Russian Academy of Sciences
Russian Federation

HONGO, Takashi
Mitsui Global Strategic Studies Institute
Japan

INYANG, Hilary
Global Education and
Infrastructure Services LLC
Nigeria

HOREN GREENFORD, Daniel
Concordia University
Canada

IQBAL, Muhammad Mohsin
Global Change Impact Studies Centre
Pakistan

HORTON, Joshua
Harvard University
Havard Kennedy School
USA

IRVINE, Peter
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
USA

HOSSEN, Mohammad Anwar
University of Dhaka
Bangladesh

ISHIMOTO, Yuki
The Institute of Applied Energy
Norway

HOWDEN, Mark
Australian National University
Australia

ISLAM, Akm Saiful
Bangladesh University of
Engineering and Technology
Bangladesh

HUANG, Yuanyuan
Laboratoire des sciences du climat
et de l'environnement
France

ISLAM, Md. Sirajul
North South University Bangladesh
ITO, Akihiko
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

Annex IV

JOUZEL, Jean
Centre d'energie atomique de Saclay
France

KAY, Robert
ICF
USA

KABIDI, Khadija
Direction de la meteorologie nationale
Morocco

KEENAN, Jesse
Harvard University
USA

KACHI, Aki
Carbon Market Watch
Germany

KEITH, David
Harvard University
USA/Canada/UK

JAKOB, Grandin
University of Bergen
Norway

KADITI, Eleni
Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries
Austria

KEMPER, Jasmin
IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme
UK

JAMES, Rachel
University of Oxford
UK

KAINUMA, Mikiko
Institute for Global Environmental Strategies
Japan

JEREZ, Sonia
University of Murcia
Spain

KALLBEKKEN, Steffen
Center for International Climate Research
Norway

JERSTAD, Heid
University of Edinburgh
UK

KALLIOKOSKI, Tuomo
University of Helsinki
Finland

JIA, Gensuo
China

KALUGIN, Andrey
Water Problems Institute of
Russian Academy of Sciences
Russian Federation

IZZET, Ari
Head of Department of Sustainable
Development and Environment
Turkey
JACOBSON, Mark
Stanford University
USA
JAEGER-WALDAU, Arnulf
European Commission
Italy

JIM ILHAM, Jasmin Irisha
Jeffrey Sachs Center on
Sustainable Development
Malaysia
JINNAH, Sikina
UC Santa Cruz
USA
JOHANSEN, Tom Gabriel
InfoDesignLab
Norway
JOHNSTON, Eleanor
Climate Interactive
USA
JONES, Ian
University of Sydney
Australia
JONES, Lindsey
London School of Economics
Overseas Development Institute
UK
JOSEY, Simon
National Oceanography Centre
UK

KANAKO, Morita
Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute
Japan
KARIMIAN, Maryam
Climatology Research Institute
National Center of Climatology
Iran
KARMALKAR, Ambarish
University of Massachusetts Amherst
USA
KARTADIKARIA, Aditya
Bandung Institute of Technology
Indonesia
KATBEHBADER, Nedal
Environment Quality Authority
State of Palestine
Switzerland
KAWAMIYA, Michio
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth
Science and Technology
Japan

KERKHOVEN, John
Partner Quintel Intelligence
Netherlands
KERSTING, Diego Kurt
Freie Universitat Berlin
Germany
KHAZAEI, Mahnaz
Iran Meteorological Organization
Iran
KHAZANEDARI, Leili
Climate Research Institute
Iran
KHENNAS, Smail
Independent energy and climate change expert
UK
KHESHGI, Haroon
ExxonMobil Research and
Engineering Company
USA
KIENDLER-SCHARR, Astrid
IEK-8: Troposphere, Forschungszentrum
Julich GmbH
Germany
KILKIS, Siir
The Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)
International Centre for Sustainable
Development of Energy, Water and
Environment Systems (SDEWES Centre)
Turkey
KIM, Hyung Ju
Green Technology Center Korea
Republic of Korea
KINN, Moshe
The University of Salford
UK

589

AIV

Annex IV

KJELLSTROM, Erik
Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute
Sweden
KNOPF, Brigitte
Mercator Research Institute on Global
Commons and Climate Change
Germany
KOBAYAHI, Shigeki
Transport Institute of Central Japan
Japan
KOCHTITZKY, William
University of Maine
USA
KOLL, Roxy Mathew
India
KONDO, Hiroaki
National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology
Japan
KOPPU, Robert
Rutgers University
USA
KOUTROULIS, Aristeidis
Technical University of Crete
School of Environmental Engineering
Greece
AIV

KRAVITZ, Ben
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
USA
KREUTER, Judith
Technische Universitat
Germany
KREY, Volker
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria
KRIEGLER, Elmar
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany
KRINNER, Gerhard
Centre national de la recherche scientifique
France
KRISHNASWAMY, Jagdish
India
KUHNE, Kjell
Leave it in the Ground Initiative
Mexico

590

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

KUHNHENN, Kai
Konzeptwerk Neue Okonomie
Germany

LEE, Arthur
Chevron Energy Technology Company
USA

KUSCH, Sigrid
University of Padua
Germany

LEE, Sai Ming
Hong Kong Observatory
China

KUYLENSTIERNA, Johan Carl Ivar
Stockholm Environment Institute
UK

LEFALE, Penehuro Fatu
LeA International
Joint Centre for Disaster Research
Massey University
New Zealand

LABRIET, Maryse
Eneris Environment Energy Consultants
Spain
LAHA, Priyanka
Indian Institute of the Technology Kharagur
India
LAHIRI, Souparna
Global Forest Coalition
India
LAHN, Bard
Center for International Climate Research
Norway
LATIF, Muhammad
Applied Systems Analysis Division
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission
Pakistan
LAW, Matt
Bath Spa University
UK
LAWRENCE, Mark
Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies
Germany
LE BRIS, Nadine
Sorbonne University
France
LE QUERE, Corinne
Tyndall Centre
University of East Anglia
UK
LEAHY, Paul
University College Cork
Ireland
LEAL, Walter
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences
Germany
LECOCQ, Noe
Inter-Environnement Wallonie
Belgium

LEFFERTSTRA, Harold
Climate Consultant
Norway
LEHOCZKY, Annamaria
Centre for Climate Change
Universitat Rovira i Virgili
Spain
LESLIE, Michelle
Canadian Nuclear Association
Canada
LEVIHN, Fabian
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
Fortum Varme
Sweden
LEVINA, Ellina
International Energy Agency
France
LEY, Debora
Latinoamerica Renovable
Guatemala/Mexico
LICKER, Rachel
Union of Concerned Scientists
USA
LIJUAN, Ma
National Climate Center
China
LINARES, Cristina
Carlos III Institute of Health
National School of Public Health
Spain
LITTLE, Conor
University of Limerick
Ireland
LLASAT, Maria-Carmen
University of Barcelona
Spain

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

LLOYD, Philip
Cape Peninsula University of Technology
Beijing Agricultural University
South Africa
LOBELLE, Delphine
University of Southampton
UK
LOCKIE, Stewart
James Cook University
Australia

LUPO, Anthony
University of Missouri
USA
LYNN, Jonathan
IPCC Secretariat
World Meteorological Organization
Switzerland
LYONS, Lorcan
France

LOCKLEY, Andrew
UK

MAAS, Wilfried
Royal Dutch Shell
Netherlands

LOMBROSO, Luca
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
Italy

MACCRACKEN, Michael
Climate Institute
USA

LONGDEN, Thomas
Centre for Health Economics
Research and Evaluation
University of Technology Sydney
Australia

MACDOUGALL, Andrew
St. Francis Xavier University
Canada

LOPEZ-BUSTINS, Joan A.
University of Barcelona
Spain
LOUGHMAN, Joshua
Arizona State University
USA
LOUREIRO, Carlos
Ulster University
University of KwaZulu-Natal
UK/South Africa
LOVERA-BILDERBEEK, Simone
Global Forest Coalition
University of Amsterdam
Paraguay
LOVINS, Amory
Rocky Mountain Institute
USA
LUCERO, Lisa
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
USA
LUDERER, Gunnar
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany
LUENING, Sebastian
Institute for Hydrography, Geoecology
and Climate Sciences
Portugal

MACMARTIN, Douglas
Cornell University
USA
MAHAL, Snaliah
Department of Sustainable Development
Saint Lucia
MAHOWALD, Natalie
Cornell University
USA
MANTYKA-PRINGLE, Chrystal
School of Environment and Sustainability
University of Saskatchewan
Canada
MARBAIX, Philippe
Universite catholique de Louvain
Belgium
MARCOTULLIO, Peter
Hunter College
City University of New York
USA
MARTIN, Eric
Irstea
France
MARTINI, Catherine
Yale Program on Climate
Change Communication
USA

Annex IV

MARX, Andreas
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research GmbH (UFZ)
Germany
MASOOD, Amjad
Global Change Impact Studies Centre
Pakistan
MASSON-DELMOTTE, Valerie
IPCC Co-Chair WGI
France
MATA, Erika
IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute
Sweden
MATSUMOTO, Katsumi
University of Minnesota
USA
MATSUMOTO, Ken'ichi
Nagasaki University
Japan
MATTHEWS, J. B. Robin
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/UK
MAY, Wilhelm
Lund University
Denmark
MAZAUD, Alain
Laboratoire des sciences du climat
et de l'environnement
France

AIV

MAZZOTTI, Marco
ETH Zurich
Switzerland
MBEVA, Kennedy
African Centre for Technology Studies
Australia
MCCAFFREY, Mark
National University for Public Service
Hungary
MCKINNON, Catriona
University of Reading
UK
MECHLER, Reinhard
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/Germany

MARTYR-KOLLER, Rosanne
University of California Berkeley
Germany

591

Annex IV

MEFTAH, Mustapha
Centre national de la recherche scientifique
France
MELAMED, Megan
International Global Atmospheric Chemistry
University of Colorado
Cooperative Institute for Research
in Environmental Sciences
USA

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

MOHAMED ABULEIF, Khalid
Sustainability Advisor to the Minister Ministry
of Petroleum and Mineral Resources
Saudi Arabia

MORTON, John
Natural Resources Institute
University of Greenwich
UK

MOLERO, Francisco
Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas,
Medioambientales y Tecnologicas
Spain

MORTON, Oliver
University College London
UK

MOLLER, Ina
Lund University
Sweden

MOUFOUMA OKIA, Wilfran
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit
Universite Paris-Saclay
France/Congo

MOLLERSTEN, Kenneth
Swedish Energy Agency
Sweden

MOUSSADEK, Rachid
National Agricultural Research Institute
Morocco

MEYA, Jasper
Humboldt-Universtiat
Germany

MONFORTI-FERRARIO, Fabio
Joint Research Centre
European Commission
Italy

MOVAGHARI, Alireza
Urmia University
Iran

MICHAELIS, Laurence
Living Witness (Quakers)
UK

MONTT, Guillermo
International Labour Organization
Switzerland

MICHAELOWA, Axel
University of Zurich
Switzerland

MOORE, Robert Daniel
University of British Columbia
Canada

MIDGLEY, Pauline
Independent Consultant
Germany

MORALES, Manuel
Universite Clermont Auvergne
France

MUSOLIN, Dmitry L.
Saint Petersburg State Forest
Technical University
Russian Federation

MIN, Seung-Ki
Pohang University of Science and Technology
Republic of Korea

MORECROFT, Mike
Natural England
UK

MYCOO, Michelle
The University of the West Indies
Trinidad and Tobago

MINDENBECK, Katja
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany

MORELLI, Angela
InfoDesignLab
Norway

NALAU, Johanna
Griffith University
Australia

MORENO, Meimalin
Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research
Venezuela

NANGOMBE, Shingirai Shepard
University of Chinese Academy of Science
Zimbabwe

MORGAN, Jennifer
Greenpeace
The Netherlands

NATALINI, Davide
Global Sustainability Institute
Anglia Ruskin University
UK

MELIA, Nathanael
Scion
New Zealand
METZ, Bert
European Climate Foundation
Netherlands

MUNOZ SOBRINO, Castor
Universidade de Vigo
Spain
MURI, Helene
University of Oslo
Norway

AIV

MITCHELL, Dann
University of Bristol
UK
MIZUNO, Yuji
Institute for Global Environmental Strategies
Japan
MKWAMBISI, David
Lilongwe University of Agriculture
and Natural Resources
Malawi
MODIRIAN, Rahele
Climatological Research Institute
Iran

592

MORIN, Samuel
France
MORROW, David
American University
George Mason University
USA

NAUELS, Alexander
University of Melbourne
Australia
NDIONE, Jacques-Andre
Centre de Suivi Ecologique
Senegal
NEDJRAOUI, Dalila
Algeria

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

Annex IV

OLA, Kalen
Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute
Sweden

PAREDES, Franklin
Institute of Atmospheric Sciences (ICAT)
Federal University of Alagoas
Brazil

OLHOFF, Anne
UNEP DTU Partnership
Denmark

PARK, Go Eun
National Institute of Forest Science
Republic of Korea

NICHOLLS, Neville
Monash University
Australia

OLSEN, Karen
UNEP DTU Partnership
Denmark

PARKER, Andrew
University of Bristol
UK

NICOLAU, Mariana
Collaborating Centre on Sustainable
Consumption and Production
Germany

O'MAHONY, Tadhg
Finland Futures Research Centre
Finland

PASTOR, Amandine
Institut de recherche pour le developpement
France

ONGOMA, Victor
South Eastern Kenya University
Kenya

PATERSON, Matthew
University of Manchester
UK

ONUOHA, Mgbeodichinma Eucharia
TU Bergakademie Freiberg Saxony
Germany

PATT, Anthony
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

NERILIE, Abram
Australian National University
Australia
NEU, Urs
ProClim
Swiss Academy of Sciences
Switzerland

NIEVES, Barros
University of Santiago de Compostela
Spain
NIFENECKER, Herve
Global Initiative to Save Our Climate (GISOC)
France
NISHIOKA, Shuzo
Institute for Global Environmental Strategies
Japan
NOGUEIRA DA SILVA, Milton
Climate Change & Technology Consultant
Brazil
NOH, Dong-Woon
Korea Energy Economics Institute
Republic of Korea
NORMAN, Barbara
University of Canberra
Australia
NUGRAHA, Adi
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
USA
NUNES, Ana Raquel
University of Warwick
UK
NUNEZ-RIBONI, Ismael
Thunen Institute of Sea Fisheries
Germany
OGDEN, Nicholas
Public Health Agency of Canada
Canada
OKPALA, Denise
The Institution of Environmental Sciences
Nigeria

OOGJES, Justin
University of Melbourne
Australia
OPPENHEIMER, Michael
Princeton University
USA
OSCHLIES, Andreas
GEOMAR
Germany
OTTO, Friederike
University of Oxford
UK

PATWARDHAN, Anand
University of Maryland
USA
PAUL ANTONY, Anish
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
USA
PAUW, Willem Pieter
German Development Institute
Germany
PEARSON, Pamela
International Cryosphere Climate Initiative
USA

OURBAK, Timothee
Agence francaise de developpement
France

PEBAYLE, Antoine
Plateforme ocean et climat
France

PAGNIEZ, Capucine
Plateforme ocean et climat
France

PEDACE, Alberto
Climate Action Network LatinoAmerica
Argentina

PAJARES, Erick
The Biosphere Group
Peru

PERDINAN
Bogor Agricultural University
Indonesia

PALTER, Jaime
University of Rhode Island
Graduate School of Oceanography
USA

PERLMAN, Kelsey
Carbon Market Watch
France

PANTANO, Vanesa
Department of Atmosphere
and Ocean Sciences
University of Buenos Aires
Argentina

AIV

PERRIER, Quentin
Centre international de recherche sur
l'environnement et le developpement
France

593

Annex IV

PETERS, Glen
Center for International Climate Research
Norway
PETRASEK MACDONALD, Joanna
Inuit Circumpolar Council
Canada
PETZOLD, Jan
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany
PHILIBERT, Cedric
International Energy Agency
France
PIACENTINI, Ruben
Institute of Physics Rosario
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Cientificas y Tecnicas
National University of Rosario
Argentina
PIANA, Valentino
Economics Web Institute
Italy
PIGUET, Etienne
University of Neuchatel
Switzerland

AIV

PIRLO, Giacomo
Consiglio per la ricerca in agricotura
e l'analisi dell'economia agraria
Italy

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

POLOCZANSKA, Elvira
IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Bremen
Germany

RAHIMI, Mohammad
Faculty of Desert Studies
Semnan University
Iran

POMPEU PAVANELLI, Joao Arthur
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais
Brazil

RASUL, Golam
International Centre for Integrated
Mountain Development
Nepal

POOT-DELGADO, Carlos
Instituto Tecnologico Superior de Champoton
Mexico

RAU, Greg
University of California, Santa Cruz
USA

POPKOSTOVA, Yana
European Centre for Energy
and Geopolitical Analysis
France

RAWE, Tonya
CARE
USA

PORTNER, Hans-Otto
IPCC Co-Chair WGII
Germany

RAYMOND, Colin
Columbia University
USA

PRAG, Andrew
International Energy Agency
France

REAY, David
University of Edinburgh
UK

PRAJAL, Pradhan
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany
PRICE, Lynn
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
USA
PUIG, Daniel
Technical University of Denmark
Denmark

REES, Morien
The International Council of Museums
Norway
REINECKE, Sabine
University of Freiburg
Forest and Environmental Policy
Germany
REISINGER, Andy
New Zealand Agricultural
GHG Research Centre
New Zealand

PISANI, Bruno
Civil Engineering School
University of A Coruna
Spain

PUIG ARNAVAT, Maria
Technical University of Denmark
Denmark

PISKOZUB, Jacek
Institute of Oceanology Polish
Academy of Sciences
Poland

PULIDO-VELAZQUEZ, David
Instituto Geologico y Minero
Spanish Geological Survey
Spain

PITARI, Giovanni
Department of Physical and Chemical Sciences
Universita L'Aquila
Italy

PUPPIM DE OLIVEIRA, Jose Antonio
Fondation Getulio Vargas
Brazil

REYNOLDS, Jesse
Utrecht University
The Netherlands

QIAN, Budong
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
Canada

RINKEVITCH, Baruch
Israel

PLANTON, Serge
Meteo-France
France
POITOU, Jean
Sauvons Le Climat
France

594

RABITZ, Florian
Kaunas University of Technology
Lithuania
RADUNSKY, Klaus
Umweltbundesamt
Austria

RETUERTO, Ruben
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela
Spain
REYER, Christopher
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Reserach
Germany

RIXEN, Tim
Leibniz Zentrum fur Marine Tropenforschung
Germany
ROBERTS, Debra
IPCC Co-Chair WGII
South Africa

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

ROBERTS, Erin
King's College London
UK

ROY, Shouraseni
University of Miami
USA

ROBIOU DU PONT, Yann
University of Melbourne
France

ROYER, Marie-Jeanne S.
Universite de Montreal
Canada

ROBLEDO ABAD, Carmenza
USYS-TdLab
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

RUTH, Urs
Robert Bosch GmbH
Germany

ROBOCK, Alan
Rutgers University
USA
ROCKMAN, Marcy
National Park Service
USA
RODRIGUEZ ANON, Jose Antonio
University of Santiago de Compostela
Spain
ROEHM, Charlotte
Terralimno LLC
USA
ROGELJ, Joeri
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria/Belgium
ROMERI, Mario Valentino
Italy
ROSE, Steven
Electric Power Research Institute
USA
ROSEN, Richard
Germany
ROSENZWEIG, Cynthia
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Goddard Institute for Space Studies
USA
ROTLLANT, Guiomar
Instituto de Ciencias del mar
Consell Superior d'Investigacions Cientifiques
Spain
ROUDIER, Philippe
French Development Agency
France
ROY, Joyashree
Jadavpur University
Institute of Technology, Bangkok
Thailand/India

SAGNI, Regasa
Malole consults
Ethiopia
SAHEB, Yamina
OpenExp
Ecole des Mines of Paris
France
SALA, Hernan Edgardo
Argentine Antarctic Institute
National Antarctic Directorate
Argentina
SALANAVE, Jean-Luc
Ecole CENTRALE SUPELEC
France
SALAT, Jordi
Instituto de Ciencias del mar
Consell Superior d'Investigacions Cientifiques
Spain
SALAWITCH, Ross
University of Maryland
USA
SALTER, Stephen
University of Edinburgh
UK
SALVADOR, Pedro
Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas,
Medioambientales y Tecnologicas
Spain
SAMSET, Bjorn
Center for International Climate Research
Norway
SANCHEZ, Jose Luis
University of Leon
Spain
SANCHEZ-MOREIRAS, Adela M
University of Vigo
Spain

Annex IV

SANDER, Sylvia
Section of Marine Environmental
Studies Laboratory
Monaco
SANTOSH KUMAR, Mishra
S. N. D. T. Women's University
India
SANZ SANCHEZ, Maria Jose
Basque Centre for Climate Change
Spain
SARGENT, Philip
Cambridge Energy Forum
UK
SAUNDERS, Harry
Decision Processes Inc
USA
SAVARESE, Stephan
ForCES SAS
France
SAVE, Robert
Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia
Agroalimentaries
Spain
SAVOLAINEN, Ilkka
Technical Research Centre of Finland
Finland
SAYGIN, Deger
Turkey

AIV

SCHAEFFER, Michiel
Climate Analytics
University of Wageningen
The Netherlands
SCHEWE, Jacob
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germany
SCHIPPER, Lisa
Stockholm Environment Institute
Overseas Development Institute
Vietnam
SCHISMENOS, Spyros
National Yunlin University of
Science and Technology
Eastern Macedonia and Thrace Institute
China
SCHLEUSSNER, Carl-Friedrich
Climate Analytics
Germany

595

Annex IV

SCHNEIDER, Linda
Heinrich Boell Foundation
Germany

SHAPIRO, Robert
Climate Mobilization Outer Cape
USA

SINGER, Stephan
Climate Action Network International
Belgium

SCHOEMAN, David
University of the Sunshine Coast
Australia

SHAWOO, Zoha
University of Oxford
UK

SINGH, Chandni
Indian Institute for Human Settlements
Myanmar/India

SCHULZ, Astrid
Wissenschaftliche Beirat der Bundesregierung
Globale Umweltveranderungen
Germany

SHEPARD, Isaac
University of Maine
USA

SINGH, Neelam
World Resources Institute
USA

SHINDELL, Drew
Duke University
USA

SKEA Jim
IPCC Co-Chair WGIII
UK

SHINE, Keith
Department of Meteorology
University of Reading
UK

SKEIE, Ragnhild
Center for International Climate Research
Norway

SCOWCROFT, John
Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute
Belgium
SEHATKASHANI, Saviz
Academic member of Atmospheric Science
and Meteorological Research Center
Iran
SEILER, Jean Marie
Retired from Commissariat a l'energie
atomique et aux energies alternatives)
France
SEITZINGER, Sybil
University Victoria
Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions
Canada

AIV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

SEMENOV, Sergey
Institute of Global Climate and Ecology
Russian Federation
SEMENOVA, Inna
Odessa State Environmental University
Ukraine
SENEVIRATNE, Sonia I.
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

SHINE, Tara
Mary Robinson Foundation
Climate Justice
Ireland
SHIOGAMA, Hideo
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan
SHOAI-TEHRANI, Bianka
Research Institute of Innovative
Technology for the Earth
Japan
SHUE, Henry
University of Oxford
UK
SIETZ, Diana
Wageningen University
Netherlands

SENSOY, Serhat
Turkish State Meteorological Service
Turkey

SIHI, Debjani
University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science Appalachian Laboratory
USA

SERRAO-NEUMANN, Silvia
Cities Research Institute
Griffith University
Australia

SIKAND, Monika
Bronx Community College
City University of New York
USA

SETTELE, Josef
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research (UFZ)
Germany

SIMMONS, Adrian
European Centre for MediumRange Weather Forecasts
UK

SHAH, Shipra
Fiji National University
Fiji

SIMS, Ralph
Massey University
New Zealand

596

SMEDLEY, Andrew
University of Manchester
UK
SMITH, Alison
University of Oxford
UK
SMITH, Sharon
Geological Survey of Canada
Natural Resources Canada
Canada
SMITHERS, Richard J.
Ricardo Energy & Environment
UK
SMOLKER, Rachel
Biofuelwatch
USA
SOLAYMANI OSBOOEI, Hamidreza
Forest, Range and Watershed
Management Org.
Iran
SOLERA URENA, Miriam
Universidad Nacional de Educacion
a Distancia (Spain)
Germany
SOORA, Naresh Kumar
Indian Agricultural Research Institute
India
SORENAAON, Anna
Centro de Investigaciones del
Mar y la Atmosfera
Argentina

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

SREENIVAS, Ashok
Prayas (Energy Group)
India

SUN, Junying
Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences
China

STABINSKY, Doreen
College of the Atlantic
USA

SUN, Yongping
Center of Hubei Cooperative Innovation
for Emissions Trading System
China

STANGELAND, Aage
The Research Council of Norway
Norway

SUSANTO, Raden Dwi
USA

STANLEY, Janet
University of Melbourne
Australia

SUSATYA, Agus
UNIB
Indonesia

STEFANO, Caserini
Politecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di
Ingegneria Civile ed Ambientale
Italy

SUTHERLAND, Michael
Trinidad and Tobago

STENMARK, Aurora
Norwegian Environment Agency
Norway
STOCKER, Thomas
University of Bern
Switzerland
STONE, Kelly
ActionAid USA
USA
STOTT, Peter
University of Exeter and Met Office
UK
STRANDBERG, Gustav
Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute
Sweden
STRAPASSON, Alexandre
Harvard University
Brazil
SU, Mingshah
National Center for Climate Change
Strategy and International Cooperation
China
SUGIYAMA, Masahiro
The University of Tokyo
Japan
SULISTYAWATI, Linda Yanti
Universitas Ahmad Dahlan
Indonesia

SUTTER, Daniel
ETH Zurich
Switzerland
SWART, Rob
Wageningen Environmental Research
The Netherlands
SWEENEY, John
Maynooth University
Ireland
SYRI, Sanna
Aalto University
Finland
TABARA, J. David
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Spain
TABATABAEI, Seyed Muhammadreza
University of Tehran
Iran
TACHIIRI, Kaoru
Japan Agency for Marine
Earth Science and Technology
Japan

Annex IV

TAKANO, Kohei
Nagano Environmental Conservation
Research Institute
Japan
TAKAYABU, Izuru
Japan Meteorological Agency
Meteorological Research Institute
Japan
TAKEMURA, Toshihiko
Kyushu University
Japan
TAM, Chi Keung
Newcastle University
Singapore
TAMAKI, Tetsuya
Kyushu University
Japan
TAMURA, Makoot
Ibaraki University
Japan
TANAKA, Katsumasa
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan
TESKE, Sven
University of Technology Sydney
Australia
TEXTOR, Christiane
German Aerospace Centre
Germany

AIV

THALER, Thomas
Institute of Mountain Risk Engineering
University of Natural Resources
and Life Sciences
Austria
THIERY, Wim
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

TAKAGI, Hiroshi
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Japan

THOBER, Stephan
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research (UFZ)
Germany

TAKAGI, Masato
Research Institute of Innovative
Technology for the Earth
Japan

THOMPSON, Michael
Forum for Climate Engineering Assessment
USA

TAKAHASHI, Kiyoshi
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Japan

THORNE, Peter
Maynooth University
Ireland

597

Annex IV

THORNTON, Thomas
Environmental Change Institute
University of Oxford
UK
THWAITES, Joe
World Resources Institute
USA
TIBIG, Lourdes
Climate Change Commission
Philippines

TYLER, Emily
University of Cape Town
South Africa
UDDIN, Noim
CPMA International
Australia
UDO, Keiko
Tohoku University
Japan

TILCHE, Andrea
European Union
Belgium

URQUHART, Penny
Independent climate resilient
development specialist
South Africa

TINDALL, David
Department of Sociology
University of British Columbia
Canada

VAILLES, Charlotte
Institute for Climate Economics
France

TOKARSKA, Katarzyna B
University of Victoria
UK
TORVANGER, Asbjorn
Center for International Climate Research
Norway
TREBER, Manfred
Germanwatch
Germany
AIV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

VALDES, Luis
Instituto Espanol de Oceanografia
Spain
VAN DE WAL, Roderik
Netherlands
VAN DEN HURK, Bart
Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch
Instituut
Netherlands

TREGUER, Paul
Universite de Bretagne Occidentale
France

VAN MUNSTER, Birgit
Homo Sapiens Foundation
UK

TSCHAKERT, Petra
University of Western Australia
Australia/Austria

VAN RUIJVEN, Bastiaan
International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis
Austria

TSUTSUI, Junichi
Central Research Institute of
Electric Power Industry
Japan
TUITT, Cate
Honourable society of Inner Temple
UK
TULKKI, Ville
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd
Finland
TURCO, Marco
University of Barcelona
Spain
TURP, Mustafa Tufan
Bogazici University Center for Climate
Change and Policy Studies
Turkey
598

VAN VELTHOVEN, Peter
Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch
Instituut
Netherlands

VENEMA, Henry David
International Institute for
Sustainable Development
Prairie Climate Centre
Canada
VERA, Carolina
Centro de Investigaciones del
Mar y la Atmosfera
University of Buenos Aires
Comision Nacional de Investigaciones
Cientifico Tecnologicas
Argentina
VERHOEF, Leendert
University of Technology Delft
Netherlands
VICTOR, David
University of California San Diego
USA
VIDALENC, Eric
Agence de l'environnement et
de la maitrise de l'energie
France
VINCENT, Ceri
British Geological Survey
UK
VINER, David
Mott MacDonald
UK
VIVIAN, Scott
University of Edinburgh
UK
VLADU, Iulain Florin
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
Germany
VON SCHUCKMANN, Karina
France

VAN YPERSELE, Jean-Pascal
Universite catholique de Louvain
Earth and Life Institute
Belgium

WACHSMUTH, Jakob
Fraunhofer Institute for Systems
and Innovation Research
Germany

VAUTARD, Robert
Institut Pierre Simon Laplace
France

WACKERNAGEL, Mathis
Global Footprint Network
USA

VELDORE, Vidyunmala
DNV-GL
Norway

WADLEIGH, Michael
Closed Mass
USA

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

WAGNER, Gernot
Harvard John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard Kennedy School
USA
WANG, Bin
University of Virginia
USA
WANG, Junye
Athabasca University
Canada
WANG, Xiaojun
Research Center for Climate Change,
Ministry of Water Resources
China
WANG, Zhen-Yi
Delta Electronics Foundation
China
WARNER, Koko
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
Germany
WARRILOW, David
Royal Meteorological Society
UK
WASHBOURNE, Carla-Leanne
University College London
UK
WASKOW, David
World Resources Institute
USA
WEBB, Jeremy
Department of Science, Technology
Engineering and Public Policy
University College London
UK

Annex IV

WEST, Thales A. P.
University of Florida
Brazil

WOLF, Shaye
Center for Biological Diversity
USA

WESTPHAL, Michael
World Resources Institute
USA

WOOLLACOTT, Jared
RTI International
USA

WESTRA, Seth
University of Adelaide
Australia

WRATT, David
National Institute of Water &
Atmospheric Research
New Zealand

WHITEFORD, Ross
University of Southampton
UK
WHITLEY, Shelagh
Overseas Development Institute
UK
WICHMANN, Janine
University of Pretoria
South Africa
WIEL, Stephen
CLASP
USA
WILDENBORG, Ton
Netherlands Organisation for Applied
Scientific Research (TNO)
Netherlands
WILLIAMS, Jonny
The National Institute of Water
and Atmospheric Research
New Zealand
WILLIAMS, Richard
Liverpool University
UK
WINIGER, Patrik
Netherlands

WEBER, Christopher
1982
USA

WINKLER, Harald
University of Cape Town
Energy Research Centre
South Africa

WEHNER, Michael
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
USA

WINROTH, Mats
Chalmers University of Technology
Sweden

WEI, Taoyuan
Center for International Climate Research
Norway

WISSENBURG, Marcel
Radboud University
Netherlands

WEISENSTEIN, Debra
School of Engineering and Applied
Science, Harvard University
USA

WITHANACHCHI, Sisira S.
University of Kassel
Germany

WRIGHT, Helena
E3G
UK
WU, Jianguo
Chinese Research Academy of
Environmental Sciences
China
WURZLER, Sabine
North Rhine Westphalian State Agency for
Nature, Environment, and Consumer Protection
Germany
XENIAS, Dimitrios
Cardiff University
UK
XU, Yangyang
Texas A&M University
USA
AIV

XU, Yinlong
China
YAMAGUCHI, Mitsutsune
Research Institute of Innovative
Technology for the Earth
Japan
YANG, Hong
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic
Science and Technology
Switzerland
YANG, Tao
Jiangxi Normal University
China
YANG, Xiu
National Center for Climate Change
Strategy and International Cooperation
China
YOON, Soonuk
Green Technology Center
Republic of Korea

599

Annex IV

YOSEPH-PAULUS, Rahayu
Local Government of Buton Regency
Indonesia

ZICKFELD, Kirsten
Simon Fraser University
Canada/Germany

YU, Rita Man Sze
CSR Asia
China

ZIELINSKI, Tymon
Institute of Oceanology
Polish Academy of Sciences
Poland

YU, Yau Hing
Sovran Environment & Energy Corp.
China
ZABOL ABBASI, Fatemeh
Climatological Research Institute
Iran
ZAELKE, Durwood
Institute for Governance and
Sustainable Development
USA
ZAFAR, Qudsia
Global Change Impact Studies Centre
Pakistan
ZARIN, Daniel
Climate and Land Use Alliance
USA
ZAVIALOV, Petr
Shirshov Institute of Oceanology
Russian Federation

AIV

Expert Reviewers of the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C

ZEREFOS, Christos
Academy of Athens
Greece
ZHANG, Jingyong
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
Chinese Academy of Sciences
China
ZHANG, Wei
IIHR Hydroscience and Engineering
University of Iowa
USA
ZHANG, Xiaolin
Florida State University
China
ZHAO, Zong-Ci
National Climate Center
China Meteorological Administration
China
ZHOU, Tianjun
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
Chinese Academy of Sciences
China

600

ZINKE, Jens
Freie Universitaet Berlin
Germany
ZOBAA, Ahmed
Brunel University London
UK
ZRINKA, Mendas
University of Bolton
UK

Index

This index should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Index. In: Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening
the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty
[Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Pean,
R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and
T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.

601

Index

Index

Note: [*] indicates the term also appears in the
Glossary. Italicized page numbers denote tables,
figures and boxed material. Bold page numbers
indicate main discussion of topics. Supplementary
Material is listed by section number, for example,
1.SM.3, 2.SM.1.3.4.

1.5C pathways*, 12-17, 51, 59-64, 93-174,
265-271, 278, 320, 1.SM.4, 1.SM.6
assumptions, 95, 98, 109-112
carbon dioxide removal (CDR)* in, 17, 21, 95, 96,
118-125, 180, 277, 316
classification of, 99-100, 100, 113-114
CO2 emissions, 1.SM.6
definition, 51, 53, 59-61
demand-side mitigation and, 97, 460-461
emissions and, 5, 6, 12, 13, 14-15, 18, 51, 95-96,
112, 1.SM.6
emissions, benchmark indicators for
sectoral changes in, 4.SM.1
emissions evolution in, 115-118, 117, 119
feasibility*, 18-19, 52, 56, 71-72, 380-386
four categories of, 59-61, 62, 63
future emissions in, 96, 104-107
impediments to, 93, 95, 110
implications of, 265-271
investments and economics, 16, 95-96, 150-151,
152-155, 264-265
key characteristics, 112-114, 129
knowledge gaps, 388-390
mitigation and adaptation options*, 110-112,
316-317
mitigation measures, 14-15, 19-21, 51-52, 110-112
model pathways, 12, 14-15, 278
multiple strategies for, 157, 469
near-term action, implications of, 126-129, 128
one-in-two to two-in-three chance (of reaching
limit) in, 60, 63, 113
overview of, 108-129, 129
pathway archetypes, 99-100, 100, 112-113, 113
pathways remaining below 1.5C, 100,
113-114, 160
pathways temporarily exceeding 1.5C, 100,
113-114, 160
policies, 112, 148-150
remaining carbon budget*, 12, 96, 104-107, 108
scenarios, 98-100, 100
strengthening the global response, 18-23, 70-75,
313-443
sustainable development and, 19-23, 20-21, 98,
156-157, 156, 448-449, 463-472, 465
sustainable development pathways, 64, 448-449,
466-472, 469, 479-480
synergies and trade-offs, 18-21, 20-21, 316, 391
system/sector transitions, 14-15, 15-16,
323-349
time frame for mitigation, 95-96
transformations, 129-148, 322-323, 466
transitions, speed and scale of, 320, 320, 322-323
See also Pathways

602

1.5C warmer worlds*, 4-6, 274-281
commonalities in, 277
definition, 53
energy supply and demand in (FAQ), 161, 162
equity and, 54-55, 451-453
impacts in, 7-10, 177-179, 319
importance of adaptation in (FAQ), 396-397, 397
key questions, 274-277
knowledge base for, 52, 53-56
poverty, equality, and equity implications, 451-453
projected climatic changes, 7-10, 186-188, 188, 189
projected risks and impacts, 7-10, 11, 51,
175-311
risks, vs. 2C worlds, 5, 7-9, 11, 177-181, 277
storyline of this report, 77-78, 78
storylines of, 277
sustainable development and, 18-23, 55-56, 447
temperature in, 283
time frame for mitigation, 277, 278
variation in, 177, 277, 278
watershed management in, 356
See also Global warming of 1.5C
2030
emissions gap, 358
emissions levels in, 18, 95, 114
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development*,
56, 73, 469, 477
See also Sustainable Development Goals

A
Acceptability of policy or system change*,
22, 368-369
Adaptability. See Adaptive capacity
Adaptation*, 5, 10
bottom-up approaches, 317, 368
community-based, 315, 330, 384, 458
definition, 51, 70, 396
ecosystem-based, 386, 457-458
FAQ on, 396-397, 397
feasibility, 380, 381, 385
finance, 21-22, 379, 456
implementing, 51, 315, 383-386
importance of, 396-397, 397
infrastructure investments, 21
integration with mitigation and sustainable
development, 75-76, 448, 467
knowledge gaps, 388-391
levels of, 51
local participation, 456
maladaptation, 19, 386, 396
in Mekong River basin, 239-240
place-specific, 447, 458
potential for, 247-250
rate of temperature change and, 178
risk reduction and, 5, 10
sea level rise and, 10, 457
socio-economic challenges to, 110
specific sectors, 10
sustainable development and, 19, 447, 456-459
synergies, 18-19, 391, 447, 475
synergies with mitigation, 386-387, 475,

4.SM.4.5.1, 4.SM.5.2
transformational, 5, 315, 322-323, 384, 397,
456-457
Adaptation behaviour*, See Human behaviour
Adaptation limits*, 10, 70, 454-456
examples of, 455
hard limits, 70, 455
residual risks and, 454-455
for Small Island Developing States, 235
soft limits, 70, 455
Adaptation options*, 10, 19, 316-317, 319,
336-337
in agriculture, 70, 315, 457
cost-effectiveness, 316
education and learning, 337, 456
enabling conditions*, 4.SM.2
energy system transitions, 4.SM.4.3.1
feasibility, 381, 384-386, 385,
4.SM.4.3.1-4.SM.4.3.5
industrial system transitions, 4.SM.4.3.4
land and ecosystem transitions, 4.SM.4.3.2
overarching, 336-337, 338, 385, 389, 4.SM.4.3.5
supporting transitions, 336-337, 338
sustainable development and, 457-458
synergies, 18, 19
urban, 10, 70, 263, 340-341, 384-386, 385
urban and infrastructure transitions, 4.SM.4.3.3
Adaptation pathways*, 64, 70, 396, 458-459
place-specific, 458
Adaptive capacity*,
enhancing, 316, 319, 456-457
factors affecting, 69
limits to, 10
sustainable development and, 447
Adaptive governance. See Governance
Aerosols*, 12, 65, 118, 120, 267-268
aerosol cooling, 96, 267-268
knowledge gaps, 157
precursors, 98, 102-103, 118, 157
radiative forcing, 102-103
See also Black carbon
Afforestation*, 17, 21, 96, 121, 266, 270, 316, 343
co-benefits, 316
constraints, 316
FAQ, 394, 395
incentivization of, 147
land requirements, 125, 126, 265, 266, 269,
270, 316
trade-offs, 269
AFOLU. See Agriculture, forestry and other land-use
Africa
Fybnos and succulent Karoo biomes, 260, 261
Limpopo Watercourse Commission, 356
Sahel, 180, 236, 259, 261, 262-263
Southern Africa, 260, 261
tipping points*, 262-263, 264
West Africa and the Sahel, 259, 261, 264
West African monsoon, 262-263, 264
Agreement*. See Confidence; Evidence; Likelihood
Agriculture
adaptation options*, 70, 315, 457
agroforestry, 328, 384

Index
warming in, 4
See also Arctic sea ice
Arctic sea ice, 8, 205-206, 209, 254
beyond end of century, 270
fisheries and, 224-225
as hotspot and tipping point, 258, 261, 262, 270
projected changes, 205, 212, 254
sea-ice free summers, 8, 178, 205, 206, 254
temperature overshoot and, 8, 178, 206
Asian monsoon, 262, 264
Assessment frameworks, 75-76
climate models and simulations, 76
confidence, uncertainty, and risk, 77
cost-benefit analysis*, 76
detection and attribution, 76
knowledge sources and evidence, 75-76
methodologies, 76
risk assessment*, 183-186
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
(AMOC), 205, 223, 257
Atlantic Multi-Decadal Oscillation (AMO), 201
Atmosphere-ocean general circulation model
(AOGCM). See Climate models
Attribution. See Detection and attribution
Avoided impacts, 18, 68, 183, 253-265, 447
aggregated avoided impacts, 253-258
hotspots, 258-260, 261
poverty and inequality implications, 452-453, 453
Reasons for Concern, 253-259
reduced risks, 452-453, 453, 455
regional tipping points, 262-263, 264
sustainable development
implications, 452-453, 453

B
Baseline period. See Reference period
Batteries, 325
Behavioural change. See Human behaviour
Beijing, peak car use, 376
Bhutan, national goals, 387
Bio-based feedstocks, 315, 335-336, 335
Bio-technologies, 319
Biochar*, 121, 268, 270, 345
Biodiversity*, 8, 256-257
adaptation limits*, 455
Aichi targets, 266
CDR and, 265, 266, 269
impacts and risks at 1.5C vs. 2C, 8, 179, 256-257
management, 10
Bioenergy*, 12, 17, 97, 111-112, 124, 131, 324-325
carbon intensity of, 324-325
crops, 147
emissions increase with, 96
IAMs/modelling, 124, 2.SM.1.2.4
land use for, 19, 146, 147, 265, 269, 343
risks of implementing, 125
sugarcane for bioethanol in Brazil, 371
trade-offs, 97
water use and, 464-466
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and
storage (BECCS)*, 17, 121, 268-270, 316,

342-343, 394, 395
in IAMs, 124
land requirements, 125, 126, 180, 265-266
net zero emissions and, 135
pathways with, 14-15, 17, 96, 180
risks, 125, 268-270
uncertainties, 158
Bioethanol, 371
Biofuel*, 269, 324-325
Biomass*, 131, 132-133, 138, 269, 324
Biome shifts, 216, 217, 247, 250, 256-257
Fybnos and succulent Karoo biomes, 260, 261
Bivalve molluscs, 180, 227, 228, 237, 238, 248,
3.SM.3.2.5, 3.SM.3.2.11
Black carbon (BC)*, 12, 13, 96, 118, 120, 316,
341-342
main characteristics of, 342
reducing emissions of, 341-342
warming impact, 66
Blue carbon*, 330, 462
Bolivian Altiplano, 458
Boreal forests, 8, 263, 264
Bottom-up approaches, 317, 368
Brazil
bioethanol in, 371
National Adaptation Plan, 340
Buen Vivir, 480
Buildings, 15-16, 139, 140-142, 316
building codes, 332, 339, 377
decarbonization of energy supply, 316
decarbonization of investments, 378
electrification, 141
energy efficiency and, 332, 339, 377, 460
energy supply/use in, 139, 140-142, 141, 331
heating and cooling demand, 141-142, 331
long-lived infrastructure, 142
low-emission, 317, 460
technological innovations, 370
transitions, speed and scale of, 320
Burden sharing*, 380, 470

C
Cancun Agreement, 79, 353
Car use
peak car use, 376
pricing policies and use reductions, 366
Carbon budget*, 12, 96, 104-107
in 1.5C pathways, 113-114
remaining carbon budget*, 12, 24, 96, 104-107, 108
remaining carbon budget*, assessment methods,
104-107, 2.SM.1.1.2
total, 24
uncertainties, 12, 96, 106, 108
Carbon cycle*, 96, 103, 157
inertia, 107
oceans and, 257-258
terrestrial, 219, 220
uncertainties, 347
Carbon dioxide (CO2)*
cumulative emissions, 6, 12, 62, 67, 96, 105, 114,
123, 126-127, 127

603

Index

climate-smart agriculture*, 457, 467
conservation agriculture*, 267, 327, 384, 459
crop yields/productivity, 9, 11, 145, 145, 147,
179, 236-237, 252, 259, 263, 264, 267, 316, 327,
452, 3.SM.3.3.5
emissions, 12, 14, 95, 96, 116-118, 147, 147, 157,
265, 315-316
energy crops, 16, 97
intensification of, 266-267, 327
irrigation, 201, 215, 267, 267, 315, 328, 384, 466
land for, 16, 97, 112, 146, 327-329
livelihoods, 55, 315, 447
mitigation potential, 316
peri-urban, 316
risk reduction, 456
technological innovation and, 329, 370
tipping points*, 263, 264
transformational adaptation in, 384
transitions, 315-316
water-energy-food (WEF) nexus, 386-387
Agriculture, forestry and other land-use (AFOLU),
144-148, 463
CDR and, 17, 121, 144-145
drivers of changes in, 145-146
emissions, 14-15, 114, 118, 268
mitigation options*, 462-463
policy assumptions, 145-146
projections for, 17
Agroforestry, 328, 384
Air pollution/quality*, 157, 241, 250, 267, 316, 464
Albedo*, 70, 267
Algae, as bioenergy source, 111-112
Alpine regions, 259, 261
Amazon, 340
tropical forest, 221, 263, 340
Ammonia (NH3) emissions, 96
Anomalies*
global mean surface temperature, 183, 210
soil moisture*, 198, 199, 200
Antarctic ice sheet, 7, 178, 208-209, 257, 258, 271,
282
Antarctic sea ice, 206, 225
Anthropocene*, 52, 53, 54, 75
as boundary concept for 1.5C warmer worlds, 54
geological dimension of, 54
Anthropogenic emissions*, 5, 95
recent trends, 1.SM.7
Appliances, energy-efficient, 316, 331, 460, 461
Aquaculture, 8, 9, 237-238
hypoxia and, 224
production, 237-238
risks for, 228
AR5. See IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
Arctic region, 258-259, 338-339, 452, 3.SM.3.3.5
adaptation in, 339
economic effects of climate change, 339
ecosystems, 9, 11, 53, 220
as hotspot, 258, 261, 262, 270, 338
indigenous peoples, 9, 339
land regions, 259, 261
risks for, 9, 53, 251, 252, 253, 452
tipping points*, 262, 264

Index

Index
emissions reductions, 18, 95, 96
net emissions, 12-17, 13, 14-15, 114, 116, 119
net zero emissions, 5, 12, 24, 95, 107, 116
permafrost release of, 104
sector-specific emissions, 119
time scales of warming due to, 64
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS)*, 14, 15,
97, 134-136, 136, 268, 277, 315
deployment in 1.5C and 2C pathways, 134-136,
136
direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage
(DACCS)*, 17, 125
fossil fuels with CCS, 97, 135
in industry sector, 335, 336
in power sector, 326-327
uncertainties, 136
See also Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture
and storage (BECCS)
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU)*,
15, 335, 336
Carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage
(CCUS). See Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation
(CCU)
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR)*, 17, 70, 118-125,
268-270, 342-346, 4.SM.4.2.5
in 1.5C pathways*, 17, 21, 95, 96, 111, 114,
118-125, 122, 180, 265, 277, 316
AFOLU sector, 17, 121
co-benefits, 121, 266
comparison of removal options, 270
costs, 344, 4.SM.3
cross-cutting issues, 347
definition, 24, 70
deployment at scale, 17, 70, 96, 114, 121-124,
122, 180, 265-266, 269-270, 343, 4.SM.3
deployment potential, 344
design and implementation of, 21, 448
ethical aspects, 347
FAQ on, 394, 395
feasibility, 17, 121, 269, 316, 343, 383, 4.SM.4.2.5
governance and, 17, 347
key messages, 270
knowledge gaps, 158, 390
land-based, 268-270
land footprint of, 125, 126, 180, 265-266, 269,
270, 343
limitations of, 96
in model pathways, 12, 14-15
net negative emissions, 96, 114, 118
ramp-up rates for, 119, 123
reducing dependence on, 19, 149, 180, 277
risks of, 96, 114, 125, 265-266, 344
role of, 17, 21, 96, 111, 114, 122-123
side effects, 344, 4.SM.3
sustainability and, 21, 96, 114, 124-125
Sustainable Development Goals and, 448, 462
trade-offs, 21, 96, 462
types of measures employed, 17, 70, 96, 121,
125, 265, 268, 270, 316, 342-346, 394
uncertainties, 96, 158, 343, 347
Carbon intensity*, 97
of bioenergy*, 324-325

604

of electricity, 97, 130
of final energy sectors, 129-130, 130, 137-138, 139
of residual fuel mix, 130
Carbon leakage, 149, 375
Carbon neutrality*, 14, 96
timing of, 12, 96
Carbon price*, 95, 152-153, 153, 375-377
necessity and constraints, 375-377
policies on, 95, 317, 375-377, 460
uniform world carbon price, 375
Carbon sequestration*, 67, 95, 112, 114, 121-124,
147, 266
marine, 17, 121, 125, 178, 227, 228, 229,
3.SM.3.2.8
in peatlands, 221
permanence of, 125
soil carbon sequestration (SCS)*, 17, 121, 219,
268, 269, 270, 345
terrestrial, 112, 121, 125, 146-147, 219, 265, 316
tracking progress toward, 67
See also Blue carbon; Carbon dioxide capture
and storage
Carbon sink. See Carbon sequestration
Carbonate chemistry, 178, 222, 223
Caribbean region, 260, 339-340
small island developing states and territories,
339-340
China
peak car use in Beijing, 376
technology and renewables pathways, 471
Circular economy, 335-336
Cities, 330-334
impacts and risks, 180, 182
sea level rise, impacts, 231-232
transformation* in, 472-474
See also Urban areas; and specific cities
Civil society, 23, 317
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)*, 474
Climate change commitment*
constant composition commitment, 64
geophysical warming commitment, 64-66, 65
warming commitment from past emissions,
64-66, 65, 1.SM.5
zero emissions commitment, 64-65, 65
Climate education, 22, 317, 456
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate
event)*, 4, 182
in 1.5C warmer worlds*, 7
human health and, 240-241
impacts, 7, 177-178, 182, 240
observed changes in, 4, 7, 177, 210, 223, 1.SM.1
precipitation extremes, 7, 178, 189, 190-192, 197
projected changes, 7, 177-178, 189, 190-191, 192
risks from, 11, 181
temperature extremes, 7, 177, 187, 189, 190-191,
192, 210, 255
Climate feedbacks*, 5, 103
biophysical feedbacks, 266-267
Earth system feedbacks, 65, 103-104
land processes and, 268
Climate forcers. See Radiative forcing
Climate models*, 7, 76, 177, 183-184, 274, 3.SM.1.1

Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP)*,
62, 76
downscaling*, 76, 186, 194
FAIR, 99, 101, 102, 103, 103, 158
HAPPI, 76
integrated multimodel studies, 99
knowledge gaps, 272
MAGICC, 99, 101, 102, 103, 103, 127, 127, 158
reduced-complexity, 2.SM.1.1.1
regional (RCM), 185
Climate monitoring, 317
Climate projections*
climate models and simulations, 76, 183-184
definition of, 184
Climate-resilient development pathways
(CRDPs)*, 22, 52, 73, 448-449, 450-451, 451,
468-472, 475-476
country and community strategies, 470-471
definition, 24, 64
development trajectories and equity, 469-470
FAQ on, 479-480, 480
low-carbon development pathways, 471-472
regional and national factors, 22
sustainable development and, 22, 448-449
trajectories and decision-making in, 451, 480
transformations, equity, and well-being in,
468-469, 472, 472-474
urban transformations* in, 472-473
in Vanuatu, 471
Climate-resilient pathways*, 64
Climate sensitivity*
equilibrium climate sensitivity*, 103, 104
transient climate response*, 96, 184-185
uncertainties, 12
See also Transient climate response to cumulative
CO2 emissions
Climate services*, 337, 338, 385
Climate system*, 5, 208
as a global commons, 353
assessment of changes in, 183, 186
observed changes in, 177
tipping points in, 262-263, 270
Climate target*, 98-99, 151
policy assumptions and, 149
stringent, 112, 126
Climate variability*, 279-281
Coal, 96-97, 132, 132-133, 138, 461
Coastal communities, 9, 181, 182, 222, 453,
Table 3.SM.4
adaptation, 226, 233, 457
adaptation limits*, 455
coastal protection, 225, 226, 227-228,
3.SM.3.2.9
flooding, 11, 181, 231, 235, 249, 252, 252,
3.SM.3.3.3
groundwater, 181
infrastructure risks, 181, 226, 231, 235, 249
livelihoods, 9, 222, 226, 249, 447, 452
relocation of, 457
sea level rise and, 207, 225, 231-234, 243, 249,
252, 457
tourism, 229, 253

Index
259, 263, 267, 327, 452, 3.SM.3.3.5
Cuba, risk management in, 339
Cultural practices and resilience, 360

D
Danube River Protection Convention, 356
Decarbonization*
of electricity, 95
of energy sector, 95, 148, 277, 316, 461
of industry sector, 140
of investments, 378
macro-level indicators, 129-130
rate of, 12, 468
transport sector, 333, 461
Decision-making, 321, 360, 365, 456, 462, 469
adaptation, 459
information provision and, 367
participatory, 386, 459
problem-solving, 448-449
sustainable development goals and, 451, 480
Decoupling*, 56, 372, 376, 461
Definitions, 24
See also Glossary
Deforestation*, 263, 264
emissions from, 146
of mangroves, 226, 251
rates of, 146
reducing emissions from (REDD+), 329-330
tipping points*, 263
Deltas and estuaries, 232-233
Demand and supply-side measures*, 97, 111,
161, 317
demand-side measures*, 97, 460-461
investments, 153-154
mitigation and, 97
supply-side measures*, 111
See also Energy supply and demand
Dengue fever, 9, 180, 241
Detection and attribution*, 76, 183, 210-212
attribution methods, 3.SM.1.2
human influences on climate, 4, 51, 59, 81,82,
186-187, 210-212, 282, 1.SM.2, 1.SM.6, 3.SM.2.1
of impacts, 69, 213
regional precipitation on land, 3.SM.2.2.1
regional temperature on land, 3.SM.2.2.1
sea level rise, 252
Developing countries
adaptation finance, 21
development trajectories, 469-470
international cooperation and, 23
Development pathways. See Climate-resilient
development pathways; Pathways
Diet, human, 19, 180, 316, 462, Table 3.SM.12
Direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage
(DACCS)*, 17, 125, 316, 346, 394
Disaster risk management (DRM)*, 10, 316, 336,
338, 385
in Jamaica, 339-340
Disaster*
early warning systems*, 338, 339, 370
preparedness, 339-340

reduction, technological innovations and, 370
Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction*, 70
See also Hazard
Discounting*, 152
Disease, 9, 452
dengue fever, 9, 180, 241
diarrhoea, 452
geographic range shifts of vectors, 9, 180, 241
malaria, 9, 180, 241
vector-borne, 9, 180
See also Human health
Displacement*. See Migration
Disruptive innovation*, 22, 111, 319, 323
Double dividend*, 376
Downscaling*, 76, 186, 194, 204
Droughts*, 182, 196-201, 211, 215, 247, 250, 255,
3.SM.3.1.1.2
hotspots, 199, 200, 260
management responses/examples, 356
in Mediterranean Basin and the Middle East,
200-201
observed changes, 196, 211
Palmer Drought Severity Index, 199, 215
precipitation minus evapotranspiration, 198-199,
198, 255
projected, for 1.5C warming, compared with 2C,
7, 178, 196-201, 199, 211, 215, 247, 250, 255,
3.SM.3.1.1.2
regional changes, 198-200, 198, 199, 200-201
Drylands, 459

E
Early warning systems (EWS)*, 338, 339, 370
Earth system
feedbacks, 65, 96, 103-104
inertia of, 64
Economic factors, 9, 150-151, 152-155, 264-265
access to finance, 21, 23, 155
circular economy, 335-336, 335
co-benefits (`double dividend'), 376
depreciation of assets, 375
`depression economics', 319
economic damages from climate change, 243,
264-265
green economy, 470-471
incentives, 317, 366, 377
marginal abatement costs, 16, 95, 150, 375
pricing instruments, 317
redistributive policies, 21
regional economic benefits, 258
See also Finance; Investments
Economic growth, 53, 180-181, 182, 319
decoupling from emissions, 56, 372, 376, 461
impacts on, 180-181, 182
mitigation costs and, 258
regional economic benefits, 258
risks at 1.5C, vs. 2C, 9, 180-181, 182
in SSPs, 110, 149
Economic indicators/variables
discounting*, 152

605

Index

Coastal ecosystems, 8, 181, 182, 226, 249, 330,
Table 3.SM.4
blue carbon*, 330, 462
framework organisms in, 225-226, 248
integrated coastal zone management, 226
protection services, 227-228, 228, 248
restoration of, 330
saltwater intrusion, 8
sea level rise and, 207, 225, 249
storms/storm surge, 223, 249
stress management in, 330
Co-benefits*, 2, 67, 157, 268, 316, 319, 323
of sustainable development*, 447
Common but Differentiated Responsibilities
and Respective Capabilities (CBDR-RC)*, 318
Community-based adaptation, 315, 330, 360,
384, 458
Conference of the Parties (COP)*
COP 15, 378
COP 16 (Cancun), 353
COP 21, 66, 79, 372
Confidence*, 77, 182
See also Evidence; Likelihood; Uncertainty
Conflict, 245
Conservation agriculture*, 267, 327, 384, 459
Consumption, 53, 56
resource-intensive, 95
responsible, 460
Cook stoves, 460
Cooperation, 23, 461
international, 22, 23, 95, 240
regional, 353-354
Copenhagen Accord, 353
Coral reefs, 8, 11, 179, 229-230, 3.SM.3.2.3,
3.SM.3.2.10, 3.SM.3.3.9
adaptation limits*, 455
bleaching and mortality, 70, 228, 229, 254
Great Barrier Reef (Australia), 228, 251
heat stress, 226, 229
impacts, 221
observed loss of, 8, 228-229
projected losses, 8, 179
projected risks, 53, 225-226, 228, 228-229, 248,
251, 252, 254
protection for coastal areas, 228
storm damage, 222
Cost-benefit analysis*, 76, 150-151
Cost-effectiveness*, 150-151, 152-153, 316
Costs, 76
adaptation, 21-22, 316
economic damages from climate change, 243,
264-265
energy sector transition, 374-375
marginal abatement costs, 16, 95, 150
mitigation, 16, 22, 258, 264, 316
regional economic benefits, 258
social cost of carbon (SCC)*, 150-151, 265, 375
See also Carbon price
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP)*,
62, 76
Covenant of Mayors initiative, 354, 355
Crop yields, 9, 11, 145, 145, 147, 179, 236-237, 252,

Index

Index
economic diversification, 21, 71, 448
gross domestic product (GDP)*, 158, 243, 256,
258, 265, 373
gross fixed capital formation (GFCF)*, 317, 373
Economic sectors, 242-244, 256, 3.SM.3.5
energy systems, 243-244
global economic impacts, 256
impacts and risks, 180-181, 242-244, 250, 256
tourism, 242-243
transportation, 244
Ecosystem(s)*, 179, 182, 216-230, 250
adaptation options*, 384, 385, 4.SM.4.3.2
Arctic, 9, 11, 53, 220
coastal, 8, 181, 182, 226, 249, 330
drylands, 459
feasibility of mitigation options, 382
freshwater, 213-216, 221, 247
impacts and risks at 1.5C, vs. 2C, 5, 8-9,
11, 179, 182, 250, 453
impacts of temperature overshoot, 277
knowledge gaps, 388
large-scale shifts in, 69
mitigation and, 315, 4.SM.4.2.2
observed impacts, 253
ocean, 8-9, 179, 221-230, 248
resilience, 70
restoration of, 329-330, 459
risks of severe impacts, 53
risks, regional and ecosystem-specific, 219-221
succession in, 69
terrestrial, 8, 11, 179, 216-221, 247, 251,
3.SM.3.3.7
trade-offs, 19
transformations, 8
transitions, 315, 4.SM.4.2.2, 4.SM.4.3.2
Ecosystem-based adaptation, 386, 457-458
Ecosystem restoration, 16, 70, 329-330, 384
Ecosystem services*, 17, 19, 179, 247
carbon sinks, 69, 220, 221
impacts and risks at 1.5C, vs. 2C, 8, 9, 179,
247, 256-257
irreversible impacts, 8
marine, 179, 221-230, 248
mitigation and, 315
observed changes, 5
terrestrial, 221
Education (climate education), 22, 317, 385, 456
Effective climate sensitivity. See Climate sensitivity
Effective radiative forcing. See Radiative forcing
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)*, 58, 201, 257
deforestation and, 263
La Nina events, 235
response in Guatemala, 356
Electric vehicle (EV)*, 316, 332-333, 333
costs of, 325
Electricity generation/use, 15, 97, 133-134, 135,
138, 243-244, 326
carbon intensity* of, 97
decarbonization, 95
disruptions of, 326
enabling conditions, 387
energy storage, 325-326

606

evolution of supply over time, 134, 135
investments, 154
from renewables, 15, 96, 134, 324
technological innovations, 370
Electrification, 15, 95, 97, 111, 134, 315, 316, 326
in industry sector, 335, 336
in transport sector, 332-333, 333, 460
Emission pathways*, 12-17, 13, 14-15, 137, 184,
274-276
in a prospective scenario, 276
definition and categories, 24, 59-61, 62
See also Pathways
Emissions
1.5C pathways*, 6, 12-17, 13, 14-15, 95, 112,
113-118, 113, 117, 463
aggregate, 67-68, 115
anthropogenic, recent trends, 1.SM.7
in archetype pathways, 112-113, 113
benchmark values, 115, 4.SM.1
calculating, 66-68
carbon budget* and, 96
CO2 equivalent emission*, 67, 127
cumulative CO2, 6, 12, 62, 67, 96, 113, 123, 1.SM.6
cumulative CO2 and temperature, 96, 104, 105,
126-127, 127
cumulative emissions*, 6, 12, 62, 67, 123
at current rate, consequences of, 5
decoupling economic growth from, 56, 372, 376, 461
emissions gap, 126, 358
future emissions, commitment to, 66
global, in 2030, 6, 12, 13, 95
long-lived climate forcers, 66-68, 116-118, 117
measuring progress to net-zero emissions, 66-68
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)*,
56, 95, 126-129, 127, 128, 149
negative emissions*, 17, 51, 70, 96, 114, 118
net-zero emissions, 12, 51, 95, 107, 116
net-zero, timing of, 95, 119
non-CO2, 12, 13, 96, 105-107, 115-116, 147, 1.SM.6
past emissions, global warming and, 51, 64-65, 65
peak, 95, 115, 129
peak, timing of, 115, 126-127, 129
reductions, 13, 15, 18, 95, 463
reductions, behaviour change and, 317, 363
reductions, near-term, 17, 96, 124, 126-129, 128
reductions, rate of, 51
reductions, remaining carbon budget and, 96
reductions, technologies and, 369-370
reductions, timing of, 5, 6, 18, 61, 95, 96, 107,
114, 116-118
sectoral pathways, 137
short-lived climate forcers, 64, 66-68, 118, 120, 316
timescales and, 5, 61, 64-66
timing of, 95, 117, 119
warming commitment from past emissions, 64-66,
65, 1.SM.5
zero emissions commitment, 64-65, 65
Enabling conditions*, 18-19, 52, 148-150, 317-318,
338, 352, 386, 474-475, 4.SM.2
adaptation options*, 4.SM.2
enabling behavioural and lifestyle changes,
362-369

enabling technological innovations, 369-372, 370
FAQ, 392-393
international cooperation, 22, 23
knowledge gaps, 390-391
Manizales, Colombia: enabling environment in, 361
for mitigation implementation, 381-383
Energy efficiency*, 15, 96, 137, 140, 315, 316,
460-461
appliances, 316, 331, 460, 461
behavioural responses and, 460-461
building codes, 332, 339, 377
efficiency standards, 377, 378
food production systems, 315-316
improving, 377-378
in industry sector, 315, 335, 335
mitigation options, 460-461
policies, 149, 153, 377-378
sustainable development goals (SDGs) and, 448
Energy sector, 15, 129-144, 243-244, 315, 324-327
adaptation options*, 384, 385
carbon dioxide capture and storage in, 326-327
carbon intensity, 129-130, 130, 137-138, 138, 139
decarbonization, 95, 148, 277, 316, 461
decarbonization, macro-level indicators, 129-130
diversification of, 21, 448
electrification, 15, 95, 97, 111, 134, 315, 316, 326
emissions, 96, 137, 138
end-use sectors, 136-144
energy security, 387
feasibility of mitigation options, 382
final energy, 137, 138
fuel switch, 460-461
hybrid systems, 326
infrastructure, 326, 384, 385
investments, 16, 22, 95-96, 153, 155, 372, 373-374
knowledge gaps, 388
low-carbon pathways, 462, 464-466
low-carbon technologies, 15, 16, 96
mitigation options, 12, 14, 460-461, 4.SM.4.2.1
renewable energy, 14, 15, 96, 111, 131, 132-133,
316, 324
solar energy, 96
synergies with Sustainable Development Goals, 19
transformation, 129-144, 316, 463
transitions in 1.5C pathways*, 15, 96-97, 130,
315, 316, 324-327, 374-375, 4.SM.4.2.1,
4.SM.4.3.1
transitions, speed and scale of, 320, 320
water and, 326, 384, 464-466
water-energy-food (WEF) nexus, 386-387
Energy supply and demand, 15, 17, 96-97,
129-136, 316, 460-461, 466
in 1.5C warmer worlds, 161, 162, 316
access to energy, 464
air conditioning, 243
batteries, 325
bioenergy*, 12, 17, 96, 111-112, 124, 324-325
carbon intensity of, 129-130, 130, 461
demand reductions, 95, 137
disruptions and vulnerabilities, 326
emissions pathways, 12, 14, 15, 95
energy storage, 316, 325-326

Index
heavy precipitation, 255
See also Climate extreme
Extremes. See Climate extreme; and specific topics,
e.g., precipitation

F
Fairness*, 449, 469, 479
nation-level fair shares, 470
FAQs. See Frequently Asked Questions
Farmer managed natural regeneration (FMNR), 459
Feasibility*, 18-19, 52, 56, 71-72, 380-386, 381,
392-393, 393
adaptation options*, 381, 384-386, 385,
4.SM.4.3.1-4.SM.4.3.5
assessment of, 71-72, 380, 381, 382-383, 4.SM.4.1
definition, 52
dimensions of, 71-72, 380, 381, 392
enabling conditions*, 18-19, 52, 56
mitigation options*, 381, 381, 382-383,
4.SM.4.2.1-4.SM.4.2.5
Feedback. See Climate feedbacks
Fiji, freshwater resources, 368
Finance, 21-22, 23, 148-149, 317, 361-362, 372-380,
474
access to, 21, 23, 155, 317, 456
adaptation financing, 21-22, 379, 456
challenges of, 372-375, 373-374, 379
climate-friendly products, 378
de-risking, 317, 378-379
global and national systems for, 317-318, 380
Green Climate Fund, 74, 379
green instruments, 378, 474
innovative, 315, 380
knowledge gaps, 391
low-emission assets, 317
mobilization of, 19, 456
multilateral and national development banks, 317
new forms of, 374, 380, 474
policy instruments and, 317, 372-380
private sector, 21, 22
public-private partnerships, 317, 474
public sector, 21, 317
redirection of, 317, 374, 378
See also Investments
Financial institutions*, 361-362
Fires, 244, 259
forest fires, 8, 247
tundra, 262
Fisheries, 8, 9, 11, 237-238, 248, 452
adaptation measures, 238
fin fish, 180, 226-227, 237-238, 3.SM.3.2.7,
3.SM.3.3.10, 3.SM.3.2.12, 3.SM.3.2.13
foodwebs and, 226-227, 248
hypoxia and, 224
livelihoods, 452
management, 227
productivity change, 225, 249, 258
projected impacts, 8, 9, 11, 178, 222, 228, 248, 257
range shifts, 222, 248
restoration of, 330
risks, 180, 228, 237-238, 251, 252, 257

Floods*, 11, 182, 201-203, 211, 214-215,
3.SM.3.1.1.2
coastal, 181, 231, 235, 249, 252, 252, 3.SM.3.3.3
damage from, 214, 215
Danube River Protection Convention, 356
fluvial, 201-203, 214, 247, 251-252, 252,
3.SM.3.3.4
management in Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 342
numbers of people at risk, 452
observed changes, 201, 211
Philippines, flood measures, 368
projected changes, 179, 201-203, 202, 211, 214,
3.SM.3.1.1.2
risks, with 1.5C warming, compared with 2C, 7,
178, 179, 181, 201-203, 202, 214-215, 247,
251-252, 252
sea level rise and, 8
Fluorinated gases, 118, 120
Food, Table 3.SM.12
GHG-intensive foods, 97, 147
healthy diets and choices, 19, 97, 147, 180, 462
land use for, 97, 145
plant-based proteins, 112
prices, 447, 462, 464
quality/nutrition, 327, Table 3.SM.12
water-energy-food (WEF) nexus, 386-387
Food demand
reducing, 464, 466
in SSPs, 110, 110, 111
Food production systems, 178, 236-240, 250, 252,
327-329, 453, 464, Table 3.SM.5
climate-smart food production, 239
efficiency of, 315-316, 464
genome modification, 329
land use and, 327-329
mixed crop-livestock production, 315, 328
projected impacts, 179-180, 236-240, 250
technological innovations, 316, 329
tipping points*, 263, 264
See also Agriculture; Crop yields
Food security*, 180, 182, 237, 238-240, 250
decline in, 53
enhancing, 315-316
food insecurity, 447
mitigation pathways and, 464
projected impacts, 179-180, 239, 250, Table 3.SM.5
risks to, 238-239
strategies for improving, 239-240
Food shortages, 9
Food wastage*, 316, 328-329, 462
Forcing. See Radiative forcing
Forest fires, 8, 247
Forests*, 220, 316, 329-330
agroforestry, 328, 384
Amazon tropical forest, 221, 263, 340
Australian rainforest, 254
boreal, 8, 263, 264
as carbon sinks, 340
CDR options and, 316
ecosystem restoration, 329-330
emissions, 14
impacts, 220

607

Index

evolution of primary energy contributions, 130-132,
131, 132-134
final energy demand, 137, 138
fossil fuels, 96-97
grid flexibility resources (GFR), 325
low-demand scenarios, 110, 111, 448
mitigation options, 460-461
primary energy supply, 96-97, 130-132, 131,
132-133
smart grids, 316
in SSPs, 109-110, 110
sustainable development goals
(SDGs) and, 447-448
synergies and trade-offs, 19, 20-21, 448
transformations in, 129-136, 130-135
urban, 331
See also Electricity generation/use
Enhanced weathering*, 17, 112, 268, 269, 270,
345-346, 462-463
costs, 316, 345
side effects, 345-346
Equality*, 448-449, 451-453
in 1.5C warmer worlds*, 451-453
inequality, 456
inequality, reducing, 18-23, 445-538
Equilibrium climate sensitivity. 
See Climate sensitivity
Equity*, 18, 23, 51, 54-55, 448-449, 456, 469-470,
479
in 1.5C warmer worlds*, 451-453
burden sharing*, 380, 470
climate-resilient development
pathways*, 22, 448-449, 469-470
conditions for achieving, 474-475
disproportionate impacts and, 51
fairness* and, 449, 469, 479
gender equity*, 23
intergenerational equity*, 55
international equity, 55
justice and, 22, 55, 456, 470
mitigation efforts and, 18, 55
national equity, 55, 470
policies and, 22, 456
procedural equity*, 55, 73
research gaps, 475-476
responsibility-capacity-need assessment, 470
in social-ecological systems*, 338-341
trade-offs, 19
Ethics*, 51, 52
European Union, Covenant of Mayors, 354, 355
Evidence*, 451
Exposure*
factors influencing, 53
numbers of people exposed, 178, 246, 453
See also Hazard; Risk; Vulnerability
Extinction, 8, 179, 218, 256-257
commitment to, 218
Extratropical cyclone*, 203-204, 211
See also Tropical cyclone
Extreme weather events*, 182, 255
floods and droughts, 214-215, 255
frequency of, 223

Index

Index
land area for, 16, 97
land-use change, 146
rainforests, 254, 263, 264
REDD+, 329-330
responsible sourcing of products, 462
risks, 8, 220-221
tipping points*, 263, 264
See also Afforestation; Deforestation; Reforestation
Fossil fuels*
in 1.5C pathways*, 14-15, 15, 96-97
combined with CCS, 97, 135
countries/economies dependent on, 448,
461, 462
energy sector use, 15, 96-97, 131, 131,
132-133, 138
greenhouse gas emissions, 53, 114
market preference, shifting, 317
reducing investments in, 378
Framing and context, 49-92
assessment and methodologies, 75-76
confidence, uncertainty and risk, 77
feasibility, 71-72
framing asymmetries, 55
global response, 70-75
impacts, 69-70
knowledge base, 53-56, 75-76
sustainable development, 73-75
transformation and transitions, 73
understanding 1.5C, 56-64
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
How Close are we to 1.5C?, 81, 82
What are Carbon Dioxide Removal and Negative
Emissions?, 394, 395
What are the Connections between Sustainable
Development and Limiting Global Warming to
1.5C above Pre-Industrial Levels?,
477-478, 478
What are the Impacts of 1.5C and 2C of
Warming?, 282-283, 283
What are the Pathways to Achieving Poverty
Reduction and Reducing Inequalities while
Reaching a 1.5C World?, 479-480, 480
What do Energy Supply and Demand have to
do with Limiting Warming to 1.5C?, 161, 162
What Kind of Pathways Limit Warming to 1.5C
and are we on Track?, 159, 160
What Transitions Could Enable Limiting Global
Warming to 1.5C?, 392-393, 393
Why are we Talking about 1.5C?, 78, 80
Why is Adaptation Important in a 1.5C-Warmer
World?, 396-397, 397
Freshwater systems, 182, 213-216, 221, 247
adaptation initiatives, 368
extreme events, 214-215
freshwater stress, 181
knowledge gaps, 272
water temperature, 214
See also Water resources
Fuel switch, 460-461, 481-506
Fybnos and succulent Karoo biomes, 260, 261

608

G
Gender equity*, 23, 452
General circulation model (GCM). See Climate models
Genome modification techniques, 329
Geophysical relationships, 101-107
climate and Earth-system feedbacks, 103-104
geophysical uncertainties, 96, 101-104
knowledge gaps, 157-158
non-CO2 climate forcers, 101-103, 103
Geophysical warming commitment, 64-66, 65
Glaciers*, 206
Global climate model (GCM). See Climate models
Global financial systems, 317-318
Globalisation, 319
Global mean surface temperature (GMST)*,
56-57, 57, 177, 186, 274
1.5C rise, factors in, 4, 274
anomalies*, 183, 210
definition, 24
measurement of, 12
observed, 4, 6, 186
past emissions and, 51
Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT)*,
12, 56
Global response, strengthening, 18-23, 70-75,
313-443
1.5C-consistent pathways, implications of,
320-321, 320, 448
accelerating the response, 319-320
adaptation options, 321, 336-337, 338
change, far-reaching and rapid, 352-380, 392
change, historical rates of, 322
cooperation, 22, 23
enabling change, 21-22, 315-318
feasibility assessments, 380-386, 381, 382-383,
385
finance and investments, 317, 321, 361-362,
372-380
governance and policies, 23, 71, 315, 316, 317,
321, 352-355
implementation, 23, 70, 71, 315, 317, 319,
320-323, 352-380
implementing adaptation, 383-386, 385
implementing mitigation, 381-383
integration and enabling transformation, 380-387
knowledge gaps, 318, 387, 388-391
levels of ambition, raising, 315
monitoring and evaluation (M&E)*, 386
policy instruments and finance, 372-380
response options, 19-21, 70-71, 316-317
sustainable development and, 18, 22, 316, 321
synergies and trade-offs, 316, 386-387
system transitions, and rates of change, 322-323
systemic changes, 323-349
transformation and transitions, 70, 73, 315,
380-387
transitions, speed and scale of, 317, 320, 320
Global Temperature-change Potential (GTP),
66-68
Global warming*, 4-6
commitment to continued warming, 64-66, 65,

1.SM.5
current level of, 4, 51, 53, 76, 106, 177, 1.SM.1
definition, 24, 51, 56
with emissions continuing at present rate, 4
geophysical warming commitment, 64-66, 65
human experience of present-day, 53, 1.SM.1
human-induced, 4-5, 51, 53, 53, 54, 59, 81, 82,
186-187, 282, 1.SM.2, 1.SM.6
level in 2017, 51, 59, 81
maximum temperature reached, 5
observed, 4, 51, 53, 53, 58-59, 189-190,
1.SM.1, 1.SM.2, 1.SM.3, 1.SM.6
past emissions and, 51, 64-65, 65, 72
peak in, 5, 65, 96, 101, 177, 277, 278
pre-industrial* reference period,
51, 56, 57-59, 184
projections, 4, 81, 82, 95, 187-188, 188
reference periods, 56-59, 184
regional/seasonal variations in, 4, 59, 60, 81
temperatures used for definition, 51, 106
timescales and persistence, 5
total warming, 59, 61
See also Global mean surface temperature;
Temperature
Global warming of 1.5C, 4-6, 56-64, 187, 274
1.5C pathways*, 12-17, 51, 93-174
already experienced in some regions
and seasons, 4, 51, 59, 68, 81, 452
closeness to (FAQ), 81, 82
context of sustainable development
and poverty eradication, 18-23
framing and context, 4-6, 49-92
future emissions and, 6, 13
impacts and risks, compared with 2C,
5, 7-10, 11, 51, 175-311, 261
not considered `safe', 447, 455
projected climatic changes, 7-10, 186-188
projected timeline for reaching,
4, 95-96, Table 3.SM.7
Reasons for concern (RFCs)*, 10, 11, 181
reference period, 56-59, 184
returning to, after overshoot, 5, 17, 61, 96
stabilization responses/scenarios, 147, 158, 182,
184-185
strengthening the global response, 18-23, 70-75,
313-443
synergies and trade-offs, 19
temperature range for, 51, 187, 188, 275
See also 1.5C warmer worlds*
Global warming of 2C, 100
emissions and, 116
impacts and risks, compared with 1.5C, 5, 7-10,
11, 175-311, 261
OECD scenario for, 373
Reasons for concern (RFCs)*, 10, 11
regions with high risks, 247-250
runoff and floods, 178, 211
Global warming of 3C, 18, 261
rainforests and, 263
Global Warming Potentials (GWPs), 66-68
Governance*, 19, 71, 316, 317, 352-355
adaptive governance*, 315

Index

H
Happiness index (Bhutan), 387
Hazard*, 68, 186-212, 210-212
collocated and/or concomitant, 188
See also Disaster; Risk; Vulnerability
Health. See Human health
Heat-related morbidity and mortality, 9, 11,
180, 240-241, 250, 252, 252, 263, 264, 3.SM.3.3.1
Heat stress, 452

coral reefs, 226, 229
Heatwaves*, 9, 263, 264
in cities, 242
deadly, 263, 264
extreme, 177
marine, 177
numbers of people exposed, 178
observed changes, 177
projected changes, 177-178
tipping points*, 263, 264
Holocene*, 53
Holocene Thermal Maximum (HTM), 208
Hotspots, 182, 258-260, 261
drought*, 199, 200
precipitation, 193, 194
temperature, 190-191, 193
Human behaviour*, 362-369
adaptation behaviour*, 363
adaptation options*, 457
behavioural change*, 19, 21, 22, 97, 315, 317, 461
behavioural change, enabling, 362-369
behavioural change, knowledge gaps, 390-391
dietary choices, 19, 97, 147, 180, 316, 462
energy efficiency* and, 460-461
factors affecting, 364-365
habits, heuristics, and biases, 365, 461
knowledge and, 364
mitigation behaviour*, 362, 363
motivation and, 364-365
rebound effect, 460
See also Values
Human health, 9, 178, 182, 240-241, 250, 385
adaptation limits*, 455
air quality and, 241, 250, 464, Table 3.SM.9
benefits of emissions reductions, 12
co-benefits, 157
cold-related mortality, 241
heat-related morbidity and mortality, 9, 11, 180,
240-241, 250, 252, 252, 263, 264, 3.SM.3.3.1
impacts and risks at 1.5C, vs. 2C, 9, 180, 182,
240-241, 250, 252, 453
occupational health, 241, 250
population health, 337, 338, 385, 457
risks, 180, 240-241, 252
temperature-related risks, Table 3.SM.8
tipping points*, 263, 264
trade-offs, 19
urban areas, 180
vector-borne diseases, 9, 180, 241, Table 3.SM.10
Human-induced warming, 4, 51, 59, 81, 82,
186-187, 188, 282, 1.SM.2, 1.SM.6
equal to observed warming, 51, 59
rate of, 66
Human population, 51, 319
current, 319
displacement/migrations of, 180, 181, 244-245,
337, 338, 385
growth of, 95, 319
in regions where 1.5C already exceeded, 51
in SSPs, 109, 110
Human rights*, 55, 450, 460, 469-470, 475
Human security*, 9

Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 12, 96, 118, 341-342,
342
radiative forcing from, 342
Hydrogen, 15, 315, 335, 336
Hydrological cycle*, 191-196
Hydropower, 201, 214, 243, 466

I
Ice sheets*
albedo and, 257
Antarctic ice sheet, 7, 178, 208-209, 257, 258,
271, 282
Greenland ice sheet, 7, 178, 206, 208-209, 257,
271, 282
marine ice sheet instability (MISI), 257, 258
sea level rise and, 7, 178, 206, 208, 257, 271
thresholds, 257
time frame for loss of, 257
tipping points, 282
(Climate change) Impact assessment*, 76, 185-186
Impacts*, 7-10, 68-70, 175-311
in 1.5C and 2C warmer worlds*, 7-10,
177-179, 182, 319
in 1.5C pathways, vs. overshoot pathways, 51,
61, 62
attribution for, 69, 213
avoided, 18, 68, 183, 253-265, 447, 452-453,
453, 475
climate extremes and, 7, 177-178, 182
coastal and low-lying areas, 231-234, Table 3.SM.4
definitions, 24, 68
direct vs. indirect, 69
disproportionate, 11, 51, 447, 452
distribution of, 10, 11, 18, 181, 255-256
drivers of, 69
economic sectors and services, 180-181, 182,
242-244, 250, 256
ecosystems, 178, 179, 182
emission pathways* and, 51, 282
FAQ on, 282-283, 283
food systems, 179-180, 182, 236-240, 250,
Table 3.SM.5
global aggregate, 10, 11, 181, 182, 256-257
global and regional climate changes, 186-212,
210-212
human health, 9, 180, 182, 240-241, 250,
252, 453
impact assessment*, 76, 185-186
impact cascades, 69, 245, 452
irreversible, 5, 61, 177, 251, 252, 254
knowledge gaps, 272-273
land use, 179-180
livelihoods, poverty, and migration, 244-245, 447
marine ecosystems, 8-9, 179, 221-230
non-linearity, 69-70
observed, 5, 53, 212-253
ocean, 5, 8-9, 178, 179, 180, 182, 221-230, 228,
248-249, 3.SM.3.2.1-3.SM.3.2.13
projected risks, 7-10, 212-253
regional, 9, 68, 180-181, 182, 189-196
sea level rise, 7-8, 181, 182, 206-207, 212

609

Index

challenges in 1.5C pathways, 95
Covenant of Mayors initiative, 354, 355
governance capacity*, 71
governance framework, 317, 359
inclusive, 475
international, 352-354, 474
knowledge gaps, 390
linkages across sectors, 71
local and regional, 316, 354, 355
multilevel governance*, 19, 23, 317, 352-355,
355, 356, 384, 386, 474-475
national, 316, 353, 361
partnerships among actors, 23
sub-national, 354
water-energy-food (WEF) nexus, 386-387
See also Policies
Green bonds, 378
Green Climate Fund, 74, 379
Green economy, 470-471
Green infrastructure*, 10, 316, 334, 334, 384, 385
investment in, 316
Greenhouse gas(es) (GHGs)*,
long-lived, 64-66, 66-68, 116-118
short-lived, 64, 66-68, 316
See also Carbon dioxide; Methane; Nitrous oxide;
Ozone
Greenhouse gas emissions, 14-15, 18
aggregate, 115
benchmark values, 115
cumulative emissions*, 6, 12, 62
drivers of, 53
global, in 2030, 12, 13
reductions in, 6, 12, 13, 14-15, 95
reporting of, 66
timing of reductions, 6, 13, 95
See also Emissions
Greenhouse gas removal*. See Carbon dioxide
removal (CDR)
Greenland ice sheet, 7, 178, 206, 208-209, 257,
271, 282
Gross domestic product (GDP)*, 158, 243, 256,
258, 265, 373
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF)*, 317, 373
Gross world product (GWP), 256
Groundwater, 15, 3.SM.3.1.1.3
coastal, 181
Guatemala
Indigenous Table for Climate Change, 360
Maya watershed meteorological forecasts, 360
response to drought and El-Nino, 356
Gulf Cooperative Council (GCC) countries, 462

Index

Index
small islands and coastal areas, 181, 182
summary of, 182-183, 182, 247-250, 251-253
terrestrial ecosystems, 8, 11, 179, 216-221, 252,
Table 3.SM.2
time-integrated, 61, 62
timescales of, 61, 62
uncertainties*, 69
uncertainty propagation, 3.SM.1.3
urban areas, 241-242
water resources, 179, 3.SM.3.1.1.2-3.SM.3.1.1.4
Implementation. See Global response, strengthening
Inclusion/inclusive processes, 331, 333, 353, 381,
449, 475
cultural considerations, 384
decision-making, 456
Incremental adaptation. See Adaptation
India, technology and renewables pathways, 471
Indigenous knowledge*, 22, 315, 337, 338, 339,
385, 456, 480
community adaptation and, 360
in Guatemala, 360
Indigenous Table for Climate Change (Guatemala),
360
in Pacific Islands and small island developing
states, 360
in Tanzania, 360
Indigenous peoples, 23, 447
in Arctic, 9, 339
cultural beliefs, 364
land tenure, 462
Maya (in Guatemala), 360
risks and impacts, 9
Industry sector, 334-336, 4.SM.4.3.4
adaptation options*, 385, 386
bio-based feedstocks, 335-336, 335
carbon capture and storage (CCS), 335, 336
changes in structure of, 375
decarbonization, 140
electrification and hydrogen, 335, 336, 460
emissions, 15, 114, 140, 334
energy efficiency, 315, 335, 335, 460
energy-intensive industry, 334
feasibility of mitigation options, 383
final energy demand and use, 138-140, 139
knowledge gaps, 389
mitigation options*, 335, 4.SM.4.2.4
substitution and circularity, 335, 335, 460
technological innovations, 370, 460
transitions in, 15, 334-336, 460, 4.SM.4.3.4
transitions, speed and scale of, 320, 320
Inequality
in 1.5C warmer world*, 447
adaptation pathways* and, 458-459
increased, 53, 319
persistent, 471
reducing, 18-23, 72, 445-538, 456, 475
research gaps, 475-476
See also Equality
Information and communication technology
(ICT)*, 316, 319
Information flow and sharing, 377-378, 456, 457

610

Infrastructure
adaptation options*, 384-386, 385, 4.SM.4.3.3
climate-resilient, 386
coastal, 181, 226, 231, 235, 249
decommissioning of existing, 374
feasibility of mitigation options, 382
floods and, 181
green infrastructure*, 10, 316, 334, 334, 384, 385
investments in, 21, 333, 373-374, 374
knowledge gaps, 388-389
lock-in of carbon-emitting, 18, 126
low-emission, 317, 374
mitigation options*, 4.SM.4.2.3
sea level rise and, 8, 231, 249
transitions in, 15-16, 4.SM.4.3.3
urban, 331, 333
Insects, 254-255
phenology, 216, 218
pollination by, 216, 218, 255
range loss, 254-255, 256-257
species loss, 179, 218
Institutional capacity*, 19, 71, 359-362
cooperative institutions and social safety nets, 362
enhancing, 359-362, 384
monitoring, reporting, and review, 361
policy design and implementation, 359-360
Institutions*, 359-362, 474-475
financial, 361-362
institutional capacities, 359-362
knowledge gaps, 390
monitoring, reporting, and review, 361
reform: Manizales, Colombia, 361
Integrated assessment*, 95
Integrated assessment models (IAMs)*, 99,
100-101, 108-109, 136-137
assumptions, 2.SM.1.2.2, 2.SM.1.2.3
bioenergy and BECCS deployment in, 124, 268
CDR and, 268-269
global economic impacts, 256
knowledge gaps, 158
land use and bioenergy modelling, 2.SM.1.2.4
multiple IAMs, 463-464
scope, use and limitations, 2.SM.1.2.1
Integrated assessment model (IAM) scenario
database
configuration, 2.SM.1.3.1
data collected, 2.SM.1.3.4
modelling Framework Reference Cards, 2.SM.2
Part 2
overview of mitigation measures, 2.SM.1.2.6
overview of scenarios, 2.SM.1.3.2
overview of studies, 2.SM.1.3.3
scenario classification, 2.SM.1.4
summary of models, Table 2.SM.7
Interconnectivity, 52, 54, 319
International agreements, 70, 317
International cooperation, 22, 23, 95
Mekong River Commission, 240
International governance, 352-354, 474
Internet of Things (IoT)*, 331
Invasive species, 8, 9, 223

Investments, 21, 95-96, 149, 153-155, 316,
372-380
decarbonization*, 378
energy-related, 16, 95-96, 153, 155
green investment, 474
incentives, 317
investment needs, 373-374
knowledge gaps, 158
low-emission, 154, 317, 378
mitigation, 21, 95-96, 466
policy instruments and, 317
speed and scale of change, 321
upscaling of, 15, 317
world investment, 317, 373
See also Finance
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), 51, 81
IPCC Special Report on 1.5C (SR1.5), 4, 74, 79
storyline, 77-78, 78
timeline of, 80
Iron fertilization. See Ocean fertilization
Irreversibility*, 5, 61, 177, 251, 252, 254, 262, 277
temperature overshoot and, 8, 61, 179
See also Tipping points
Italy, Province of Foggia, multilevel governance
in, 355

J
Jamaica, 339-340
Justice*, 448-449, 456, 469
distributive justice*, 55
justice-centered pathways, 470
procedural justice*, 55
social justice*, 22, 448-449
See also Equity; Ethics; Fairness; Human rights

K
Kampala, Uganda, Climate Change Action
Strategy, 340
Kigali Amendment, 118
Kiribati, adaptation in, 368, 471
Knowledge gaps, 157-158, 388-391
impacts and risks, 272-273
See also specific topics
Knowledge sources, 52, 53-56, 75-76
grey literature, 76, 451
indigenous knowledge*, 22, 315, 337, 338, 339,
385, 456, 480
local knowledge*, 22, 339, 457
scientific literature, 75, 451
Krill, 227, 228, 3.SM.3.2.6
Kyoto Protocol*, 80, 353
Kyoto GHG-emissions, 14, 115-116, 117, 119, 126

L
Land management, 17, 19, 180
carbon dioxide removal and, 121, 180
Land surface air temperature*, 56
Land use*, 144-148, 180, 327-329
adaptation options*, 384, 385, 4.SM.4.3.2

Index
Lock-in*, 18, 126, 129
London, U.K.
adaptation and disaster risk management, 458
car use/policies, 366
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF)*, 66-68,
116-118, 117
time scales, 64-66
Loss and Damage*, 454-456
Low-carbon pathways, 471-472

M
Maharashtra, India, water resources, 368
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation)*, 19,
386, 396
Malaria, 9, 180, 241, 452
Mangroves, 225, 226, 228, 228, 248, 252, 462,
3.SM.3.2.1, 3.SM.3.3.8
replanting, 330, 457
Manizales, Colombia, 361
Marginal abatement costs, 16, 95, 150, 375
Marine ecosystems. See Ocean ecosystems
Mayan K'iche population in Guatemala, 360
Mediterranean region, 259, 261
droughts, 200-201
threatened systems, 254
Mekong River basin, 239-240
Methane (CH4)*, 268, 316, 341, 342
AFOLU sector, 118, 147, 147
agricultural, 96
emissions, 13, 118, 120
emissions, evolution of, 96
emissions reduction, 12, 95, 102, 157, 268, 316
mitigation potential, 118
release from permafrost*, 12, 104
release from wetlands, 12
zero emissions commitment (ZEC), 65
Migration*, 180, 181, 232, 244-245, 337, 338, 385
as adaptation, 457
(internal) displacement*, 245
sea level change* and, 232
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)*, 74,
450, 477
Mitigation*, 19-21, 70, 93-174
in 1.5C pathways*, 12-17, 51-52, 93-174, 465
adaptation and, 19, 386-387, 4.SM.4.5.1
classification of, 99-100, 100
costs, 16, 22, 258, 264, 316
decisions after 2030, 56
definition, 70
demand-side measures*, 97
equity considerations, 55
feasibility, 15, 380, 381
global response, strengthening, 19-21, 70-75,
313-443
implementing, 381-383
integrated mitigation studies, 95
investments, 21, 95-96, 466
knowledge gaps, 388-391
non-CO2 mitigation, 95, 96, 105-106, 108,
115-116, 120, 265, 268
risks and risk reduction, 5, 179, 448

socio-economic challenges to, 110
sustainable development and, 12, 19-21, 97,
156-157, 447-448, 459-466, 465, 481-509
synergies and trade-offs, 18-21, 20-21, 72, 97,
157, 316, 386-387, 391, 459-463, 465,
4.SM.4.5.1
synergies with adaptation, 386-387, 475,
4.SM.4.5.1, 4.SM.5.2
time frames for, 277, 278, 279-281
See also 1.5C pathways; Pathways
Mitigation behaviour. See Human behaviour
Mitigation options*, 19-21, 316-317, 319, 323,
324-347, 463, 481-509
1.5C pathways*, 100, 110-112, 316-317, 465
CDR, 4.SM.4.2.5
emissions reduction with, 12, 13, 14-15
enabling conditions, 381-383
energy supply and demand, 460-462, 4.SM.4.2.1
feasibility assessment, 381, 381, 382-383,
4.SM.4.2.1-4.SM.4.2.5
industrial system, 4.SM.4.2.4
land-based, 16, 462-463, 4.SM.4.2.2
mitigation-SDG table, 481-509
overview, 2.SM.1.2.6
SDGs and, 19-21, 20-21, 448
synergies and trade-offs, 459-463, 463, 465,
4.SM.4.5.1
urban and infrastructure, 4.SM.4.2.3
Mitigation pathways*, 93-174, 265-271
1.5C pathways*, 12-17, 13, 14-15, 60-61, 98,
101, 102, 108-129, 110, 2.SM.1.5
2C pathways, 96, 100, 101, 102
adaptive mitigation pathway, 60-61
carbon dioxide removal (CDR) in, 118-125, 180
challenges, opportunities, and
co-impacts, 147-157
emissions and, 12, 14-15
four model pathways, 12, 14-15, 61, 62
geophysical characteristics, 101-104
groups/classification, 61, 62, 113-114, 113
land-use change, 265-266
overview, 108-129, 129
prospective, 60, 63
scenarios in, 98-100, 100, 277, 279-281
sustainable development and, 463-472, 465,
2.SM.1.5
synergies and trade-offs, 465
transformations, 129-157, 466
See also 1.5C pathways; Pathways
Mitigation potential, 118, 315, 363
Mitigation scenarios*. See Mitigation pathways
Models. See Climate models; Integrated assessment
models (IAMs)
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E)*, 386
Monitoring, reporting, and review institutions,
361
Monsoon, 194, 262-263, 264
Montreal Protocol, 118, 353
Mosquitoes, 241
Motivation*, 364-365
Mountain ecosystems, 254

611

Index

for agriculture and food, 16, 97, 112, 146, 327-329
carbon dioxide removal (CDR)* and, 125, 126,
265-266, 268-270, 343
climate-resilient, 333
feasibility of mitigation options, 382
governance and, 17
intensification of, 16
knowledge gaps, 388
mitigation options, 148, 265-266, 382, 462-463,
4.SM.4.2.2
mitigation potential, 315
modelling, 2.SM.1.2.4
planning: Manizales, Columbia example, 361
risks of carbon release, 221
sustainability of, 16, 97
synergies and trade-offs, 19, 20-21
transitions in, 16, 17, 96, 97, 144-148, 315,
327-329, 4.SM.4.3.2
urban, 316, 333
Land-use change (LUC)*, 112, 126, 144-148,
179, 180
in agricultural sector, 98, 144-148
bioenergy production and, 69
biophysical feedbacks, 266-267
CDR and, 268-269
overview of, 145
pace of, 145, 146
risks in mitigation pathways, 69, 97, 265-266
in SSPs, 145
Large scale singular events, 10, 11, 181, 254,
257-258
Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), 208
Lifestyles, 315
choices, 97, 180
consumption and, 53, 56, 95, 97
emissions reduction through, 317
lifestyle change, enabling, 362-369
lifestyle change, knowledge gaps, 390-391
low energy demand, 97
low resource use, 97
mitigation and adaptation behaviour, 362-363
in SSPs, 110
sustainable, 276
See also Food; Human behaviour
Likelihood*, 77, 182
Limpopo Watercourse Commission, 356
Livelihoods*, 73, 182, 244
agricultural, 55, 315, 447
coastal, 9, 222, 226, 249, 447, 452, 455
impacts and risks of 1.5C warmer worlds*, 452
poverty and, 244
security, promoting, 456-457
Livestock, 9, 180, 264, 327-328
animal feed, 112
emissions, 147, 327
land use, 97
mixed crop-livestock production, 315, 328
production, 237
in the tropics and subtropics, 263, 264
Local communities, 23
Local knowledge*, 22, 339, 457
Local participation, 456

Index

Index

N
Narratives*, 52, 109
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)*,
56, 95, 126-129, 127, 128, 149, 159, 357-359
adaptation and, 359
consistency of, 357-359
remaining carbon budget and, 113-114
uncertainties and, 358
Natural gas, 97
NDCs. See Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs)
Negative emissions*, 17, 51, 70, 118-121, 394, 395
474
CDR, role in, 70, 114, 118
FAQ on, 394, 395
See also Net-zero emissions;
Net-zero CO2 emissions
Net negative emissions*, 51, 96, 114, 116, 474
Net-zero emissions*, 5, 24
Net-zero CO2 emissions*, 12, 51, 95, 116
definition, 24
measuring progress to, 66-68
necessary to stabilize GMST, 116, 161
timing of, 5, 12, 13, 61, 95, 107, 116, 119
New York, United States, adaptation initiatives, 340
Nitrogen fertilizer, 116
Nitrous oxide (N2O)*, 13, 66
agricultural, 96, 116-118, 147
bioenergy and, 12
emission increases, 96
emission reductions, 116-1118
Non-CO2 climate forcers, 96, 120, 341-342
geographical variation in, 103
reductions in, 95
uncertainties, 101-103, 103, 106, 108
Non-CO2 emissions*, 12, 13, 96, 106, 115-116,
265, 1.SM.6
agricultural, 147, 147
reducing, 341
remaining carbon budget* and, 105-107, 108
Non-governmental organizations, 22
Non-overshoot pathways. See Overshoot; Pathways
Nuclear energy, 14, 15, 325, 461
costs of, 325
role in primary energy supply, 130-131, 132,
132-133
safety of, 325
water use and, 466

O
Ocean(s), 8-9, 178, 182, 221-230, 248-249,
3.SM.3.2, Table 3.SM.3
adaptation options, 225
biodiversity, 8
carbon sequestration, 17, 121, 178, 222, 227, 228,
248, 257-258
carbon uptake, 17, 121, 178, 227, 228, 229,
3.SM.3.2.8
circulation, 204-205, 212, 223, 248
foodwebs, 226-227, 228, 248

612

heatwaves*, 177
hypoxia and dead zones, 179, 210, 224, 248
impacts and risks at 1.5C, vs. 2C, 5, 8-9, 178,
179, 180, 182, 221-230, 228, 248-249,
3.SM.3.2.1-3.SM.3.2.13
irreversible impacts, 8
knowledge gaps, 272-273
productivity/fisheries, 8, 179, 249
projected changes, 8-9
pteropods, 224, 226-227, 3.SM.3.2.4
Reasons for Concern, 3.SM.3., Table 3.SM.6
salinity, 209
Southern Ocean, 257-258
storms, 222-223, 249
stratification, 222, 224, 248
temperature, 8, 177, 204-205, 212, 222, 223-224,
248
thermal inertia/expansion of, 64-65, 107, 282
warming over, 4, 51
See also Coastal communities; Coral reefs;
Fisheries; Sea level change
Ocean acidification (OA)*, 8, 209-210, 212,
223-224, 248, 282
pH*, 212, 222, 223
reversal of, 5, 67
risks from, 180, 223-224, 227
Ocean alkalinization, 17, 121, 345-346
Ocean chemistry, 209-210, 223-224
carbonate chemistry, 178, 222, 223
Ocean ecosystems, 8-9, 179, 221-230, 248
blue carbon*, 330, 462
critical thresholds, 179
ecosystem services, 227-229, 228
foodwebs, 226-227, 228, 248
framework organisms, 225-226, 248
impacts, 8, 9, 178, 179, 221-230, 228, 248
ocean circulation and, 223, 248
species range shifts, 222, 248
Ocean fertilization*, 346, 462-463
Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), 373
Overshoot*, 12, 14-15, 18, 51, 100, 179, 265
CDR and, 17, 95
definition, 24
emission reductions and, 13, 14-15, 18, 95, 116
impacts of, 60
irreversible impacts, 61, 179
low-OS vs. high-OS, 100
magnitude and duration of, 179, 265
no or limited overshoot, 12-17, 13, 14-15,
60-61, 62
returning to 1.5C after overshoot, 5, 17, 61, 96
risks of, 5, 177, 179, 277
Ozone (O3)*, 268
ozone-related mortality, 9, 180, 250
precursors, 98, 118, 241
tropospheric, 236

P
Pacific decadal variability (PDV), 201
Paris Agreement*, 4, 18, 77, 79, 353

aim and context, 54-55, 66, 74, 77, 79, 359
equity principle, 51, 54, 479
goal of adaptation, 359
goal of limiting warming, 51
time horizon for, 74
transparency framework, 361
Pathway archetypes, 99-100, 100, 112-113, 113, 147
cumulative CO2 emissions, 123
electricity generation, 135
land-use change (LUC)*, 126, 145
land use/footprint, 147
primary energy contributions, 130-131, 131
Pathways, 12-17, 49-64, 62-64, 93-174
1.5C pathways*, 12-17, 14-15, 52, 59-64,
93-174, 100, 160, 265-271, 274-276, 320,
1.SM.4, 1.SM.6
2C pathways, 96, 100, 101, 102
adaptation pathways*, 64, 70, 396, 458-459
assumptions, 95, 109-112
bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture
and storage (BECCS)*, 17, 96
carbon dioxide removal (CDR)* in, 17, 21, 95, 96,
111, 118-125, 180, 265-266
classification of, 61, 62, 99-100, 100, 113-114, 113
climate-resilient development pathways, 22, 52,
64, 73, 448-449, 450-451, 451, 468-472,
475-476, 479-480, 480
definitions of, 59-61, 63-64
emissions in, 12-17, 13, 14-15, 24, 95, 96
four categories/model pathways, 12, 14-15,
59-61, 62, 63, 265-271
geophysical characteristics, 101-104
implications beyond end of century, 270-271, 278
net-zero CO2 emissions*, 12, 61, 66-68, 116
nexus approaches, 467
no or limited overshoot, 12-17, 13, 14-15, 60-61,
62, 100
non-CO2 mitigation, 265, 268
overshoot pathways, 12, 14-15, 18, 24, 51, 60-61,
62, 100, 277
overview, 108-129
portfolio of measures, 12, 15
prospective mitigation pathways, 60, 63
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)*, 62
scenarios used, 98-100, 100
sector and system transitions, 14-15, 15-16
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)*, 62-63,
109-110, 110, 111, 448, 467-468
sustainable development and, 18-23, 98-101
156-157, 156, 463-466, 465
Sustainable Development Pathways, 64, 448-449,
466-472, 469, 479-480
temperature pathways, 59-61, 62, 63
time frame for, 95-96
transformation pathways*, 70, 148-157
transformations, whole-system, 129-148
transitions, speed and scale of, 15, 320, 320, 392
uncertainty, 60, 98
used in this report, 59-61, 62, 63
See also 1.5C pathways; Climate-resilient
development pathways; Pathway archetypes;
Scenarios

Index
extremes, projected, 189, 197, 214-215
extremes, Sub-Saharan Africa, 197
heavy precipitation, 7, 177, 178, 194-196, 195,
211, 255
hotspots, 193, 194
monsoon, 194, 262-263, 264
observed changes, 177, 191-194, 211
projected changes, 7, 178, 187-188, 188, 211
regional, 191-196, 196, 3.SM.2.3.1, 3.SM.2.3.2
runoff*, 201-203, 211
See also Droughts; Floods
Precursors*, 64, 65, 98, 102-103, 118
Pre-industrial*, 24
reference period, 51, 56, 57-59, 81, 184
Procedural equity. See Equity
Pteropods, 224, 226-227, 3.SM.3.2.4
Public acceptability, 22, 317, 368-369

R
Radiative forcing*, 59, 66-67, 188
aerosols*, 102-103
long-lived climate forcers (LLCF)*, 64-66, 66-68,
116-118
natural forcings, 59, 66-67
non-CO2 forcers, 5, 6, 95, 96, 101-103, 103
recent trends, 1.SM.7
short-lived climate forcers (SLCF)*, 64, 66-68, 118,
120, 316
uncertainties in, 96, 101-104, 103
Rainfall. See Precipitation
Reasons for concern (RFCs)*, 10, 11, 181, 182,
251-258, 3.SM.3.3.1-3.SM.3.3.7
RFC1 (Unique and threatened systems), 10, 11,
181, 251, 253-255, 254
RFC2 (Extreme weather events), 10, 11, 181,
251-252, 254, 255
RFC3 (Distribution of impacts), 10, 11, 181,
251-253, 254, 255-256
RFC4 (Global aggregate impacts), 10, 11, 181,
251-254, 254, 256-257
RFC5 (Large scale singular events), 10, 11, 181,
254, 257-258
Recycling, 335, 335, 460
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Forest Degradation (REDD+)*, 329-330
Reference period*, 56-59, 81, 184
periods shorter than 30 years, 51
pre-industrial* temperatures, 51, 56, 57-59
30-year period used, 51, 56
Reforestation*, 17, 70, 121, 265, 266, 270, 316,
343, 394, 395
constraints, 316
incentivization of, 147
trade-offs, 269
Region(s)*, 187
climate differences in, 177-178
cooperation and governance, 353-354
with high risks at 2C, 247-250
hotspots, 258-260, 261
regions used in this report, 187
tipping points, 262-263, 264

warming of >1.5C already experienced, 4, 51,
68, 81, 452
See also specific regions and countries
Regional climate change, 68, 177, 188-191
drought*, 198-200, 198, 199, 200-201, 260
runoff*, 201-202, 202, 211
temperatures on land, 188-191, 189, 192, 193,
196, 197
See also Regional impacts; Regional precipitation;
Regional temperatures
Regional impacts, 9, 68, 177-178, 182
crop production, 9, 259, 263
economic growth, 9, 180-181
variation in, 450
Regional precipitation, 191-196, 196
observed changes, 191-194, 3.SM.2.3.1
projected changes, 193, 194-196, 195, 196
3.SM.2.3.2
Sub-Saharan Africa, 197
Regional temperatures, 59, 60, 189-191, 196, 283
observed changes, 189-190, 197, 1.SM.1, 1.SM.3,
3.SM.2.2.1
projected changes, 189, 190-191, 192, 193, 196,
197, 283, 3.SM.2.2
Regulatory measures, 377-378
Remaining carbon budget*, 12, 96, 104-107,
2.SM.1.1.2
1.5C pathways*, 113-114
agricultural emissions and, 147
assessment of, 104-107, 108
CO2 and non-CO2 contributions, 105-107, 108
definition, 24, 96
overshoot minimization and, 177
permafrost thawing and, 105, 107
uncertainties, 12, 96, 108
Remedial measures, 70-71
Renewable energy, 14, 15, 96, 111, 131, 132-133,
316, 324
acceptability of, 368-369
deployment and scaling up, 461, 464-466
feasibility of, 324
hybrid systems, 326
water demands for, 464
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)*,
62
Resilience*, 316, 456
climate-resilient land use, 333
cultural practices and, 360
See also Climate-resilient development pathways
(CRDPs); Vulnerability
Risk(s)*, 5, 7-10, 177-181, 186-253, 210-212,
247-250
confidence and likelihood qualifiers, 77, 182
de-risking policies and investments, 317, 378-379
definition, 24, 68
ecosystems*, 8-9, 11
factors influencing, 5, 277
with global warming of 1.5C, compared with
2C, 5, 7-10, 11, 177-181, 186-253, 210-212,
247-250, 453
human health, 180, 182, 250
interacting and cascading, 245, 452

613

Index

Peatlands, 221
Permafrost*, 182, 262, 271
beyond end of century, 271
feedbacks, 103-104, 262
irreversible loss of carbon from, 262, 264
remaining carbon budget and, 12
thawing, 8, 12, 104, 220, 259, 262
tipping points*, 262, 264
pH*. See Ocean acidification
Phenology, 216-218
Philippines, flood measures, 368
Phytoplankton, 224, 226
Policies*, 19, 21-22, 71, 148-150, 317, 372-380
acceptability* of, 22, 368-369
assumptions in 1.5 pathways, 112, 149
car/transport pricing policies, 366
carbon pricing, 95, 317, 375-377, 460
coordination and monitoring of, 449
design and implementation,
71, 321, 359-360, 460
enabling climate finance, 372-380
equity in, 22
innovation, 22
integrated policy packages, 379-380, 383
international agreements, 70, 317
internationally cooperative, 22, 23, 95
investment, 22
knowledge gaps, 391
for low-emission transition, 372-375
mobilization and integration of, 150, 317
national, 316
promoting climate action, 366-368
redistributive, 21, 448
regulatory measures, 377-378
for residual risk and loss and damage, 456
Sustainable Development Goals and, 448
technology, 95, 148, 370-371
See also Governance
Population. See Human population
Poverty*, 9, 53, 180, 182, 244
in 1.5C warmer worlds*, 447, 451-453
adaptation limits*, 455
avoided impacts of 1.5C vs. 2C, 452-453
climate change influence on, 55, 282, 447, 450, 452
disproportionate impacts, 9, 51
energy poverty, 464
increase in, 180
livelihoods* and, 244
multidimensional, 55, 450, 457
Multidimensional Poverty Index, 55
numbers of people at risk, 447, 452
`poverty scenario' (SSP4), 452
projections for, 9, 10, 180
Poverty eradication*, 18-23, 55, 72, 445-538
conditions for achieving, 474-475
mitigation pathways and, 22
research gaps, 475-476
sustainable development and, 450
Power asymmetries, 449, 459, 462, 471, 475
Prairie pothole ecosystems, 221, 254
Precipitation, 182, 191-196
extremes, observed, 191-192, 197

Index
key elements of, 251-253, 252
multi-sector, 246
multiple and compound, 10, 178, 181
to natural and human systems, 178, 179-181,
212-253, 247-250
Reasons for concern (RFCs)*, 10, 11, 181
residual, 454-456
social-ecological systems, 338-341
summary of, 247-250, 251-253
of temperature overshoot, 5, 177, 179
of unavoidable impacts, 455
uncertainty, 77
urban areas, 183
to vulnerable populations, 53
Risk assessment*, 55, 183-186
Risk management*, 336
adaptation* and, 5, 10
Sendai Framework*, 70
See also Disaster risk management
Risk sharing, 316, 336-337, 338, 385
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, adaptation strategy,
341
Runoff*, 178, 201-203, 211
observed changes, 201, 211
projected changes, 201-203, 202, 211

Index

S
Sahel, Africa, projected risks and impacts in, 180,
236, 259, 261, 262-263
Scenarios*, 52, 62-64, 98-100, 276, 277, 279-281
1.5C- and 2C scenarios, 98-100, 100, 184
comparison of, 279-281
database of, 99
definition of, 63
emission scenarios*, 184, 276
faster transition scenario, 131, 135
inclusion of CDR in, 277
OECD scenario for 2C, 373
primary energy supply in, 132-133
socio-economic scenario*, 62-63
SRES, 62
used in this report, 63
See also Narratives; Pathways
Scientific evidence, 52
Scientific institutions, 23, 317, 451
Sea ice*, 182, 205-206, 212, 224-225, 249, 270
Antarctic, 206, 225
Arctic, 8, 178, 205-206, 209, 212, 224, 254, 258,
261, 262
beyond end of century, 270
irreversible changes, 257, 262
temperature overshoot and, 8
as tipping point, 261, 262, 270
Sea level change*, 7-8, 182, 206-207, 212, 225,
231-234, 248, 249
adaptation and, 10
beyond end of century, 271
coastal areas and, 207, 231-234, 243, 248, 249, 252
commitment to continued rise, 7, 51, 67, 207, 257,
271, 282
deltas and estuaries, 232-233

614

detection and attribution, 252
emissions and, 5, 7, 51
glaciers and, 206
global mean sea level rise, 178, 206-207, 212
ice sheets* and, 7, 178, 206, 208, 257, 271
impacts, 178, 181, 182
migration due to, 232
multi-metre rise, 7, 178, 271
numbers of people at risk, 178, 231, 232, 234, 256
past climate episodes and, 208
projected, for 1.5C, vs. 2C, 7-8, 178, 206-207,
207, 212, 231-234, 234
regional, 178, 207, 234
sea level rise, 7-8, 67, 178, 206-207, 225,
231-234, 248, 249, 252
small islands and, 7, 8, 232
time-integrated impacts, 61, 62
UNESCO World Heritage sites at risk, 243
Sea surface temperature (SST)*, 204, 223-224,
248
in definition of 1.5C, 51
Seagrasses, 225-226, 228, 248, 3.SM.3.2.1
Seasonal warming, 4, 51, 59, 60, 68
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction*, 70
Sequestration. See Carbon sequestration
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)*, 62-63,
109-110, 110, 111, 448, 467-468
land-use change and, 145
policy assumptions, 149
SDGs and, 321, 448, 467-468
Shipping, 333
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF)*, 64, 66-68,
118, 120, 316, 341-342
co-benefits of reducing, 342, 342
emission reductions, 67, 316, 341-342
knowledge gaps, 389
main characteristics of, 342
mitigation options*, 341
projected emissions, 96, 157
SDGs and, 157
Singapore, road pricing and car use, 366
Sink*. See Carbon sequestration
Small Island Developing States (SIDS)*, 9,
234-235, 255, 260, 261
adaptation approaches, 339-340
adaptation limits, 235, 455
in Caribbean, 339-340
climate hazards for, 234-235, 471
climate-resilient development pathways* in,
471, 471
disproportionate impacts/risks, 9, 53, 447
flooding, 235
freshwater resources, 9, 213, 234, 235
Kiribati, adaptation in, 368, 471
livelihoods, 232, 235
migration and, 181
multiple, compounded risks, 10, 178, 181,
260, 261
Pacific Islands, indigenous knowledge in, 360
risks, 9, 181, 232, 255
sea level rise and, 7, 8, 232, 234-235
storm damage, 235

tourism, 229
Vanuatu, planning for climate-resilient
development, 449, 471
Snow, 182
Social cost of carbon (SCC)*, 150-151, 265, 375
Social costs*, 67, 265, 317, 365, 375
Social-ecological systems*, 338-341
Social learning*, 449, 475
Social safety nets, 362, 385
Societal choices, 98, 99
Societal (social) transformation.
See Transformation
Socio-economic drivers, 109-110, 110
Socio-economic scenario*, 62-63
Soil carbon sequestration (SCS)*. See Carbon
sequestration
Soil erosion, 216
Soil moisture*, 190, 191, 196
anomalies, 198, 199, 200
Solar energy, 96, 131, 131, 132-133
water use and, 464-466
Solar radiation modification (SRM)*, 12-13, 70-71,
347-349, 349-352
carbon budget and, 351
in context of 1.5C pathways*, 349-352
feasibility, 347-349, 351-352
governance, 347-348
impacts and ethical issues, 71, 317, 349, 351
knowledge gaps, 390
overview/main characteristics, 348
risks of, 13, 347
social acceptability of, 349
sustainable development and, 351
timing and magnitude, 349-351
uncertainties and limitations, 12-13, 316-317
Southeast Asia, vulnerability and risks in, 259, 261
Southern Ocean, role in global carbon cycle,
257-258
Special Report on 1.5C. See IPCC Special Report
on 1.5C (SR1.5)
Species
interactions, phenology and, 216-218
invasive, 8, 9, 223
loss and extinction, 8, 179, 218
range loss/shifts, 8, 179, 218, 222, 247, 248,
256-257
SSPs. See Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)
Stabilisation (of GHG or CO2-equivalent
concentration)*, 116, 122, 147, 158, 184-185
Stockholm, congestion charge and car use, 366
Storms, 181, 222-223, 249
extratropical, 203-204
storm surge, 223
tropical cyclones, 203-204, 211
Stranded assets*, 18
Structured Expert Dialogue (SED), 79
Sub-national actors*, 23
Sub-Saharan Africa, changes in climate extremes,
197
Sulphur dioxide (SO2), 96, 118, 120
Supply-side measures. See Demand and supply-side
measures

Index
mitigation and SDGs, 19-21, 20-21, 157, 459-463,
463, 465
mitigation and sustainable development, 459-463,
463, 475
uneven distribution of, 466
Synfuels, 333
Systemic changes/transitions, 14-15, 15-16, 21-22,
315, 323-349, 449, 476
enabling, 315-318
rates of change, 322-323
See also Transitions

T
Tanzania, indigenous knowledge used in, 360
Technology, 22
access to, 23
biotechnology/genome modification, 319, 329
deployment of, 72
disruptive, 22, 111, 319, 323
general purpose technologies (GPT)*, 369-370, 383
information and communication
technology (ICT)*, 316, 319
innovation in, 19, 21, 22, 316, 369-370
innovation, enabling, 369-372
innovation, examples of, 370
innovation, knowledge gaps, 391
low-carbon, 15, 16, 96, 153, 331
new, 15, 22, 319
policies, 95, 148, 370-371
Power-2-X, 111
smart technology/IoT, 331
standards, 332, 378
Technology transfer*, 19, 23, 371-372, 371, 449, 474
Temperature, 182
carbon budget, emissions, and, 96
datasets, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 1.SM.1
fluctuations in, natural, 56, 59
global average, defined, 56-57, 81
global mean surface temperature (GMST)*, 56-57,
57, 177, 186
heat-related morbidity and mortality, 9, 11, 180,
240-241, 250, 252, 252, 263, 264, 3.SM.3.3.1
heatwaves*, 9, 177-178, 263, 264
land-sea contrast in warming, 8, 51, 59, 187, 190, 205
land surface air temperature*, 56
number of hot days, 190, 193, 210
observed warming, 6, 51, 53, 53, 58, 106, 189-191,
1.SM.1, 1.SM.2, 1.SM.3, 1.SM.6
peak in, 5, 96, 101, 104, 177, 277
peak, reducing after, 17, 18, 278
projections, 4, 7, 177, 187-188, 188, 190-191,
192, 193
rate of change, 54, 177, 178
regional variation in, 177, 283
sea surface temperature (SST)*, 51, 204, 223-224,
248
temperatures used in definition of 1.5C, 51, 187,
188
See also Global warming
Temperature extremes, 255, 263
hotspots (key risks), 190-191, 193

and human health, 263, 264
observed, 210
probability ratio of, 192
projected, 7, 177, 189, 190-191, 192, 210, 255
Sub-Saharan Africa, 197
Temperature overshoot*. See Overshoot
Temperature threshold, 65, 66
Terrestrial ecosystems, 8, 179, 216-221, 247, 252,
3.SM.3.3.7
biomass and carbon stocks, 219, 220
biome shifts, 216, 217, 247, 250
ecosystem function, 219
impacts and risks at 1.5C, vs. 2C, 8, 11, 179,
216-221, 247, 251, 252, 3.SM.3.3.7, Table 3.SM.2
knowledge gaps, 272
phenology, 216-218
productivity, 220
regional and ecosystem-specific risks, 219-221
respiration, 219
severe ecosystem changes, 217
Thermohaline circulation. See Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC)
Tipping points*, 182, 262-263, 264, 270, 282
identifying, 458
See also Irreversibility
Tourism, 11, 178, 181, 242-243, 253, 3.SM.3.3.2
coastal areas, 229, 253
observed impacts, 181
projected impacts, 181, 242-243, 253
risks, 181, 253
seasonal, 181, 243
Trade-offs, 18-19, 72, 73, 269, 4.SM.4.5.1, 4.SM.5.2
example of, 477
knowledge gaps, 391
mitigation options and sustainable development,
459-463, 465
reconciling, 467
with SDGs, 19, 73
specific mitigation options, 97
uneven distribution of, 466
Transformation*, 22, 52, 70, 73, 112, 129-157, 315,
468-469
1.5C pathways*, 95, 112-113, 129-148, 448, 472
1.5C warmer worlds*, 73
challenges, opportunities, and
co-impacts, 148-157
cities/urban areas, 472-474
in climate-resilient development pathways, 468-469
context-specific, 469
energy system, 129-144, 463
FAQ on, 392-393, 393
feasibility of, 52, 72
fundamental elements of, 73
implementing, 276
societal (social) transformation*,
22, 52, 73, 448-449, 466
sustainable development and, 22, 448, 456
trade-offs, 73
upscaling and accelerating, 314
whole systems approach, 392
See also Transitions
Transformation pathways*. See Pathways

615

Index

Surface air temperature (SAT)
in definition of 1.5C, 51, 56
global average temperature and, 56-57
Sustainable development (SD)*, 18-23, 72, 73-75,
445-538
and 1.5C pathways*, 93, 97, 98, 156-157, 253,
450-451, 463-466, 465
and 1.5C warmer worlds*, 55-56, 447, 451-453
adaptation and, 19, 447, 456-459
avoided impacts and, 452-453, 453, 475
climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs)*
and, 22, 52, 64, 448-449, 450-451, 451, 468-472,
475-476, 479-480
co-benefits, 447
conditions for achieving, 474-475
definition, 73
equity and, 55-56, 448-449
integration with adaptation and mitigation, 75-76,
448, 467
mitigation and, 12, 18, 19-21, 97, 156-157, 156,
447-448, 459-466, 481-509
mitigation pathways and, 463-466, 465
overview, 450, 475-476
pathways to 1.5C, 466-472, 469, 479-480
research gaps, 475-476
risks to, 253
in social-ecological systems*, 338-341
synergies and trade-offs, 457-458, 459-463, 463,
475
trajectories, 451, 469-470, 480
transformation* and, 22, 56, 73, 448, 456, 466
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)*, 18,
19-21, 73-75, 156-157, 156
adaptation options* and, 457-458
avoided impacts and, 18, 68, 183, 253-265, 447,
453, 475
CDR and, 448, 462
climate change and, 73, 74, 75, 157, 158, 252
energy efficiency and, 448
equity and, 51
food security and nutrition, 238
mitigation options and, 19-21, 20-21, 448,
459-463
mitigation pathways, interactions with, 2.SM.1.5
mitigation-SDG table, 481-509
overview, 450
policy instruments and, 448
prioritizing, 447
risks from 1.5C, vs. 2C, 453
SDG Global Index Scores, 53
SDG-interaction scores*, 481-509
Shared Socio-economic Pathways* and, 321, 448,
467-468
synergies and trade-offs, 19-21, 21-22, 319, 447,
463, 475
system transitions and, 317
Sustainable Development Pathways, 64, 448-449,
466-472, 469, 479-480
Synergies, 18-19, 20-21, 72, 269, 316, 477,
4.SM.4.5.1, 4.SM.5.2
adaptation and SDGs, 447
knowledge gaps, 391

Index

Index
Transformational adaptation. See Adaptation
Transient climate response*, 184-185
See also Climate sensitivity
Transient climate response to cumulative CO2
emissions (TCRE)*, 96, 104, 106
Transition Movement, 480
Transition Towns (TTs), 473-474
Transitions*, 14-15, 15-16, 21-22, 73, 315-318,
323-349, 4.SM.4.2.1-4.SM.4.2.5,
4.SM.4.3.1-4.SM.4.3.5
adaptation options* supporting, 321, 336-337, 338
enabling, 19, 21-22, 315-318
in energy sector, 15, 96-97, 315, 324-327,
374-375, 4.SM.4.2.1, 4.SM.4.3.1
equity* in, 22
FAQ on, 392-393, 393
in land use, 16, 17, 96, 97, 315, 327-329,
4.SM.4.3.2
policies supporting, 22
risks and ethics, 319
speed and scale of, 15, 314, 317, 320, 320,
322-323, 392, 394
sustainable development and, 22
synergies, 316, 4.SM.5.2
system/sector transitions, 14-15, 15-16, 21-22,
96-97, 315-318, 323-349
See also specific sectors
Transnational emission reduction initiatives
(TERIs), 149
Transport sector, 244, 316, 332-333
biofuels, 325
car/transport pricing policies, 366
decarbonization* of, 316, 461
demotorization, 316, 366, 376
electric vehicle (EV)*, 316, 332-333, 333
electrification of, 332-333, 333, 460
emissions, 96, 114, 142-144, 143
emissions reduction, 366
final energy demand and use, 139, 142-144, 143,
332
impacts of weather and climate on, 244
international transport, 333
investments in, 373-374
road safety for pedestrians, 461
road transport, 142-143, 461
strategies to reduce energy consumption, 142
sustainable transport, 332
technological innovations, 370
transitions, 15-16, 316
transitions, speed and scale of, 320, 320
urban environments, 316, 332
Tropical cyclone*, 203-204, 211
Cyclone Pam, 471
Tundra, 8, 179, 216, 220
tipping points*, 262, 264

U
Uncertainty*, 69, 77
of climate response to mitigation, 60, 63
geophysical, 96, 101-104
in mitigation pathways, 60, 63

616

propagation of, 3.SM.1.3
Unique and threatened systems, 10, 11, 181, 251,
253-255, 254
United Kingdom Overseas Territories (UKOT), 339
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC)*, 79, 80, 353
adaptation financing, 21
Conference of the Parties (COP)*, 79
Green Climate Fund, 74, 379
Uptake*. See Carbon sequestration
Urban areas, 180, 241-242, 330-334
adaptation examples, 340-341
adaptation options*, 10, 70, 263, 384-386, 385,
4.SM.4.3.3
agriculture in, 316
demotorization, 316, 366, 376
energy systems, 331
feasibility of adaptation options, 384-386, 385
feasibility of mitigation options, 382
global urbanization, 472
governance, 473
green infrastructure*, 10, 334, 334, 385
heat island effect, 9, 180, 242
heat-related extreme events, 241-242
impacts and risks, 180, 182, 183, 241-242
informal urban settlements, 473
infrastructure, 331, 333
knowledge gaps, 388-389
land use, 316, 333
low-carbon cities, 331
mitigation options*, 4.SM.4.2.3
numbers of people in, 330, 340
peri-urban agriculture, 316
poverty and, 242
risks and risk reduction, 331, 456
sea level rise and, 231-232, 241
transformation* in, 472-474
transformational adaptation, 386
Transition Towns (TTs), 473-474
transitions, 15-16, 316, 330-334, 4.SM.4.2.3,
4.SM.4.3.3
transport, 316, 331, 332-333
urban planning, 148
water services, 316, 334
See also specific cities
Urban heat islands, 9, 180, 242

V
Values, 22, 71, 317, 364-365
re-examination of, 449, 469, 475
societal, 448, 476
value judgements, 55
Vanuatu, planning for climate-resilience, 449, 471
Vector-borne disease, 9, 180, 241
Aedes mosquitoes, 241
Vulnerability*, 69, 447
disproportionate impacts and, 9, 51, 447
factors influencing, 53
international cooperation and, 23
multiple, interrelated climate risks, 10
new vulnerabilities, 10

redistributive policies and, 21
reducing, 19, 447, 457
risks and, 53, 452
sustainable development and, 447
systemic, 22, 447, 457

W
Warm Spell Duration Index (WSDI), 190
Water availability, 178, 213-214
Water cycle. See Hydrological cycle
Water management, 10
Water resources, 179, 182, 213-216, 464-466
bottom-up initiatives, 368
demand for, 464-466
groundwater, 181, 215, 3.SM.3.1.1.3
impacts and risks, 213-216, 247
irrigation, 201, 215, 267, 267, 315, 328, 384, 466
projections, 179
regional, 179, 247
in urban areas, 316, 334
water-energy-food (WEF) nexus, 386-387
water quality, 215-216, 3.SM.3.1.1.4
water temperature, 214
watershed management, 356
See also Precipitation
Water scarcity, 179, 213, 452, 453, 466
Water security, 464-466
Water stress, 9, 181, 247, 452, 466
Well-being*, 18, 180
Bhutan's happiness index, 387
place-specific adaptation and, 447
well-being for all, 469
Wetlands, 179, 225, 254, 330, Table 3.SM.2
management, 330
methane release from, 12
salinization of, 233
sea level rise and, 233
Wind energy, 96, 131, 131, 132-133

Z
Zero emissions commitment (ZEC), 64-65, 65

