Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report
Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report forms the fourth volume of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Third
Assessment Report, and is composed of the Synthesis Report itself, the Summaries for Policymakers and Technical
Summaries of the three IPCC Working Group volumes, and supporting annexes.
IPCC assessments attempt to answer such general questions as:
* Has the Earth's climate changed as a result of human activities?
* In what ways is climate projected to change in the future?
* How vulnerable are agriculture, water supply, ecosystems, coastal infrastructure, and human health to different levels of
change in climate and sea level?
* What is the technical, economic, and market potential of options to adapt to climate change or reduce emissions of the
gases that influence climate?
Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report provides a policy-relevant, but not policy-prescriptive, synthesis and integration of
information contained within the Third Assessment Report and also draws upon all previously approved and accepted IPCC
reports that address a broad range of key policy-relevant questions. For this reason it will be especially useful for
policymakers and researchers, and as a main or supplementary student textbook for courses in environmental studies,
meteorology, climatology, biology, ecology, and atmospheric chemistry.

Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report

Edited by:
Robert T. Watson
The World Bank
and the
Core Writing Team
Based on a draft prepared by:
Core Writing Team
Daniel L. Albritton, Terry Barker, Igor A. Bashmakov, Osvaldo Canziani, Renate Christ, Ulrich Cubasch, Ogunlade Davidson,
Habiba Gitay, David Griggs, John Houghton, Joanna House, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Murari Lal, Neil Leary, Christopher
Magadza, James J. McCarthy, John F.B. Mitchell, Jose Roberto Moreira, Mohan Munasinghe, Ian Noble, Rajendra Pachauri,
Barrie Pittock, Michael Prather, Richard G. Richels, John B. Robinson, Jayant Sathaye, Stephen Schneider, Robert Scholes,
Thomas Stocker, Narasimhan Sundararaman, Rob Swart, Tomihiro Taniguchi, and D. Zhou
All IPCC Authors
Editorial Team
David J. Dokken, Maria Noguer, Paul van der Linden, Cathy Johnson, Jiahua Pan, and the GRID-Arendal Design Studio

Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Third Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org
(c)IPCC 2001
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2001
Printed in the United States of America
Typeface Times New Roman 10/12.5 pt. System Adobe PageMaker 6.5 [AU]
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data available
ISBN 0 521 80770 0 hardback
ISBN 0 521 01507 3 paperback

Referencing the Volume
IPCC, 2001: Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report. A Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Third Assessment Report of the
Integovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Watson, R.T. and the Core Writing Team (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom, and New York, NY, USA, 398 pp.
Cover Image Credits
Center: Earth--shown for a projection centered on Asia--as seen by the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on
board the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) EOS-Terra satellite. Land-surface data composited spatially at 1 km and
temporally during May and June 2001; cloud layer derived from EOS-Terra, GOES 8/10, GMS-5, and Meteosat 5/7 sensor data; sea-ice
composited over an 8-day period using MODIS data; and U.S. Geological Survey topography data overlain to visualize the terrain. Image by
Reto Stockli, Science Systems and Applications, Inc., and the Visualization and Analysis Laboratory at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
Right: The Lena Delta, Sakha Republic (Yakutia), Russia, as imaged from two Landsat-7 scenes taken at noon, 27 July 2000. Generated by
the Norwegian Mapping Authority and GRID-Arendal, with palette derived from infrared channels to yield "natural colors" for the various
landscape elements.
Lower Left: "One Way Water" (Thailand). Photograph provided by Topham/UNEP/Waranun Chutchawantipakorn.
Upper Left: "In Search of Water" (India). Photograph provided by Topham/UNEP/P.K. De.

Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report

Contents
Foreword

vii

Preface

ix

Summary for Policymakers

1

Synthesis Report
Question 1
Question 2
Question 3
Question 4
Question 5
Question 6
Question 7
Question 8
Question 9

35
37
43
59
79
87
97
107
123
135

Working Group Summaries
Working Group I: The Scientific Basis
Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
Working Group III: Mitigation

147
149
219
291

Annexes
A. Authors and Expert Reviewers
B. Glossary of Terms
C. Acronyms, Abbreviations, and Units
D. Scientific, Technical, and Socio-Economic Questions Selected by the Panel
E. List of Major IPCC Reports

355
356
365
390
394
396

Foreword
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
jointly established in 1988, by the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP). Its present terms of reference are to:
* Assess available information on the science, the impacts,
and the economics of--and the options for mitigating and/
or adapting to--climate change.
* Provide, on request, scientific/technical/socio-economic
advice to the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
Since its establishment, the IPCC has produced a series of
Assessment Reports (1990, 1995, and 2001), Special Reports,
Technical Papers, and methodologies, such as the Guidelines
for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, which have become
standard works of reference, widely used by policymakers,
scientists, and other experts and students.
This Synthesis Report completes the four-volume Third
Assessment Report (TAR). It addresses specifically the issues
of concern to the policymaker, in the context of Article 2 of
the UNFCCC--issues such as the extent to which human
activities have influenced and will in the future influence the
global climate, the impacts of a changed climate on ecological

G.O.P. Obasi
Secretary General
World Meteorological Organization

and socio-economic systems, and existing and projected technical
and policy capacity to address anthropogenic climate change.
It explores briefly the linked nature of a number of multilateral
environmental conventions. It draws on the work of hundreds
of experts from all regions of the world who have in the past
and at present participated in the IPCC process. As is customary
in the IPCC, success in producing this report has depended first
and foremost on the dedication, enthusiasm, and cooperation
of these experts in many different but related disciplines.
We take this opportunity to express our heart-felt gratitude to
the authors and reviewers of all the IPCC reports and Technical
Papers, particularly the TAR. We thank likewise the IPCC
Bureau; Dr. Sundararaman, Secretary of IPCC, and his
Secretariat staff; and those staffing the Technical Support Units
of the three Working Groups. We acknowledge with gratitude
the governments and organizations that contribute to the IPCC
Trust Fund, and provide support to the experts and in other
ways. The IPCC has been especially successful in engaging in
its work a large number of experts from the developing
countries and countries with their economies in transition; the
Trust Fund enables extending financial assistance for their
travel to IPCC meetings.
We thank the Chairman of the IPCC, Dr. Robert T. Watson,
for guiding the effort in completing the TAR.

K. Topfer
Executive Director
United Nations Environment Programme
and Director-General
United Nations Office in Nairobi

vii

Preface
This Synthesis Report with its Summary for Policymakers is
the fourth and final part of the Third Assessment Report (TAR)
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). It
draws together and integrates for the benefit of policy makers,
and others, and in response to questions identified by governments
and subsequently agreed by the IPCC, information that has
been approved and/or accepted by the IPCC.i It is intended to
assist governments, individually and collectively, in formulating
appropriate adaptation and mitigation responses to the threat
of human-induced climate change.
The Synthesis Report is based mainly on the contributions of
the three IPCC Working Groups to the TAR, but also uses
information from earlier IPCC assessments, Special Reports,
and Technical Papers. It follows the question and answer
format, and is in two parts: a Summary for Policymakers and
a longer document that contains expanded responses to each
of the questions posed by governments. The Summary for
Policymakers references the appropriate paragraphs in the
longer report, while the longer report contains references to
the source of the material on which the response is based--
that is, the Summaries for Policymakers and chapters from
previously approved and accepted Working Group contributions
to the TAR and earlier IPCC reports and Technical Papers
(see the accompanying box for cross-referencing nomenclature).
The procedures for approving the Summary for Policymakers
and adopting the balance of the Synthesis Report were
formalized by the IPCC at its Fifteenth Session (San Jose,
Costa Rica, 15-18 April 1999). A draft of the Synthesis Report
and its Summary for Policymakers was prepared by a team of
lead authors, who were involved in preparation of the TAR,
and submitted for simultaneous government/technical and
expert review. The revised drafts were circulated to governments
in a final distribution before approval/adoption at the IPCC's
Eighteenth Session (Wembley, United Kingdom, 24-29
September 2001).
The Synthesis Report consists of nine policy-relevant
questions:
* Question 1 addresses the ultimate objective of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which

i

See Procedures for the Preparation, Review, Approval,
Acceptance, Adoption, and Publication of the IPCC Reports
in http://www.ipcc.ch for descriptions of terms.

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

is found in Article 2 (i.e., what constitutes "dangerous
anthropogenic interference in the climate system") and
provides a framework for placing the issue of climate
change in the context of sustainable development.
Question 2 assesses and, where possible, attributes
observed changes in climate and ecological systems since
the pre-industrial era.
Questions 3 and 4 assess the impact of future emissions of
greenhouse gases and sulfate aerosol precursors (without
specific policies to mitigate climate change) on climate,
including changes in variability and extreme events and in
ecological and socio-economic systems.
Question 5 discusses inertia in the climate, ecological
systems, and socio-economic sectors, and implications for
mitigation and adaptation.
Question 6 assesses the near- and long-term implications
of stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases on climate, ecological systems, and socio-economic
sectors.
Question 7 assesses the technologies, policies, and costs
of near- and long-term actions to mitigate greenhouse gas
emissions.
Question 8 identifies the interactions between climate
change, other environmental issues, and development.
Question 9 summarizes the most robust findings and key
uncertainties.

We take this opportunity to thank:
* The Core Writing Team who drafted this report and, with
their meticulous and painstaking attention to detail,
finalized it
* Other members of the IPCC Bureau who acted as Review
Editors
* The members of the Working Groups' teams of
Coordinating Lead Authors and Lead Authors who helped
with the initial drafting
* The Heads and the staff of the Technical Support Units of
the three Working Groups, particularly David Dokken,
Maria Noguer, and Paul van der Linden for logistical and
editorial support
* The Head and the staff of the GRID office at Arendal,
Norway--Philippe Rekacewicz in particular--for working
with the author team on the graphics contained in the
Synthesis Report
* The staff of the IPCC Secretariat for innumerable
administrative tasks performed.

ix

The Synthesis Report with its Summary for Policymakers is
published here in a single volume together with the Summaries
for Policymakers and Technical Summaries of the Working Group
contributions to the TAR, as well as a comprehensive, consolidated
glossary. The Synthesis Report is also available in Arabic, Chinese,
French, Russian, and Spanish--the other official languages of
the IPCC. The Synthesis Report is also available as a stand-alone
publication, as are discrete brochures consisting of the Summaries
for Policymakers, Technical Summaries, and glossaries of the
respective Working Group reports. The full English text of all

four volumes comprising the Third Assessment Report has been
published in both print and digital form, with searchable
versions available on CD-ROM and at http://www.ipcc.ch.

R.T. Watson
IPCC Chair
N. Sundararaman
IPCC Secretary

IPCC Assessments Cited in the Synthesis Report
Qx.x
WGI TAR
WGII TAR
WGIII TAR
SRES
SRLULUCF
SRTT
SRAGA
DES GP
IPCC TP4
IPCC TP3
WGII SAR

x

Relevant paragraph in the underlying Synthesis Report
Working Group I contribution to the Third Assessment Report
Working Group II contribution to the Third Assessment Report
Working Group III contribution to the Third Assessment Report
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry
Special Report on the Methodological and Technological Issues
in Technology Transfer
Special Report on Aviation and the Global Atmosphere
Guidance Paper on Development, Equity, and Sustainability
Technical Paper on Implications of Proposed CO2 Emissions Limitations
Technical Paper on Stabilization of Atmospheric Greehouse Gases:
Physical, Biological, and Socio-Economic Implications
Working Group II contribution to the Second Assessment Report

SPM
TS
ES
GP
TP

Summary for Policymakers
Technical Summary
Executive Summary
Guidance Paper
Technical Paper

Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report

Summary for Policymakers

An Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
This summary, approved in detail at IPCC Plenary XVIII (Wembley, United Kingdom, 24-29 September 2001), represents the
formally agreed statement of the IPCC concerning key findings and uncertainties contained in the Working Group contributions
to the Third Assessment Report.

Based on a draft prepared by:
Robert T. Watson, Daniel L. Albritton, Terry Barker, Igor A. Bashmakov, Osvaldo Canziani, Renate Christ, Ulrich Cubasch,
Ogunlade Davidson, Habiba Gitay, David Griggs, John Houghton, Joanna House, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Murari Lal, Neil
Leary, Christopher Magadza, James J. McCarthy, John F.B. Mitchell, Jose Roberto Moreira, Mohan Munasinghe, Ian Noble,
Rajendra Pachauri, Barrie Pittock, Michael Prather, Richard G. Richels, John B. Robinson, Jayant Sathaye, Stephen
Schneider, Robert Scholes, Thomas Stocker, Narasimhan Sundararaman, Rob Swart, Tomihiro Taniguchi, D. Zhou, and many
IPCC authors and reviewers

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Introduction
In accordance with a decision taken at its Thirteenth Session (Maldives, 22 and 25-28 September
1997) and other subsequent decisions, the IPCC decided:
* To include a Synthesis Report as part of its Third Assessment Report
* That the Synthesis Report would provide a policy-relevant, but not policy-prescriptive, synthesis
and integration of information contained within the Third Assessment Report and also drawing
upon all previously approved and accepted IPCC reports that would address a broad range of
key policy-relevant, but not policy-prescriptive, questions
* That the questions would be developed in consultation with the Conference of the Parties
(COP) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
The following nine questions were based on submissions by governments and were approved by
the IPCC at its Fifteenth Session (San Jose, Costa Rica, 15-18 April 1999).

Q1

Question 1
What can scientific, technical, and socio-economic analyses contribute to
the determination of what constitutes dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system as referred to in Article 2 of the
Framework Convention on Climate Change?

2

Natural, technical, and social sciences can provide essential
information and evidence needed for decisions on what constitutes
"dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system." At
the same time, such decisions are value judgments determined
through socio-political processes, taking into account considerations
such as development, equity, and sustainability, as well as
uncertainties and risk.

Q1.1

The basis for determining what constitutes "dangerous anthropogenic interference"
will vary among regions--depending both on the local nature and consequences
of climate change impacts, and also on the adaptive capacity available to cope
with climate change--and depends upon mitigative capacity, since the magnitude
and the rate of change are both important. There is no universally applicable best set of
policies; rather, it is important to consider both the robustness of different policy measures against
a range of possible future worlds, and the degree to which such climate-specific policies can be
integrated with broader sustainable development policies.

Q1.2

The Third Assessment Report (TAR) provides an assessment of new scientific
information and evidence as an input for policymakers in their determination of
what constitutes "dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system."
It provides, first, new projections of future concentrations of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, global and regional patterns of changes and rates of change in temperature,
precipitation, and sea level, and changes in extreme climate events. It also examines possibilities
for abrupt and irreversible changes in ocean circulation and the major ice sheets. Second, it provides
an assessment of the biophysical and socio-economic impacts of climate change, with regard to
risks to unique and threatened systems, risks associated with extreme weather events, the distribution
of impacts, aggregate impacts, and risks of large-scale, high-impact events. Third, it provides an
assessment of the potential for achieving a broad range of levels of greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere through mitigation, and information about how adaptation can
reduce vulnerability.

Q1.3-6

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q1

An integrated view of climate change considers the dynamics of the complete cycle
of interlinked causes and effects across all sectors concerned (see Figure SPM-1).
The TAR provides new policy-relevant information and evidence with regard to all quadrants of
Figure SPM-1. A major new contribution of the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)
was to explore alternative development paths and related greenhouse gas emissions, and the TAR
assessed preliminary work on the linkage between adaptation, mitigation, and development paths.
However, the TAR does not achieve a fully integrated assessment of climate change because of
the incomplete state of knowledge.

Q1.7

Climate change decision making is essentially a sequential process under general
uncertainty. Decision making has to deal with uncertainties including the risk of non-linear and/
or irreversible changes, entails balancing the risks of either insufficient or excessive action, and
involves careful consideration of the consequences (both environmental and economic), their
likelihood, and society's attitude towards risk.

Q1.8

Climate Change - an integrated framework

Temperature rise
Sea-level rise
Precipitation change
Droughts and floods

Adaptation

Climate Change

Impacts on human
and natural systems
Food and water resources
Ecosystem and biodiversity
Human settlements
Human health

Emissions and
concentrations
Greenhouse gases
Aerosols

Mitigation

Adaptation

Socio-economic
development paths
Economic growth
Technology
Population
Governance

Figure SPM-1: Climate change - an integrated framework. Schematic and simplified representation of an
integrated assessment framework for considering anthropogenic climate change. The yellow arrows show the
cycle of cause and effect among the four quadrants shown in the figure, while the blue arrow indicates the
societal response to climate change impacts. See the caption for Figure 1-1 for an expanded description of
this framework.

Q1 Figure 1-1

3

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

The climate change issue is part of the larger challenge of sustainable development.
As a result, climate policies can be more effective when consistently embedded
within broader strategies designed to make national and regional development
paths more sustainable. This occurs because the impact of climate variability and change,
climate policy responses, and associated socio-economic development will affect the ability of
countries to achieve sustainable development goals. Conversely, the pursuit of those goals will in
turn affect the opportunities for, and success of, climate policies. In particular, the socio-economic
and technological characteristics of different development paths will strongly affect emissions,
the rate and magnitude of climate change, climate change impacts, the capability to adapt, and the
capacity to mitigate.

Q1.9-10

The TAR assesses available information on the timing, opportunities, costs, benefits,
and impacts of various mitigation and adaptation options. It indicates that there are
opportunities for countries acting individually, and in cooperation with others, to reduce costs of
mitigation and adaptation and to realize benefits associated with achieving sustainable development.

Q1.11

Q2

Question 2
What is the evidence for, causes of, and consequences of changes in the
Earth's climate since the pre-industrial era?
(a)

(b)

4

Has the Earth's climate changed since the pre-industrial era at the
regional and/or global scale? If so, what part, if any, of the observed
changes can be attributed to human influence and what part, if any,
can be attributed to natural phenomena? What is the basis for that
attribution?
What is known about the environmental, social, and economic
consequences of climate changes since the pre-industrial era with
an emphasis on the last 50 years?

The Earth's climate system has demonstrably changed on both global
and regional scales since the pre-industrial era, with some of these
changes attributable to human activities.

Q2.2

Human activities have increased the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases and aerosols since the pre-industrial era. The atmospheric concentrations of key
anthropogenic greenhouse gases (i.e., carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),
and tropospheric ozone (O3)) reached their highest recorded levels in the 1990s, primarily due to
the combustion of fossil fuels, agriculture, and land-use changes (see Table SPM-1). The radiative
forcing from anthropogenic greenhouse gases is positive with a small uncertainty range; that from
the direct aerosol effects is negative and smaller; whereas the negative forcing from the indirect
effects of aerosols on clouds might be large but is not well quantified.

Q2.4-5

An increasing body of observations gives a collective picture of a warming world
and other changes in the climate system (see Table SPM-1).

Q2.6

Globally it is very likely that the 1990s was the warmest decade, and 1998 the
warmest year, in the instrumental record (1861-2000) (see Box SPM-1). The increase
in surface temperature over the 20th century for the Northern Hemisphere is likely to have been
greater than that for any other century in the last thousand years (see Table SPM-1). Insufficient
data are available prior to the year 1860 in the Southern Hemisphere to compare the recent warming
with changes over the last 1,000 years. Temperature changes have not been uniform globally but
have varied over regions and different parts of the lower atmosphere.

Q2.7

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Table SPM-1

Q1 | Q2

20th century changes in the Earth's atmosphere, climate, and biophysical system.a

Indicator

Observed Changes

Concentration indicators
Atmospheric concentration of CO2

280 ppm for the period 1000-1750 to 368 ppm in year 2000 (314% increase).

Terrestrial biospheric CO2 exchange

Cumulative source of about 30 Gt C between the years 1800 and 2000; but during the
1990s, a net sink of about 147 Gt C.

Atmospheric concentration of CH4

700 ppb for the period 1000-1750 to 1,750 ppb in year 2000 (15125% increase).

Atmospheric concentration of N2O

270 ppb for the period 1000-1750 to 316 ppb in year 2000 (175% increase).

Tropospheric concentration of O3

Increased by 3515% from the years 1750 to 2000, varies with region.

Stratospheric concentration of O3

Decreased over the years 1970 to 2000, varies with altitude and latitude.

Atmospheric concentrations of HFCs,
PFCs, and SF6

Increased globally over the last 50 years.

Weather indicators
Global mean surface temperature

Increased by 0.60.2C over the 20th century; land areas warmed more than the oceans
(very likely).

Northern Hemisphere surface
temperature

Increase over the 20th century greater than during any other century in the last 1,000
years; 1990s warmest decade of the millennium (likely).

Diurnal surface temperature range

Decreased over the years 1950 to 2000 over land: nighttime minimum temperatures
increased at twice the rate of daytime maximum temperatures (likely).

Hot days / heat index

Increased (likely).

Cold / frost days

Decreased for nearly all land areas during the 20th century (very likely).

Continental precipitation

Increased by 5-10% over the 20th century in the Northern Hemisphere (very likely),
although decreased in some regions (e.g., north and west Africa and parts of the
Mediterranean).

Heavy precipitation events

Increased at mid- and high northern latitudes (likely).

Frequency and severity of drought

Increased summer drying and associated incidence of drought in a few areas (likely). In
some regions, such as parts of Asia and Africa, the frequency and intensity of droughts
have been observed to increase in recent decades.

Box SPM-1

Confidence and likelihood statements.

Q2 Box 2-1

Where appropriate, the authors of the Third Assessment Report assigned confidence levels that represent
their collective judgment in the validity of a conclusion based on observational evidence, modeling
results, and theory that they have examined. The following words have been used throughout the text of
the Synthesis Report to the TAR relating to WGI findings: virtually certain (greater than 99% chance
that a result is true); very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance); medium likelihood (33-66%
chance); unlikely (10-33% chance); very unlikely (1-10% chance); and exceptionally unlikely (less
than 1% chance). An explicit uncertainty range () is a likely range. Estimates of confidence relating to
WGII findings are: very high (95% or greater), high (67-95%), medium (33-67%), low (5-33%), and
very low (5% or less). No confidence levels were assigned in WGIII.

There is new and stronger evidence that most of the warming observed over the
last 50 years is attributable to human activities. Detection and attribution studies
consistently find evidence for an anthropogenic signal in the climate record of the last 35 to 50
years. These studies include uncertainties in forcing due to anthropogenic sulfate aerosols and
natural factors (volcanoes and solar irradiance), but do not account for the effects of other types of
anthropogenic aerosols and land-use changes. The sulfate and natural forcings are negative over
this period and cannot explain the warming; whereas most of these studies find that, over the last
50 years, the estimated rate and magnitude of warming due to increasing greenhouse gases alone

Q2.9-11

5

Climate Change 2001

Table SPM-1

Synthesis Report

20th century changes in the Earth's atmosphere, climate, and biophysical system.a (continued)

Indicator

Observed Changes

Biological and physical indicators
Global mean sea level

Increased at an average annual rate of 1 to 2 mm during the 20th century.

Duration of ice cover of rivers and lakes

Decreased by about 2 weeks over the 20th century in mid- and high latitudes of the
Northern Hemisphere (very likely).

Arctic sea-ice extent and thickness

Thinned by 40% in recent decades in late summer to early autumn (likely) and decreased
in extent by 10-15% since the 1950s in spring and summer.

Non-polar glaciers

Widespread retreat during the 20th century.

Snow cover

Decreased in area by 10% since global observations became available from satellites in
the 1960s (very likely).

Permafrost

Thawed, warmed, and degraded in parts of the polar, sub-polar, and mountainous regions.

El Nino events

Became more frequent, persistent, and intense during the last 20 to 30 years compared to
the previous 100 years.

Growing season

Lengthened by about 1 to 4 days per decade during the last 40 years in the Northern
Hemisphere, especially at higher latitudes.

Plant and animal ranges

Shifted poleward and up in elevation for plants, insects, birds, and fish.

Breeding, flowering, and migration

Earlier plant flowering, earlier bird arrival, earlier dates of breeding season, and earlier
emergence of insects in the Northern Hemisphere.

Coral reef bleaching

Increased frequency, especially during El Nino events.

Economic indicators
Weather-related economic losses

a

Global inflation-adjusted losses rose an order of magnitude over the last 40 years (see Q2
Figure 2-7). Part of the observed upward trend is linked to socio-economic factors and
part is linked to climatic factors.

This table provides examples of key observed changes and is not an exhaustive list. It includes both changes attributable to
anthropogenic climate change and those that may be caused by natural variations or anthropogenic climate change. Confidence
levels are reported where they are explicitly assessed by the relevant Working Group. An identical table in the Synthesis Report
contains cross-references to the WGI and WGII reports.

are comparable with, or larger than, the observed warming. The best agreement between model
simulations and observations over the last 140 years has been found when all the above
anthropogenic and natural forcing factors are combined, as shown in Figure SPM-2.

6

Changes in sea level, snow cover, ice extent, and precipitation are consistent with
a warming climate near the Earth's surface. Examples of these include a more active
hydrological cycle with more heavy precipitation events and shifts in precipitation, widespread
retreat of non-polar glaciers, increases in sea level and ocean-heat content, and decreases in snow
cover and sea-ice extent and thickness (see Table SPM-1). For instance, it is very likely that the
20th century warming has contributed significantly to the observed sea-level rise, through thermal
expansion of seawater and widespread loss of land ice. Within present uncertainties, observations
and models are both consistent with a lack of significant acceleration of sea-level rise during the
20th century. There are no demonstrated changes in overall Antarctic sea-ice extent from the years
1978 to 2000. In addition, there are conflicting analyses and insufficient data to assess changes in
intensities of tropical and extra-tropical cyclones and severe local storm activity in the mid-latitudes.
Some of the observed changes are regional and some may be due to internal climate variations,
natural forcings, or regional human activities rather than attributed solely to global human influence.

Q2.12-19

Observed changes in regional climate have affected many physical
and biological systems, and there are preliminary indications that
social and economic systems have been affected.

Q2.20 & Q2.25

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q2

Comparison between modeled and observations of temperature rise since the year 1860
Temperature anomalies in C
1.0

1.0

Temperature anomalies in C
1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

(a) Natural forcing only

-0.5
Model results

(b) Anthropogenic forcing only

-0.5
Model results

Observations
-1.0
1850

1900

1950

-1.0
2000

Observations
-1.0
1850

1900

1950

Temperature anomalies in C
1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

(c) Natural + Anthropogenic forcing

-0.5

-1.0
2000

-0.5
Model results
Observations

-1.0
1850

1900

1950

-1.0
2000

Figure SPM-2: Simulating the Earth's temperature variations (C) and comparing the results to the
measured changes can provide insight to the underlying causes of the major changes. A climate model
can be used to simulate the temperature changes that occur from both natural and anthropogenic causes. The
simulations represented by the band in (a) were done with only natural forcings: solar variation and volcanic
activity. Those encompassed by the band in (b) were done with anthropogenic forcings: greenhouse gases
and an estimate of sulfate aerosols. And those encompassed by the band in (c) were done with both natural
and anthropogenic forcings included. From (b), it can be seen that the inclusion of anthropogenic forcings
provides a plausible explanation for a substantial part of the observed temperature changes over the past
century, but the best match with observations is obtained in (c) when both natural and anthropogenic factors
are included. These results show that the forcings included are sufficient to explain the observed changes, but
do not exclude the possibility that other forcings may also have contributed.

Q2 Figure 2-4

Recent regional changes in climate, particularly increases in temperature, have
already affected hydrological systems and terrestrial and marine ecosystems in
many parts of the world (see Table SPM-1). The observed changes in these systems1 are
coherent across diverse localities and/or regions and are consistent in direction with the expected
effects of regional changes in temperature. The probability that the observed changes in the expected
direction (with no reference to magnitude) could occur by chance alone is negligible.

Q2.21-24

1

There are 44 regional studies of over 400 plants and animals, which varied in length from about 20 to 50 years,
mainly from North America, Europe, and the southern polar region. There are 16 regional studies covering about
100 physical processes over most regions of the world, which varied in length from about 20 to 150 years.

7

Climate Change 2001

The rising socio-economic costs related to weather damage and to regional variations
in climate suggest increasing vulnerability to climate change. Preliminary indications
suggest that some social and economic systems have been affected by recent increases in floods
and droughts, with increases in economic losses for catastrophic weather events. However, because
these systems are also affected by changes in socio-economic factors such as demographic shifts
and land-use changes, quantifying the relative impact of climate change (either anthropogenic or
natural) and socio-economic factors is difficult.

Synthesis Report

Q2.25-26

Q3

Question 3
What is known about the regional and global climatic, environmental, and
socio-economic consequences in the next 25, 50, and 100 years associated
with a range of greenhouse gas emissions arising from scenarios used in
the TAR (projections which involve no climate policy intervention)?
To the extent possible evaluate the:
* Projected changes in atmospheric concentrations, climate, and sea level
* Impacts and economic costs and benefits of changes in climate and
atmospheric composition on human health, diversity and productivity of
ecological systems, and socio-economic sectors (particularly agriculture
and water)
* The range of options for adaptation, including the costs, benefits, and
challenges
* Development, sustainability, and equity issues associated with impacts
and adaptation at a regional and global level.
Carbon dioxide concentrations, globally averaged surface temperature,
and sea level are projected to increase under all IPCC emissions scenarios
during the 21st century.2

Q3.2

For the six illustrative SRES emissions scenarios, the projected concentration of
CO2 in the year 2100 ranges from 540 to 970 ppm, compared to about 280 ppm in
the pre-industrial era and about 368 ppm in the year 2000. The different socio-economic
assumptions (demographic, social, economic, and technological) result in the different levels of
future greenhouse gases and aerosols. Further uncertainties, especially regarding the persistence
of the present removal processes (carbon sinks) and the magnitude of the climate feedback on the
terrestrial biosphere, cause a variation of about -10 to +30% in the year 2100 concentration, around
each scenario. Therefore, the total range is 490 to 1,250 ppm (75 to 350% above the year 1750 (preindustrial) concentration). Concentrations of the primary non-CO2 greenhouse gases by year 2100
are projected to vary considerably across the six illustrative SRES scenarios (see Figure SPM-3).

Q3.3-5

Projections using the SRES emissions scenarios in a range of climate models
result in an increase in globally averaged surface temperature of 1.4 to 5.8C over
the period 1990 to 2100. This is about two to ten times larger than the central value
of observed warming over the 20th century and the projected rate of warming is
very likely to be without precedent during at least the last 10,000 years, based on
paleoclimate data. Temperature increases are projected to be greater than those in the Second
Assessment Report (SAR), which were about 1.0 to 3.5C based on six IS92 scenarios. The higher
projected temperatures and the wider range are due primarily to lower projected sulfur dioxide
(SO2) emissions in the SRES scenarios relative to the IS92 scenarios. For the periods 1990 to
2025 and 1990 to 2050, the projected increases are 0.4 to 1.1C and 0.8 to 2.6C, respectively. By

Q3.6-7 & Q3.11

2

8

Projections of changes in climate variability, extreme events, and abrupt/non-linear changes are covered in Question 4.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q2 | Q3

the year 2100, the range in the surface temperature response across different climate models for
the same emissions scenario is comparable to the range across different SRES emissions scenarios
for a single climate model. Figure SPM-3 shows that the SRES scenarios with the highest emissions
result in the largest projected temperature increases. Nearly all land areas will very likely warm
more than these global averages, particularly those at northern high latitudes in winter.
Globally averaged annual precipitation is projected to increase during the 21st
century, though at regional scales both increases and decreases are projected of
typically 5 to 20%. It is likely that precipitation will increase over high-latitude regions in both
summer and winter. Increases are also projected over northern mid-latitudes, tropical Africa, and
Antarctica in winter, and in southern and eastern Asia in summer. Australia, Central America, and
southern Africa show consistent decreases in winter rainfall. Larger year-to-year variations in
precipitation are very likely over most areas where an increase in mean precipitation is projected.

Q3.8 & Q3.12

Glaciers are projected to continue their widespread retreat during the 21st century.
Northern Hemisphere snow cover, permafrost, and sea-ice extent are projected to decrease further.
The Antarctic ice sheet is likely to gain mass, while the Greenland ice sheet is likely to lose mass
(see Question 4).

Q3.14

Global mean sea level is projected to rise by 0.09 to 0.88 m between the years 1990
and 2100, for the full range of SRES scenarios, but with significant regional
variations. This rise is due primarily to thermal expansion of the oceans and melting of glaciers
and ice caps. For the periods 1990 to 2025 and 1990 to 2050, the projected rises are 0.03 to 0.14
m and 0.05 to 0.32 m, respectively.

Q3.9 & Q3.13

Projected climate change will have beneficial and adverse effects on
both environmental and socio-economic systems, but the larger the
changes and rate of change in climate, the more the adverse effects
predominate.

Q3.15

The severity of the adverse impacts will be larger for greater cumulative emissions
of greenhouse gases and associated changes in climate (medium confidence). While
beneficial effects can be identified for some regions and sectors for small amounts of climate change,
these are expected to diminish as the magnitude of climate change increases. In contrast many
identified adverse effects are expected to increase in both extent and severity with the degree of
climate change. When considered by region, adverse effects are projected to predominate for much
of the world, particularly in the tropics and subtropics.

Q3.16

Overall, climate change is projected to increase threats to human health, particularly
in lower income populations, predominantly within tropical/subtropical countries.
Climate change can affect human health directly (e.g., reduced cold stress in temperate countries
but increased heat stress, loss of life in floods and storms) and indirectly through changes in the
ranges of disease vectors (e.g., mosquitoes),3 water-borne pathogens, water quality, air quality,
and food availability and quality (medium to high confidence). The actual health impacts will be
strongly influenced by local environmental conditions and socio-economic circumstances, and by
the range of social, institutional, technological, and behavioral adaptations taken to reduce the full
range of threats to health.

Q3.17

Ecological productivity and biodiversity will be altered by climate change and sealevel rise, with an increased risk of extinction of some vulnerable species (high to
medium confidence). Significant disruptions of ecosystems from disturbances such as fire,
drought, pest infestation, invasion of species, storms, and coral bleaching events are expected to

Q3.18-20

3

Eight studies have modeled the effects of climate change on these diseases--five on malaria and three on dengue.
Seven use a biological or process-based approach, and one uses an empirical, statistical approach.

9

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Socio-Economic
Scenarios

Emissions

Concentrations

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

(b) CO2 emissions (Gt C)

30

900

20

700
500

10
2000

2050

2100

(c) CH4 emissions (Tg CH4)

(a)

A1

More
global

800

A2

- B : balanced
- FI : fossil-intensive
- T : non-fossil

B1

B2

More
environmental

2000

A1B
A1T

2050

2100

(d) N2O emissions (Tg N)

B2
IS92a

2100

(g) CH4 concentration (ppb)

1500

2000

2050

2100

(h) N2O concentration (ppb)

400

20
16
2050

2100

(e) SO2 emissions (Tg S)

300

2000

2050

2100

(i) Sulfate aerosol (Tg S)

1.2

150

A1FI
A2
B1

2050

500

24

2000
Scenarios

2000

2500

600
More
regional

300

3500

1000

More
economic

(f) CO2 concentration (ppm)

0.8

100

0.4

50
2000

2050

2100

0.0

2000

2050

2100

A1FI, A1T, and A1B
The A1 storyline and scenario family describes
a future world of very rapid economic growth,
global population that peaks in mid-century and
declines thereafter, and the rapid introduction of
new and more efficient technologies. Major
underlying themes are convergence among
regions, capacity-building, and increased
cultural and social interactions, with a

10

IPCC Third Assessment Report

substantial reduction in regional differences in
per capita income. The A1 scenario family
develops into three groups that descr ibe
alternative directions of technological change
in the energy system. The three A1 groups are
distinguished by their technological emphasis:
fossil intensive (A1FI), non-fossil energy
sources (A1T), or a balance across all

sources (A1B) (where balanced is defined as
n o t r e l y i n g t o o h e av i l y o n o n e p a r t i c u l a r
energy source, on the assumption that similar
improvment rates apply to all energy supply
and end use technologies).

Summary for Policymakers

Q3

Radiative Forcing

Reasons for Concern

Temperature and Sea-Level Change

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

(l) Sea-level rise (m)
Scenarios

1.0

A1B
A1T

0.8

A1FI

All SRES envelope
including land-ice
uncertainty

0.6

A2
B1

Bars show the
range in 2100
produced by
several models

0.4

B2

0.2

IS92a

0.0
2000

(j) Radiative forcing (Wm-2)

(k) Temperature change (C)
6

10
Model ensemble
all SRES envelope

2050

2100
Reasons for concern
(m) Impacts

C
6

Model ensemble
all SRES envelope

5

4

Risks to
many

Large
increase

4

5

Negative
for most
regions

3

2

2
1

0
2000

All IS92

Model ensemble
all SRES envelope

2050

2100

0
2000

2050

Bars show the
range in 2100 0
2100 produced by
several models - 1

Risks to
some

Increase

Negative
for some
regions

I

II

III

I
II
III
IV
V

A2
The A2 storyline and scenario family describes
a very heterogeneous world. The underlying
theme is self-reliance and preservation of local
identities. Fertility patterns across regions
c o n ve r g e ve r y s l o w l y, w h i c h r e s u l t s i n
continuously increasing population. Economic
development is primarily regionally oriented
and per capita economic growth and
technological change more fragmented and
slower than other storylines.

B1
The B1 storyline and scenario family describes
a convergent wor ld with the same global
population that peaks in mid-centur y and
declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline, but
with rapid change in economic structures
toward a service and information economy, with
reductions in material intensity and the
introduction of clean and resource-efficient
technologies. The emphasis is on global
solutions to economic, social, and
environmental sustainability, including improved
equity, but without additional climate initiatives.

Net
negative
in all
metrics

C

6

Higher

5
4

Positive or
negative
market
impacts;
majority of
people
adversely
affected

Very low

IV

V

3
2
1
0
-1

Risks to unique and threatened systems
Risks from extreme climate events
Distribution of impacts
Aggregate impacts
Risks from future large-scale discontinuities

B2
The B2 storyline and scenario family describes
a world in which the emphasis is on local
solutions to economic, social, and
environmental sustainability. It is a world with
continuously increasing global population, at a
rate lower than A2, intermediate levels of
economic development, and less rapid and
more diverse technological change than in the
B1 and A1 storylines. While the scenario is
also oriented towards environmental protection
and social equity, it focuses on local and
regional levels.

Figure SPM-3: The different socio-economic assumptions underlying the SRES scenarios result in different levels of
Q3 Figure 3-1
future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols. These emissions in turn change the concentration of these gases and
aerosols in the atmosphere, leading to changed radiative forcing of the climate system. Radiative forcing due to the SRES scenarios results in projected
increases in temperature and sea level, which in turn will cause impacts. The SRES scenarios do not include additional climate initiatives and no
probabilities of occurrence are assigned. Because the SRES scenarios had only been available for a very short time prior to production of the TAR,
the impacts assessments here use climate model results that tend to be based on equilibrium climate change scenarios (e.g., 2xCO2), a relatively
small number of experiments using a 1% per year CO2 increase transient scenario, or the scenarios used in the SAR (i.e., the IS92 series). Impacts
in turn can affect socio-economic development paths through, for example, adaptation and mitigation. The highlighted boxes along the top of the
figure illustrate how the various aspects relate to the integrated assessment framework for considering climate change (see Figure SPM-1).

11

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

increase. The stresses caused by climate change, when added to other stresses on ecological systems,
threaten substantial damage to or complete loss of some unique systems and extinction of some
endangered species. The effect of increasing CO2 concentrations will increase net primary
productivity of plants, but climate changes, and the changes in disturbance regimes associated
with them, may lead to either increased or decreased net ecosystem productivity (medium
confidence). Some global models project that the net uptake of carbon by terrestrial ecosystems
will increase during the first half of the 21st century but then level off or decline.

12

Models of cereal crops indicate that in some temperate areas potential yields increase
with small increases in temperature but decrease with larger temperature changes
(medium to low confidence). In most tropical and subtropical regions, potential yields
are projected to decrease for most projected increases in temperature (medium
confidence). Where there is also a large decrease in rainfall in subtropical and tropical dryland/
rainfed systems, crop yields would be even more adversely affected. These estimates include some
adaptive responses by farmers and the beneficial effects of CO2 fertilization, but not the impact of
projected increases in pest infestations and changes in climate extremes. The ability of livestock
producers to adapt their herds to the physiological stresses associated with climate change is
poorly known. Warming of a few C or more is projected to increase food prices globally, and may
increase the risk of hunger in vulnerable populations.

Q3.21

Climate change will exacerbate water shortages in many water-scarce areas of the
world. Demand for water is generally increasing due to population growth and economic
development, but is falling in some countries because of increased efficiency of use. Climate
change is projected to substantially reduce available water (as reflected by projected runoff) in
many of the water-scarce areas of the world, but to increase it in some other areas (medium
confidence) (see Figure SPM-4). Freshwater quality generally would be degraded by higher water
temperatures (high confidence), but this may be offset in some regions by increased flows.

Q3.22

The aggregated market sector effects, measured as changes in gross domestic
product (GDP), are estimated to be negative for many developing countries for all
magnitudes of global mean temperature increases studied (low confidence), and
are estimated to be mixed for developed countries for up to a few C warming (low
confidence) and negative for warming beyond a few degrees (medium to low
confidence). The estimates generally exclude the effects of changes in climate variability and
extremes, do not account for the effects of different rates of climate change, only partially account
for impacts on goods and services that are not traded in markets, and treat gains for some as
canceling out losses for others.

Q3.25

Populations that inhabit small islands and/or low-lying coastal areas are at particular
risk of severe social and economic effects from sea-level rise and storm surges.
Many human settlements will face increased risk of coastal flooding and erosion, and tens of
millions of people living in deltas, in low-lying coastal areas, and on small islands will face risk of
displacement. Resources critical to island and coastal populations such as beaches, freshwater,
fisheries, coral reefs and atolls, and wildlife habitat would also be at risk.

Q3.23

The impacts of climate change will fall disproportionately upon developing countries
and the poor persons within all countries, and thereby exacerbate inequities in
health status and access to adequate food, clean water, and other resources.
Populations in developing countries are generally exposed to relatively high risks of adverse impacts
from climate change. In addition, poverty and other factors create conditions of low adaptive
capacity in most developing countries.

Q3.33

Adaptation has the potential to reduce adverse effects of climate
change and can often produce immediate ancillary benefits, but will
not prevent all damages.

Q3.26

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q3

(a)

(b)

< -250

-250 to -150

-150 to -50

-50 to -25

-25 to 0

0 to 25

25 to 50

50 to 150

>150

Change in Annual Runoff (mm yr-1)

Figure SPM-4: Projected changes in average annual water runoff by the year 2050, relative to average
runoff for the years 1961 to 1990, largely follow projected changes in precipitation. Changes in runoff
are calculated with a hydrologic model using as inputs climate projections from two versions of the Hadley
Centre atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) for a scenario of 1% per annum increase in
effective CO2 concentration in the atmosphere: (a) HadCM2 ensemble mean and (b) HadCM3. Projected
increases in runoff in high latitudes and southeast Asia and decreases in central Asia, the area around the
Mediterranean, southern Africa, and Australia are broadly consistent across the Hadley Centre experiments,
and with the precipitation projections of other AOGCM experiments. For other areas of the world, changes in
precipitation and runoff are scenario- and model-dependent.

Q3 Figure 3-5

Numerous possible adaptation options for responding to climate change have been
identified that can reduce adverse and enhance beneficial impacts of climate change,
but will incur costs. Quantitative evaluation of their benefits and costs and how they vary
across regions and entities is incomplete.

Q3.27

13

Climate Change 2001

Greater and more rapid climate change would pose greater challenges for adaptation
and greater risks of damages than would lesser and slower change. Natural and
human systems have evolved capabilities to cope with a range of climate variability within which
the risks of damage are relatively low and ability to recover is high. However, changes in climate
that result in increased frequency of events that fall outside the historic range with which systems
have coped increase the risk of severe damages and incomplete recovery or collapse of the system.

Synthesis Report

Q3.28

Q4

Question 4
What is known about the influence of the increasing atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and the projected
human-induced change in climate regionally and globally on:
a.
b.
c.
d.

14

The frequency and magnitude of climate fluctuations, including daily,
seasonal, inter-annual, and decadal variability, such as the El Nino
Southern Oscillation cycles and others?
The duration, location, frequency, and intensity of extreme events
such as heat waves, droughts, floods, heavy precipitation, avalanches,
storms, tornadoes, and tropical cyclones?
The risk of abrupt/non-linear changes in, among others, the sources
and sinks of greenhouse gases, ocean circulation, and the extent of
polar ice and permafrost? If so, can the risk be quantified?
The risk of abrupt or non-linear changes in ecological systems?

An increase in climate variability and some extreme events is projected.

Q4.2-8

Models project that increasing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases
will result in changes in daily, seasonal, inter-annual, and decadal variability. There
is projected to be a decrease in diurnal temperature range in many areas, decrease of daily variability
of surface air temperature in winter, and increased daily variability in summer in the Northern
Hemisphere land areas. Many models project more El Nino-like mean conditions in the tropical
Pacific. There is no clear agreement concerning changes in frequency or structure of naturally
occurring atmosphere-ocean circulation patterns such as that of the North Atlantic Oscillation
(NAO).

Q4.3-8

Models project that increasing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases
result in changes in frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme events, such as
more hot days, heat waves, heavy precipitation events, and fewer cold days. Many
of these projected changes would lead to increased risks of floods and droughts in many regions,
and predominantly adverse impacts on ecological systems, socio-economic sectors, and human
health (see Table SPM-2 for details). High resolution modeling studies suggest that peak wind and
precipitation intensity of tropical cyclones are likely to increase over some areas. There is insufficient
information on how very small-scale extreme weather phenomena (e.g., thunderstorms, tornadoes,
hail, hailstorms, and lightning) may change.

Q4.2-7

Greenhouse gas forcing in the 21st century could set in motion largescale, high-impact, non-linear, and potentially abrupt changes in
physical and biological systems over the coming decades to
millennia, with a wide range of associated likelihoods.

Q4.9

Some of the projected abrupt/non-linear changes in physical systems and in the
natural sources and sinks of greenhouse gases could be irreversible, but there is
an incomplete understanding of some of the underlying processes. The likelihood of

Q4.10-16

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Table SPM-2

Q3 | Q4

Examples of climate variability and extreme climate events and examples of their impacts (WGII TAR Table SPM-1).

Projected Changes during the 21st
Century in Extreme Climate
Phenomena and their Likelihood

Representative Examples of Projected Impactsa
(all high confidence of occurrence in some areas)

Higher maximum temperatures, more hot
days and heat wavesb over nearly all land
areas (very likely)

Increased incidence of death and serious illness in older age groups and urban poor.
Increased heat stress in livestock and wildlife.
Shift in tourist destinations.
Increased risk of damage to a number of crops.
Increased electric cooling demand and reduced energy supply reliability.

Higher (increasing) minimum
temperatures, fewer cold days, frost days
and cold wavesb over nearly all land
areas (very likely)

Decreased cold-related human morbidity and mortality.
Decreased risk of damage to a number of crops, and increased risk to others.
Extended range and activity of some pest and disease vectors.
Reduced heating energy demand.

More intense precipitation events (very
likely, over many areas)

Increased flood, landslide, avalanche, and mudslide damage.
Increased soil erosion.
Increased flood runoff could increase recharge of some floodplain aquifers.
Increased pressure on government and private flood insurance systems and disaster relief.

Increased summer drying over most midlatitude continental interiors and
associated risk of drought (likely)

Decreased crop yields.
Increased damage to building foundations caused by ground shrinkage.
Decreased water resource quantity and quality.
Increased risk of forest fire.

Increase in tropical cyclone peak wind
intensities, mean and peak precipitation
intensities (likely, over some areas)c

Increased risks to human life, risk of infectious disease epidemics and many other risks.
Increased coastal erosion and damage to coastal buildings and infrastructure.
Increased damage to coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs and mangroves.

Intensified droughts and floods
associated with El Nino events in many
different regions (likely)
(see also under droughts and intense
precipitation events)

Decreased agricultural and rangeland productivity in drought- and flood-prone regions.
Decreased hydro-power potential in drought-prone regions.

Increased Asian summer monsoon
precipitation variability (likely)

Increase in flood and drought magnitude and damages in temperate and tropical Asia.

Increased intensity of mid-latitude
storms (little agreement between current
models)b

Increased risks to human life and health.
Increased property and infrastructure losses.
Increased damage to coastal ecosystems.

a
b
c

These impacts can be lessened by appropriate response measures.
Information from WGI TAR Technical Summary (Section F.5).
Changes in regional distribution of tropical cyclones are possible but have not been established.

the projected changes is expected to increase with the rate, magnitude, and duration of climate
change. Examples of these types of changes include:
* Large climate-induced changes in soils and vegetation may be possible and could induce further
climate change through increased emissions of greenhouse gases from plants and soil, and
changes in surface properties (e.g., albedo).
* Most models project a weakening of the thermohaline circulation of the oceans resulting in a
reduction of heat transport into high latitudes of Europe, but none show an abrupt shutdown by
the end of the 21st century. However, beyond the year 2100, some models suggest that the
thermohaline circulation could completely, and possibly irreversibly, shut down in either
hemisphere if the change in radiative forcing is large enough and applied long enough.
* The Antarctic ice sheet is likely to increase in mass during the 21st century, but after sustained
warming the ice sheet could lose significant mass and contribute several meters to the projected
sea-level rise over the next 1,000 years.
* In contrast to the Antarctic ice sheet, the Greenland ice sheet is likely to lose mass during the
21st century and contribute a few cm to sea-level rise. Ice sheets will continue to react to
climate warming and contribute to sea-level rise for thousands of years after climate has been
stabilized. Climate models indicate that the local warming over Greenland is likely to be one
to three times the global average. Ice sheet models project that a local warming of larger than

15

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

3C, if sustained for millennia, would lead to virtually a complete melting of the Greenland ice
sheet with a resulting sea-level rise of about 7 m. A local warming of 5.5C, if sustained for
1,000 years, would likely result in a contribution from Greenland of about 3 m to sea-level rise.
* Continued warming would increase melting of permafrost in polar, sub-polar, and mountain
regions and would make much of this terrain vulnerable to subsidence and landslides which
affect infrastructure, water courses, and wetland ecosystems.
Changes in climate could increase the risk of abrupt and non-linear changes in many
ecosystems, which would affect their function, biodiversity, and productivity. The
greater the magnitude and rate of the change, the greater the risk of adverse impacts. For example:
* Changes in disturbance regimes and shifts in the location of suitable climatically defined habitats
may lead to abrupt breakdown of terrestrial and marine ecosystems with significant changes in
composition and function and increased risk of extinctions.
* Sustained increases in water temperatures of as little as 1C, alone or in combination with any
of several stresses (e.g., excessive pollution and siltation), can lead to corals ejecting their
algae (coral bleaching) and the eventual death of some corals.
* Temperature increase beyond a threshold, which varies by crop and variety, can affect key
development stages of some crops (e.g., spikelet sterility in rice, loss of pollen viability in
maize, tubers' development in potatoes) and thus the crop yields. Yield losses in these crops
can be severe if temperatures exceed critical limits for even short periods.

Q4.17-19

Q5

Question 5
What is known about the inertia and time scales associated with the
changes in the climate system, ecological systems, and socio-economic
sectors and their interactions?
Inertia is a widespread inherent characteristic of the interacting
climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems. Thus some impacts
of anthropogenic climate change may be slow to become apparent,
and some could be irreversible if climate change is not limited in
both rate and magnitude before associated thresholds, whose
positions may be poorly known, are crossed.

Q5.1-4, Q5.8, Q5.10-12,
& Q5.14-17

Inertia in Climate Systems

16

Stabilization of CO2 emissions at near-current levels will not lead to stabilization of
CO2 atmospheric concentration, whereas stabilization of emissions of shorter lived
greenhouse gases such as CH4 leads, within decades, to stabilization of their
atmospheric concentrations. Stabilization of CO2 concentrations at any level requires eventual
reduction of global CO2 net emissions to a small fraction of the current emission level. The lower
the chosen level for stabilization, the sooner the decline in global net CO2 emissions needs to
begin (see Figure SPM-5).

Q5.3 & Q5.5

After stabilization of the atmospheric concentration of CO2 and other greenhouse
gases, surface air temperature is projected to continue to rise by a few tenths of a
degree per century for a century or more, while sea level is projected to continue to
rise for many centuries (see Figure SPM-5). The slow transport of heat into the oceans and slow
response of ice sheets means that long periods are required to reach a new climate system equilibrium.

Q5.4

Some changes in the climate system, plausible beyond the 21st century, would be
effectively irreversible. For example, major melting of the ice sheets (see Question 4) and
fundamental changes in the ocean circulation pattern (see Question 4) could not be reversed over

Q5.4 & Q5.14-16

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q4 | Q5

CO2 concentration, temperature, and sea level
continue to rise long after emissions are reduced
Magnitude of response

Time taken to reach
equilibrium
Sea-level rise due to ice melting:
several millennia

CO2 emissions peak
0 to 100 years

Sea-level rise due to thermal
expansion:
centuries to millennia
Temperature stabilization:
a few centuries
CO2 stabilization:
100 to 300 years

CO2 emissions
Today 100 years

1,000 years

Figure SPM-5: After CO2 emissions are reduced and atmospheric concentrations stabilize, surface air
temperature continues to rise slowly for a century or more. Thermal expansion of the ocean continues
long after CO2 emissions have been reduced, and melting of ice sheets continues to contribute to sea-level rise
for many centuries. This figure is a generic illustration for stabilization at any level between 450 and 1,000 ppm,
and therefore has no units on the response axis. Responses to stabilization trajectories in this range show
broadly similar time courses, but the impacts become progressively larger at higher concentrations of CO2.

Q5 Figure 5-2

a period of many human generations. The threshold for fundamental changes in the ocean circulation
may be reached at a lower degree of warming if the warming is rapid rather than gradual.

Inertia in Ecological Systems
Some ecosystems show the effects of climate change quickly, while others do so
more slowly. For example, coral bleaching can occur in a single exceptionally warm season, while
long-lived organisms such as trees may be able to persist for decades under a changed climate, but be
unable to regenerate. When subjected to climate change, including changes in the frequency of extreme
events, ecosystems may be disrupted as a consequence of differences in response times of species.

Q5.8 & Q3 Table 3-2

Some carbon cycle models project the global terrestrial carbon net uptake peaks
during the 21st century, then levels off or declines. The recent global net uptake of CO2 by
terrestrial ecosystems is partly the result of time lags between enhanced plant growth and plant death
and decay. Current enhanced plant growth is partly due to fertilization effects of elevated CO2 and
nitrogen deposition, and changes in climate and land-use practices. The uptake will decline as
forests reach maturity, fertilization effects saturate, and decomposition catches up with growth. Climate
change is likely to further reduce net terrestrial carbon uptake globally. Although warming reduces
the uptake of CO2 by the ocean, the oceanic carbon sink is projected to persist under rising atmospheric
CO2, at least for the 21st century. Movement of carbon from the surface to the deep ocean takes
centuries, and its equilibration there with ocean sediments takes millennia.

Q5.6-7

17

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Inertia in Socio-Economic Systems
Unlike the climate and ecological systems, inertia in human systems is not fixed; it
can be changed by policies and the choices made by individuals. The capacity for
implementing climate change policies depends on the interaction between social and economic
structures and values, institutions, technologies, and established infrastructure. The combined
system generally evolves relatively slowly. It can respond quickly under pressure, although
sometimes at high cost (e.g., if capital equipment is prematurely retired). If change is slower, there
may be lower costs due to technological advancement or because capital equipment value is fully
depreciated. There is typically a delay of years to decades between perceiving a need to respond
to a major challenge, planning, researching and developing a solution, and implementing it.
Anticipatory action, based on informed judgment, can improve the chance that appropriate
technology is available when needed.

Q5.10-13

The development and adoption of new technologies can be accelerated by technology
transfer and supportive fiscal and research policies. Technology replacement can be delayed
by "locked-in" systems that have market advantages arising from existing institutions, services,
infrastructure, and available resources. Early deployment of rapidly improving technologies allows
learning-curve cost reductions.

Q5.10 & Q5.22

Policy Implications of Inertia

18

Inertia and uncertainty in the climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems imply
that safety margins should be considered in setting strategies, targets, and time tables
for avoiding dangerous levels of interference in the climate system. Stabilization target
levels of, for instance, atmospheric CO2 concentration, temperature, or sea level may be affected by:
* The inertia of the climate system, which will cause climate change to continue for a period
after mitigation actions are implemented
* Uncertainty regarding the location of possible thresholds of irreversible change and the behavior
of the system in their vicinity
* The time lags between adoption of mitigation goals and their achievement.
Similarly, adaptation is affected by the time lags involved in identifying climate change impacts,
developing effective adaptation strategies, and implementing adaptive measures.

Q5.18-20 & Q5.23

Inertia in the climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems makes adaptation
inevitable and already necessary in some cases, and inertia affects the optimal
mix of adaptation and mitigation strategies. Inertia has different consequences for adaptation
than for mitigation--with adaptation being primarily oriented to address localized impacts of
climate change, while mitigation aims to address the impacts on the climate system. These
consequences have bearing on the most cost-effective and equitable mix of policy options. Hedging
strategies and sequential decision making (iterative action, assessment, and revised action) may
be appropriate responses to the combination of inertia and uncertainty. In the presence of inertia,
well-founded actions to adapt to or mitigate climate change are more effective, and in some
circumstances may be cheaper, if taken earlier rather than later.

Q5.18-21

The pervasiveness of inertia and the possibility of irreversibility in the interacting
climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems are major reasons why anticipatory
adaptation and mitigation actions are beneficial. A number of opportunities to exercise
adaptation and mitigation options may be lost if action is delayed.

Q5.24

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q5 | Q6

Q6

Question 6
a)

How does the extent and timing of the introduction of a range of
emissions reduction actions determine and affect the rate, magnitude,
and impacts of climate change, and affect the global and regional
economy, taking into account the historical and current emissions?

b)

What is known from sensitivity studies about regional and global
climatic, environmental, and socio-economic consequences of stabilizing
the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (in carbon
dioxide equivalents), at a range of levels from today's to double that
level or more, taking into account to the extent possible the effects of
aerosols? For each stabilization scenario, including different pathways
to stabilization, evaluate the range of costs and benefits, relative to
the range of scenarios considered in Question 3, in terms of:
* Projected changes in atmospheric concentrations, climate, and
sea level, including changes beyond 100 years
* Impacts and economic costs and benefits of changes in climate
and atmospheric composition on human health, diversity and
productivity of ecological systems, and socio-economic sectors
(particularly agriculture and water)
* The range of options for adaptation, including the costs, benefits,
and challenges
* The range of technologies, policies, and practices that could be
used to achieve each of the stabilization levels, with an evaluation
of the national and global costs and benefits, and an assessment
of how these costs and benefits would compare, either qualitatively
or quantitatively, to the avoided environmental harm that would
be achieved by the emissions reductions
* Development, sustainability, and equity issues associated with
impacts, adaptation, and mitigation at a regional and global level.

The projected rate and magnitude of warming and sea-level rise can
be lessened by reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Q6.2

The greater the reductions in emissions and the earlier they are introduced, the smaller
and slower the projected warming and the rise in sea levels. Future climate change is
determined by historic, current, and future emissions. Differences in projected temperature changes
between scenarios that include greenhouse gas emission reductions and those that do not tend to
be small for the first few decades but grow with time if the reductions are sustained.

Q6.3

Reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and the gases that control their concentration
would be necessary to stabilize radiative forcing. For example, for the most important
anthropogenic greenhouse gas, carbon cycle models indicate that stabilization of atmospheric
CO2 concentrations at 450, 650, or 1,000 ppm would require global anthropogenic CO2 emissions
to drop below the year 1990 levels, within a few decades, about a century, or about 2 centuries,
respectively, and continue to decrease steadily thereafter (see Figure SPM-6). These models illustrate
that emissions would peak in about 1 to 2 decades (450 ppm) and roughly a century (1,000 ppm)
from the present. Eventually CO2 emissions would need to decline to a very small fraction of
current emissions. The benefits of different stabilization levels are discussed later in Question 6
and the costs of these stabilization levels are discussed in Question 7.

Q6.4

There is a wide band of uncertainty in the amount of warming that would result
from any stabilized greenhouse gas concentration. This results from the factor of three

Q6.5

19

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

uncertainty in the sensitivity of climate to increases in greenhouse gases.4 Figure SPM-7 shows
eventual CO2 stabilization levels and the corresponding range of temperature change estimated to
be realized in 2100 and at equilibrium.

Emissions, concentrations, and temperature changes corresponding
to different stabilization levels for CO2 concentrations
(a) CO2 emissions (Gt C)

(b) CO2 concentration (ppm)

A2

20

1100

18

1000

16

900

14

A1B

12
10

A1B

700

8

600

6

400

2
2050

2100

B1

500

B1

4
0
2000

A2

800

2150

2200

2250

2300

300
2000

2050

2100

2150

2200

2250

(c) Global mean temperature change (C)
7
6

WRE profiles
WRE 1000

5
4

WRE 750
WRE 650

A2
A1B

3

WRE 550
WRE 450

S profiles

B1

2

SRES scenarios

1
0
2000

2050

2100

2150

2200

2250

2300

Figure SPM-6: Stabilizing CO2 concentrations would require substantial reductions of emissions below
current levels and would slow the rate of warming.
a) CO2 emissions: The time paths of CO2 emissions that would lead to stabilization of the concentration of
CO2 in the atmosphere at various levels are estimated for the WRE stabilization profiles using carbon
cycle models. The shaded area illustrates the range of uncertainty.
b) CO2 concentrations: The CO2 concentrations specified for the WRE profiles are shown.
c) Global mean temperature changes: Temperature changes are estimated using a simple climate model for
the WRE stabilization profiles. Warming continues after the time at which the CO2 concentration is stabilized
(indicated by black spots), but at a much diminished rate. It is assumed that emissions of gases other than
CO2 follow the SRES A1B projection until the year 2100 and are constant thereafter. This scenario was
chosen as it is in the middle of the range of SRES scenarios. The dashed lines show the temperature
changes projected for the S profiles (not shown in panels (a) or (b)). The shaded area illustrates the effect of
a range of climate sensitivity across the five stabilization cases. The colored bars on the righthand side
show uncertainty for each stabilization case at the year 2300. The diamonds on the righthand side show
the average equilibrium (very long-term) warming for each CO2 stabilization level. Also shown for comparison
are CO2 emissions, concentrations, and temperature changes for three of the SRES scenarios.

4

20

The equilibrium global mean temperature response to doubling atmospheric CO2 is often used as a measure of
climate sensitivity. The temperatures shown in Figures SPM-6 and SPM-7 are derived from a simple model
calibrated to give the same response as a number of complex models that have climate sensitivities ranging from
1.7 to 4.2C. This range is comparable to the commonly accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5C.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Q6 Figure 6-1

2300

Summary for Policymakers

Q6

Emission reductions that would eventually stabilize the atmospheric concentration
of CO2 at a level below 1,000 ppm, based on profiles shown in Figure SPM-6, and
assuming that emissions of gases other than CO2 follow the SRES A1B projection
until the year 2100 and are constant thereafter, are estimated to limit global mean
temperature increase to 3.5C or less through the year 2100. Global average surface
temperature is estimated to increase 1.2 to 3.5C by the year 2100 for profiles that eventually
stabilize the concentration of CO2 at levels from 450 to 1,000 ppm. Thus, although all of the CO2
concentration stabilization profiles analyzed would prevent, during the 21st century, much of the
upper end of the SRES projections of warming (1.4 to 5.8C by the year 2100), it should be noted
that for most of the profiles the concentration of CO2 would continue to rise beyond the year 2100.
The equilibrium temperature rise would take many centuries to reach, and ranges from 1.5 to
3.9C above the year 1990 levels for stabilization at 450 ppm, and 3.5 to 8.7C above the year
1990 levels for stabilization at 1,000 ppm.5 Furthermore, for a specific temperature stabilization
target there is a very wide range of uncertainty associated with the required stabilization level of
greenhouse gas concentrations (see Figure SPM-7). The level at which CO2 concentration is required
to be stabilized for a given temperature target also depends on the levels of the non-CO2 gases.

Q6.6

Sea level and ice sheets would continue to respond to warming for many centuries
after greenhouse gas concentrations have been stabilized. The projected range of sealevel rise due to thermal expansion at equilibrium is 0.5 to 2 m for an increase in CO2 concentration
from the pre-industrial level of 280 to 560 ppm and 1 to 4 m for an increase in CO2 concentration
from 280 to 1,120 ppm. The observed rise over the 20th century was 0.1 to 0.2 m. The projected
rise would be larger if the effect of increases in other greenhouse gas concentrations were to be taken
into account. There are other contributions to sea-level rise over time scales of centuries to millennia.
Models assessed in the TAR project sea-level rise of several meters from polar ice sheets (see
Question 4) and land ice even for stablization levels of 550 ppm CO2-equivalent.

Q6.8

Reducing emissions of greenhouse gases to stabilize their atmospheric
concentrations would delay and reduce damages caused by climate
change.

Q6.9

Greenhouse gas emission reduction (mitigation) actions would lessen the pressures
on natural and human systems from climate change. Slower rates of increase in global
mean temperature and sea level would allow more time for adaptation. Consequently, mitigation
actions are expected to delay and reduce damages caused by climate change and thereby generate
environmental and socio-economic benefits. Mitigation actions and their associated costs are
assessed in the response to Question 7.

Q6.10

Mitigation actions to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases at
lower levels would generate greater benefits in terms of less damage. Stabilization at
lower levels reduces the risk of exceeding temperature thresholds in biophysical systems where
these exist. Stabilization of CO2 at, for example, 450 ppm is estimated to yield an increase in global
mean temperature in the year 2100 that is about 0.75 to 1.25oC less than is estimated for stabilization
at 1,000 ppm (see Figure SPM-7). At equilibrium the difference is about 2 to 5oC. The geographical
extent of the damage to or loss of natural systems, and the number of systems affected, which increase
with the magnitude and rate of climate change, would be lower for a lower stabilization level.
Similarly, for a lower stabilization level the severity of impacts from climate extremes is expected to be
less, fewer regions would suffer adverse net market sector impacts, global aggregate impacts would
be smaller, and risks of large-scale, high-impact events would be reduced.

Q6.11

5

For all these scenarios, the contribution to the equilibrium warming from other greenhouse gases and aerosols is
0.6C for a low climate sensitivity and 1.4C for a high climate sensitivity. The accompanying increase in radiative
forcing is equivalent to that occurring with an additional 28% in the final CO2 concentrations.

21

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

There is a wide band of uncertainty in the amount
of warming that would result from any
stabilized concentration of greenhouse gases
Temperature change relative to 1990 (C)
10

9
8

7

Temperature
change at
equilibrium

6

5
4

3

Temperature
change in
year 2100

2

1

0
450

22

550

650
750
850
Eventual CO2 stabilization level (ppm)

950 1,000

Figure SPM-7: Stabilizing CO2 concentrations would lessen warming but by an uncertain amount.
Temperature changes compared to year 1990 in (a) year 2100 and (b) at equilibrium are estimated using a
simple climate model for the WRE profiles as in Figure SPM-6. The lowest and highest estimates for each
stabilization level assume a climate sensitivity of 1.7 and 4.2C, respectively. The center line is an average of
the lowest and highest estimates.

Q6 Figure 6-2

Comprehensive, quantitative estimates of the benefits of stabilization at various
levels of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases do not yet exist. Advances
have been made in understanding the qualitative character of the impacts of climate change. Because
of uncertainty in climate sensitivity, and uncertainty about the geographic and seasonal patterns of
projected changes in temperatures, precipitation, and other climate variables and phenomena, the
impacts of climate change cannot be uniquely determined for individual emission scenarios. There
are also uncertainties about key processes and sensitivities and adaptive capacities of systems to
changes in climate. In addition, impacts such as the changes in the composition and function of
ecological systems, species extinction, and changes in human health, and disparity in the distribution
of impacts across different populations, are not readily expressed in monetary or other common
units. Because of these limitations, the benefits of different greenhouse gas emission reduction actions,
including actions to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations at selected levels, are incompletely
characterized and cannot be compared directly to mitigation costs for the purpose of estimating
the net economic effects of mitigation.

Q6.12

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q6 | Q7

Adaptation is a necessary strategy at all scales to complement climate
change mitigation efforts. Together they can contribute to sustainable
development objectives.

Q6.13

Adaptation can complement mitigation in a cost-effective strategy to reduce climate
change risks. Reductions of greenhouse gas emissions, even stabilization of their concentrations
in the atmosphere at a low level, will neither altogether prevent climate change or sea-level rise
nor altogether prevent their impacts. Many reactive adaptations will occur in response to the
changing climate and rising seas and some have already occurred. In addition, the development of
planned adaptation strategies to address risks and utilize opportunities can complement mitigation
actions to lessen climate change impacts. However, adaptation would entail costs and cannot
prevent all damages. The costs of adaptation can be lessened by mitigation actions that will reduce
and slow the climate changes to which systems would otherwise be exposed.

Q6.14-15

The impact of climate change is projected to have different effects within and between
countries. The challenge of addressing climate change raises an important issue
of equity. Mitigation and adaptation actions can, if appropriately designed, advance sustainable
development and equity both within and across countries and between generations. Reducing the projected
increase in climate extremes is expected to benefit all countries, particularly developing countries, which
are considered to be more vulnerable to climate change than developed countries. Mitigating climate
change would also lessen the risks to future generations from the actions of the present generation.

Q6.16-18

Q7

Question 7
What is known about the potential for, and costs and benefits of, and time
frame for reducing greenhouse gas emissions?
* What would be the economic and social costs and benefits and equity
implications of options for policies and measures, and the mechanisms
of the Kyoto Protocol, that might be considered to address climate
change regionally and globally?
* What portfolios of options of research and development, investments,
and other policies might be considered that would be most effective to
enhance the development and deployment of technologies that address
climate change?
* What kind of economic and other policy options might be considered to
remove existing and potential barriers and to stimulate private- and
public-sector technology transfer and deployment among countries, and
what effect might these have on projected emissions?
* How does the timing of the options contained in the above affect
associated economic costs and benefits, and the atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases over the next century and beyond?
There are many opportunities, including technological options, to
reduce near-term emissions, but barriers to their deployment exist.

Q7.2-7

Significant technical progress relevant to the potential for greenhouse gas emission
reductions has been made since the SAR in 1995, and has been faster than anticipated.
Net emissions reductions could be achieved through a portfolio of technologies (e.g., more efficient
conversion in production and use of energy, shift to low- or no-greenhouse gas-emitting technologies,
carbon removal and storage, and improved land use, land-use change, and forestry practices). Advances
are taking place in a wide range of technologies at different stages of development, ranging from
the market introduction of wind turbines and the rapid elimination of industrial by-product gases,
to the advancement of fuel cell technology and the demonstration of underground CO2 storage.

Q7.3

23

Climate Change 2001

The successful implementation of greenhouse gas mitigation options would need to
overcome technical, economic, political, cultural, social, behavioral, and/or institutional
barriers that prevent the full exploitation of the technological, economic, and social
opportunities of these options. The potential mitigation opportunities and types of barriers
vary by region and sector, and over time. This is caused by the wide variation in mitigative capacity.
Most countries could benefit from innovative financing, social learning and innovation, institutional
reforms, removing barriers to trade, and poverty eradication. In addition, in industrialized countries,
future opportunities lie primarily in removing social and behavioral barriers; in countries with
economies in transition, in price rationalization; and in developing countries, in price rationalization,
increased access to data and information, availability of advanced technologies, financial resources,
and training and capacity building. Opportunities for any given country, however, might be found
in the removal of any combination of barriers.

Q7.6

National responses to climate change can be more effective if deployed as a portfolio
of policy instruments to limit or reduce net greenhouse gas emissions. The portfolio
may include--according to national circumstances--emissions/carbon/energy taxes, tradable or
non-tradable permits, land-use policies, provision and/or removal of subsidies, deposit/refund
systems, technology or performance standards, energy mix requirement, product bans, voluntary
agreements, government spending and investment, and support for research and development.

Q7.7

Cost estimates by different models and studies vary for many reasons.

Q7.14-19

For a variety of reasons, significant differences and uncertainties surround specific
quantitative estimates of mitigation costs. Cost estimates differ because of the (a)
methodology6 used in the analysis, and (b) underlying factors and assumptions
built into the analysis. The inclusion of some factors will lead to lower estimates and others to
higher estimates. Incorporating multiple greenhouse gases, sinks, induced technical change, and
emissions trading7 can lower estimated costs. Further, studies suggest that some sources of
greenhouse gas emissions can be limited at no, or negative, net social cost to the extent that policies
can exploit no-regrets opportunities such as correcting market imperfections, inclusion of ancillary
benefits, and efficient tax revenue recycling. International cooperation that facilitates cost-effective
emissions reductions can lower mitigation costs. On the other hand, accounting for potential shortterm macro shocks to the economy, constraints on the use of domestic and international market
mechanisms, high transaction costs, inclusion of ancillary costs, and ineffective tax recycling
measures can increase estimated costs. Since no analysis incorporates all relevant factors affecting
mitigation costs, estimated costs may not reflect the actual costs of implementing mitigation actions.

Q7.14 & Q7.20

Studies examined in the TAR suggest substantial opportunities for
lowering mitigation costs.

Q7.15-16

Bottom-up studies indicate that substantial low cost mitigation opportunities exist.
According to bottom-up studies, global emissions reductions of 1.9-2.6 Gt Ceq (gigatonnes of carbon
equivalent), and 3.6-5.0 Gt Ceq per year8 could be achieved by the years 2010 and 2020, respectively.
Half of these potential emissions reductions could be achieved by the year 2020 with direct benefits
(energy saved) exceeding direct costs (net capital, operating, and maintenance costs), and the other
half at a net direct cost of up to US$100 per t Ceq (at 1998 prices). These net direct cost estimates

Q7.15 & Q7 Table 7-1

6

The SAR described two categories of approaches to estimating costs: bottom-up approaches, which build up
from assessments of specific technologies and sectors, and top-down modeling studies, which proceed from
macro-economic relationships. See Box 7-1 in the underlying report.
7
A market-based approach to achieving environmental objectives that allows those reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, below what is required, to use or trade the excess reductions to offset emissions at another source
inside or outside the country. Here the term is broadly used to include trade in emission allowances, and projectbased collaboration.
8
The emissions reduction estimates are with reference to a baseline trend that is similar in magnitude to the SRES
B2 scenario.

24

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q7

are derived using discount rates in the range of 5 to 12%, consistent with public sector discount rates.
Private internal rates of return vary greatly, and are often significantly higher, affecting the rate of
adoption of these technologies by private entities. Depending on the emissions scenario this could
allow global emissions to be reduced below year 2000 levels in 2010-2020 at these net direct cost
estimates. Realizing these reductions involves additional implementation costs, which in some cases
may be substantial, the possible need for supporting policies, increased research and development,
effective technology transfer, and overcoming other barriers. The various global, regional, national,
sector, and project studies assessed in the WGIII TAR have different scopes and assumptions.
Studies do not exist for every sector and region.
Forests, agricultural lands, and other terrestrial ecosystems offer significant carbon
mitigation potential. Conservation and sequestration of carbon, although not
necessarily permanent, may allow time for other options to be further developed
and implemented. Biological mitigation can occur by three strategies: (a) conservation of existing
carbon pools, (b) sequestration by increasing the size of carbon pools,9 and (c) substitution of
sustainably produced biological products. The estimated global potential of biological mitigation
options is on the order of 100 Gt C (cumulative) by year 2050, equivalent to about 10 to 20% of
projected fossil-fuel emissions during that period, although there are substantial uncertainties
associated with this estimate. Realization of this potential depends upon land and water availability
as well as the rates of adoption of land management practices. The largest biological potential for
atmospheric carbon mitigation is in subtropical and tropical regions. Cost estimates reported to
date for biological mitigation vary significantly from US$0.1 to about US$20 per t C in several
tropical countries and from US$20 to US$100 per t C in non-tropical countries. Methods of financial
analyses and carbon accounting have not been comparable. Moreover, the cost calculations do not
cover, in many instances, inter alia, costs for infrastructure, appropriate discounting, monitoring,
data collection and implementation costs, opportunity costs of land and maintenance, or other
recurring costs, which are often excluded or overlooked. The lower end of the range is assessed to
be biased downwards, but understanding and treatment of costs is improving over time. Biological
mitigation options may reduce or increase non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions.

Q7.4 & Q7.16

The cost estimates for Annex B countries to implement the Kyoto Protocol vary
between studies and regions, and depend strongly, among others, upon the
assumptions regarding the use of the Kyoto mechanisms, and their interactions
with domestic measures (see Figure SPM-8 for comparison of regional Annex II
mitigation costs). The great majority of global studies reporting and comparing these costs use
international energy-economic models. Nine of these studies suggest the following GDP impacts.
In the absence of emissions trade between Annex B countries, these studies show reductions in
projected GDP10 of about 0.2 to 2% in the year 2010 for different Annex II regions. With full
emissions trading between Annex B countries, the estimated reductions in the year 2010 are between
0.1 and 1.1% of projected GDP. The global modeling studies reported above show national marginal
costs to meet the Kyoto targets from about US$20 up to US$600 per t C without trading, and a
range from about US$15 up to US$150 per t C with Annex B trading. For most economies-intransition countries, GDP effects range from negligible to a several percent increase. However, for
some economies-in-transition countries, implementing the Kyoto Protocol will have similar impact
on GDP as for Annex II countries. At the time of these studies, most models did not include sinks,
non-CO2 greenhouse gases, the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), negative cost options,

Q7.17-18

9

Changing land use could influence atmospheric CO2 concentration. Hypothetically, if all of the carbon released
by historical land-use changes could be restored to the terrestrial biosphere over the course of the century (e.g.,
by reforestation), CO2 concentration would be reduced by 40 to 70 ppm.
10
The calculated GDP reductions are relative to each model's projected GDP baseline. The models evaluated only
reductions in CO2. In contrast, the estimates cited from the bottom-up analyses above included all greenhouse
gases. Many metrics can be used to present costs. For example, if the annual costs to developed countries
associated with meeting Kyoto targets with full Annex B trading are in the order of 0.5% of GDP, this represents
US$125 billion (1,000 million) per year, or US$125 per person per year by 2010 in Annex II (SRES assumptions).
This corresponds to an impact on economic growth rates over 10 years of less than 0.1 percentage point.

25

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Projections of GDP losses and marginal cost in Annex II countries in the year 2010
from global models
(a) GDP losses

Canada

Percentage of GDP loss in the year 2010
2.4

OECD countries
of Europe

United States

Japan

2.2
2.0

2.02

1.96

1.8
1.6

Australia
New
Zealand

1.53

1.50

1.4
1.23

1.2

1.20

1.14

1.0
0.91

0.8
0.6

0.59

0.4

0

0.81

0.65

0.64
0.42

0.52
0.24

0.23

0.2

0.82

0.31

0.45

0.37
0.13

0.19

0.21
0.05

Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand

United States

OECD countries
of Europe

Japan

(b) Marginal cost
1990 US$ per t C
700
665

645

600

500

400

425

200

211

201

178
135

100
46

0

331

322

300

68
14

Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand

135
76

135

68
14

United States

68
20

68

14

OECD countries
of Europe

Range of outcomes for two scenarios
Absence of international trade in carbon
emissions rights: each region must take
the prescribed reduction

135
97

Full Annex B trading of carbon emissions
rights permitted

14

Japan
The three numbers on each bar
represent the highest, median,
and lowest projections from the
set of models.

Figure SPM-8: Projections of GDP losses and marginal costs in Annex II countries in the year 2010 from global
Q7.18-19
models: (a) GDP losses and (b) marginal costs. The reductions in projected GDP are for the year 2010 relative to the
models' reference case GDP. These estimates are based on results from nine modeling teams that participated in an Energy Modeling Forum
study. The projections reported in the figure are for four regions that constitute Annex II. The models examined two scenarios. In the first, each
region makes the prescribed reduction with only domestic trading in carbon emissions. In the second, Annex B trading is permitted, and thereby
marginal costs are equal across regions. For the key factors, assumptions, and uncertainties underlying the studies, see Table 7-3 and Box 7-1 in
the underlying report.

26

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q7

ancillary benefits, or targeted revenue recycling, the inclusion of which will reduce estimated
costs. On the other hand, these models make assumptions which underestimate costs because they
assume full use of emissions trading without transaction costs, both within and among Annex B
countries, that mitigation responses would be perfectly efficient and that economies begin to adjust
to the need to meet Kyoto targets between 1990 and 2000. The cost reductions from Kyoto mechanisms
may depend on the details of implementation, including the compatibility of domestic and
international mechanisms, constraints, and transaction costs.
Emission constraints on Annex I countries have well-established, albeit varied, "spillover" effects11 on non-Annex I countries. Analyses report reductions in both projected GDP
and reductions in projected oil revenues for oil-exporting, non-Annex I countries. The study reporting
the lowest costs shows reductions of 0.2% of projected GDP with no emissions trading, and less than
0.05% of projected GDP with Annex B emissions trading in the year 2010.12 The study reporting the
highest costs shows reductions of 25% of projected oil revenues with no emissions trading, and 13%
of projected oil revenues with Annex B emissions trading in the year 2010. These studies do not
consider policies and measures other than Annex B emissions trading, that could lessen the impacts
on non-Annex I, oil-exporting countries. The effects on these countries can be further reduced by
removal of subsidies for fossil fuels, energy tax restructuring according to carbon content, increased
use of natural gas, and diversification of the economies of non-Annex I, oil-exporting countries.
Other non-Annex I countries may be adversely affected by reductions in demand for their exports
to Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) nations and by the price
increase of those carbon-intensive and other products they continue to import. These other nonAnnex I countries may benefit from the reduction in fuel prices, increased exports of carbonintensive products, and the transfer of environmentally sound technologies and know-how. The
possible relocation of some carbon-intensive industries to non-Annex I countries and wider impacts
on trade flows in response to changing prices may lead to carbon leakage13on the order of 5-20%.

Q7.19

Technology development and diffusion are important components
of cost-effective stabilization.

Q7.9-12 & Q7.23

Development and transfer of environmentally sound technologies could play a critical
role in reducing the cost of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations. Transfer of
technologies between countries and regions could widen the choice of options at the regional
level. Economies of scale and learning will lower the costs of their adoption. Through sound
economic policy and regulatory frameworks, transparency, and political stability, governments
could create an enabling environment for private- and public-sector technology transfers. Adequate
human and organizational capacity is essential at every stage to increase the flow, and improve the
quality, of technology transfer. In addition, networking among private and public stakeholders, and
focusing on products and techniques with multiple ancillary benefits, that meet or adapt to local
development needs and priorities, is essential for most effective technology transfers.

Q7.9-12 & Q7.23

Lower emissions scenarios require different patterns of energy resource development
and an increase in energy research and development to assist accelerating the
development and deployment of advanced environmentally sound energy technologies.
Emissions of CO2 due to fossil-fuel burning are virtually certain to be the dominant influence on
the trend of atmospheric CO2 concentration during the 21st century. Resource data assessed in the
TAR may imply a change in the energy mix and the introduction of new sources of energy during
the 21st century. The choice of energy mix and associated technologies and investments--either
more in the direction of exploitation of unconventional oil and gas resources, or in the direction of

Q7.27

11

These spill-over effects incorporate only economic effects, not environmental effects.
These estimated costs can be expressed as differences in GDP growth rates over the period 2000-2010. With no
emissions trading, GDP growth rate is reduced by 0.02 percentage points per year; with Annex B emissions
trading, growth rate is reduced by less than 0.005 percentage points per year.
13
Carbon leakage is defined here as the increase in emissions in non-Annex B countries due to implementation of
reductions in Annex B, expressed as a percentage of Annex B reductions.
12

27

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

non-fossil energy sources or fossil energy technology with carbon capture and storage--will
determine whether, and if so, at what level and cost, greenhouse concentrations can be stabilized.

Both the pathway to stabilization and the stabilization level itself are
key determinants of mitigation costs.14

Q7.24-25

The pathway to meeting a particular stabilization target will have an impact on
mitigation cost (see Figure SPM-9). A gradual transition away from the world's present
energy system towards a less carbon-emitting economy minimizes costs associated with premature
retirement of existing capital stock and provides time for technology development, and avoids
premature lock-in to early versions of rapidly developing low-emission technology. On the other
hand, more rapid near-term action would increase flexibility in moving towards stabilization,
decrease environmental and human risks and the costs associated with projected changes in climate,
may stimulate more rapid deployment of existing low-emission technologies, and provide strong
near-term incentives to future technological changes.

Q7.24

Studies show that the costs of stabilizing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere
increase as the concentration stabilization level declines. Different baselines can
have a strong influence on absolute costs (see Figure SPM-9). While there is a moderate
increase in the costs when passing from a 750 to a 550 ppm concentration stabilization level, there is
a larger increase in costs passing from 550 to 450 ppm unless the emissions in the baseline scenario are
very low. Although model projections indicate long-term global growth paths of GDP are not significantly
affected by mitigation actions towards stabilization, these do not show the larger variations that occur
over some shorter time periods, sectors, or regions. These studies did not incorporate carbon sequestration
and did not examine the possible effect of more ambitious targets on induced technological change.
Also, the issue of uncertainty takes on increasing importance as the time frame is expanded.

Q7.25

Global average GDP reduction in the year 2050
Percentage reduction relative to baseline
4.5

Scenarios:

4.0

A1B

3.5
A1T

3.0
2.5

A1FI

2.0
A2

1.5
1.0

B1

0.5
0

B2

450

550

650

750

Eventual CO2 stabilization level (ppm)
Figure SPM-9: Indicative relationship in the year 2050 between the relative GDP reduction caused by
mitigation activities, the SRES scenarios, and the stabilization level. The reduction in GDP tends to
increase with the stringency of the stabilization level, but the costs are very sensitive to the choice of the
baseline scenario. These projected mitigation costs do not take into account potential benefits of avoided
climate change.

14

28

See Question 6 for discussion of impacts of climate change.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Q7.25

Summary for Policymakers

Q7 | Q8

Q8

Question 8
What is known about the interactions between projected human-induced
changes in climate and other environmental issues (e.g., urban air pollution,
regional acid deposition, loss of biological diversity, stratospheric ozone
depletion, and desertification and land degradation)? What is known about
environmental, social, and economic costs and benefits and implications
of these interactions for integrating climate change response strategies in
an equitable manner into broad sustainable development strategies at
the local, regional, and global scales?
Local, regional, and global environmental issues are inextricably linked
and affect sustainable development. Therefore, there are synergistic
opportunities to develop more effective response options to these
environmental issues that enhance benefits, reduce costs, and more
sustainably meet human needs.

Q8.1-2

Meeting human needs in many instances is causing environmental degradation,
which in turn threatens the ability to meet present and future needs. For example,
increased agricultural production can be achieved through increased use of nitrogenous fertilizers,
irrigation, or the conversion of natural grasslands and forests to croplands. However, these changes
can affect the Earth's climate through the release of greenhouse gases, lead to land degradation
through erosion and salinization of soils, and contribute to the loss of biodiversity and reduction
of carbon sequestration through the conversion and fragmentation of natural ecological systems.
Agricultural productivity can in turn be adversely affected by changes in climate, especially in the
tropics and subtropics, loss of biodiversity and changes at the genetic and species level, and land
degradation through loss of soil fertility. Many of these changes adversely affect food security and
disproportionately impact the poor.

Q8.3 & Q8.15

The primary factors underlying anthropogenic climate change are similar to those
for most environmental and socio-economic issues--that is, economic growth,
broad technological changes, life style patterns, demographic shifts (population
size, age structure, and migration), and governance structures. These can give rise to:
* Increased demand for natural resources and energy
* Market imperfections, including subsidies that lead to the inefficient use of resources and act
as a barrier to the market penetration of environmentally sound technologies; the lack of
recognition of the true value of natural resources; failure to appropriate for the global values of
natural resources at the local level; and failure to internalize the costs of environmental
degradation into the market price of a resource
* Limited availability and transfer of technology, inefficient use of technologies, and inadequate
investment in research and development for the technologies of the future
* Failure to manage adequately the use of natural resources and energy.

Q8.4

Climate change affects environmental issues such as loss of biodiversity,
desertification, stratospheric ozone depletion, freshwater availability, and air quality,
and in turn climate change is affected by many of these issues. For example, climate
change is projected to exacerbate local and regional air pollution and delay the recovery of the
stratospheric ozone layer. In addition, climate change could also affect the productivity and
composition of terrestrial and aquatic ecological systems, with a potential loss in both genetic and
species diversity; could accelerate the rate of land degradation; and could exacerbate problems
related to freshwater quantity and quality in many areas. Conversely, local and regional air pollution,
stratospheric ozone depletion, changes in ecological systems, and land degradation would affect
the Earth's climate by changing the sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, radiative balance of
the atmosphere, and surface albedo.

Q8.5-20

29

Climate Change 2001

The linkages among local, regional, and global environmental issues, and their
relationship to meeting human needs, offer opportunities to capture synergies in
developing response options and reducing vulnerabilities to climate change,
although trade-offs between issues may exist. Multiple environmental and development
goals can be achieved by adopting a broad range of technologies, policies, and measures that explicitly
recognize the inextricable linkages among environmental problems and human needs. Addressing
the need for energy, while reducing local and regional air pollution and global climate change
cost-effectively, requires an interdisciplinary assessment of the synergies and trade-offs of meeting
energy requirements in the most economically, environmentally, and socially sustainable manner.
Greenhouse gas emissions, as well as local and regional pollutants, could be reduced through more
efficient use of energy and increasing the share of lower carbon-emitting fossil fuels, advanced fossilfuel technologies (e.g., highly efficient combined cycle gas turbines, fuel cells, and combined heat and
power) and renewable energy technologies (e.g., increased use of environmentally sound biofuels,
hydropower, solar, wind- and wave-power). Further, the increase of greenhouse gas concentrations
in the atmosphere can be reduced also by enhanced uptake of carbon through, for example,
afforestation, reforestation, slowing deforestation, and improved forest, rangeland, wetland, and
cropland management, which can have favorable effects on biodiversity, food production, land,
and water resources. Reducing vulnerability to climate change can often reduce vulnerability to
other environmental stresses and vice versa. In some cases there will be trade-offs. For example,
in some implementations, monoculture plantations could decrease local biodiversity.

Q8.21-25

The capacity of countries to adapt and mitigate can be enhanced when climate
policies are integrated with national development policies including economic,
social, and other environmental dimensions. Climate mitigation and adaptation options can
yield ancillary benefits that meet human needs, improve well-being, and bring other environmental
benefits. Countries with limited economic resources and low level of technology are often highly
vulnerable to climate change and other environmental problems.

Q8.26-27

A great deal of interaction exists among the environmental issues that multilateral
environmental agreements address, and synergies can be exploited in their
implementation. Global environmental problems are addressed in a range of individual conventions
and agreements, as well as a range of regional agreements. They may contain, inter alia, matters of
common interest and similar requirements for enacting general objectives--for example, implementation
plans, data collection and processing, strengthening human and infrastructural capacity, and reporting
obligations. For example, although different, the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone
Layer and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change are scientifically interrelated
because many of the compounds that cause depletion of the ozone layer are also important greenhouse
gases and because some of the substitutes for the now banned ozone-depleting substances are
greenhouse gases.

Q8.11 & Q8.28

Question 9
What are the most robust findings and key uncertainties regarding
attribution of climate change and regarding model projections of:
* Future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols?
* Future concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols?
* Future changes in regional and global climate?
* Regional and global impacts of climate change?
* Costs and benefits of mitigation and adaptation options?
In this report, a robust finding for climate change is defined as one that holds under a variety of
approaches, methods, models, and assumptions and one that is expected to be relatively unaffected
by uncertainties. Key uncertainties in this context are those that, if reduced, may lead to new and

30

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Q9

Summary for Policymakers

Q8 | Q9

robust findings in relation to the questions of this report. In the examples in Table SPM-3, many of
the robust findings relate to the existence of a climate response to human activities and the sign of
the response. Many of the key uncertainties are concerned with the quantification of the magnitude
and/or timing of the response. After addressing the attribution of climate change, the table deals in
order with the issues illustrated in Figure SPM-1. Figure SPM-10 illustrates some of the main robust
findings regarding climate change. Table SPM-3 provides examples and is not an exhaustive list.

Table SPM-3

Robust findings and key uncertainties.a

Robust Findings
Observations show Earth's surface is warming.
Globally, 1990s very likely warmest decade in
instrumental record (Figure SPM-10b). [Q9.8]

Key Uncertainties
Climate change and
attribution

Magnitude and character of natural climate
variability. [Q9.8]
Climate forcings due to natural factors and
anthropogenic aerosols (particularly indirect
effects). [Q9.8]

Atmospheric concentrations of main anthropogenic
greenhouse gases (CO2 (Figure SPM-10a), CH4,
N2O, and tropospheric O3) increased substantially
since the year 1750. [Q9.10]

Relating regional trends to anthropogenic climate
change. [Q9.8 & Q9.22]

Some greenhouse gases have long lifetimes (e.g.,
CO2, N2O, and PFCs). [Q9.10]
Most of observed warming over last 50 years
likely due to increases in greenhouse gas
concentrations due to human activities. [Q9.8]
CO2 concentrations increasing over 21st century
virtually certain to be mainly due to fossil-fuel
emissions (Figure SPM-10a). [Q9.11]
Stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations
at 450, 650, or 1,000 ppm would require global
anthropogenic CO2 emissions to drop below year
1990 levels, within a few decades, about a century,
or about 2 centuries, respectively, and continue to
decrease steadily thereafter to a small fraction of
current emissions. Emissions would peak in about
1 to 2 decades (450 ppm) and roughly a century
(1,000 ppm) from the present. [Q9.30]

Future emissions and
concentrations of
greenhouse gases and
aerosols based on models
and projections with the
SRES and stabilization
scenarios

Assumptions underlying the wide rangeb of SRES
emissions scenarios relating to economic growth,
technological progress, population growth, and
governance structures (lead to largest uncertainties
in projections). Inadequate emission scenarios for
ozone and aerosol precursors. [Q9.10]
Factors in modeling of carbon cycle including
effects of climate feedbacks.b [Q9.10]

For most SRES scenarios, SO2 emissions
(precursor for sulfate aerosols) are lower in the
year 2100 compared with year 2000. [Q9.10]
Global average surface temperature during 21st
century rising at rates very likely without
precedent during last 10,000 years (Figure SPM10b). [Q9.13]
Nearly all land areas very likely to warm more
than the global average, with more hot days and
heat waves and fewer cold days and cold waves.
[Q9.13]

Future changes in global
and regional climate
based on model
projections with SRES
scenarios

Assumptions associated with a wide rangec of
SRES scenarios, as above. [Q9.10]
Factors associated with model projectionsc, in
particular climate sensitivity, climate forcing, and
feedback processes especially those involving
water vapor, clouds, and aerosols (including
aerosol indirect effects). [Q9.16]

Rise in sea level during 21st century that will
continue for further centuries. [Q9.15]

Understanding the probability distribution
associated with temperature and sea-level
projections. [Q9.16]

Hydrological cycle more intense. Increase in
globally averaged precipitation and more intense
precipitation events very likely over many areas.
[Q9.14]

The mechanisms, quantification, time scales, and
likelihoods associated with large-scale abrupt/nonlinear changes (e.g., ocean thermohaline
circulation). [Q9.16]

Increased summer drying and associated risk of
drought likely over most mid-latitude continental
interiors. [Q9.14]

Capabilities of models on regional scales
(especially regarding precipitation) leading to
inconsistencies in model projections and
difficulties in quantification on local and regional
scales. [Q9.16]

31

Climate Change 2001

Table SPM-3

Synthesis Report

Robust findings and key uncertainties.a (continued)

Robust Findings
Projected climate change will have beneficial and
adverse effects on both environmental and socioeconomic systems, but the larger the changes and
the rate of change in climate, the more the adverse
effects predominate. [Q9.17]

Key Uncertainties
Regional and global
impacts of changes in
mean climate and
extremes

Reliability of local or regional detail in projections
of climate change, especially climate extremes.
[Q9.22]
Assessing and predicting response of ecological,
social (e.g., impact of vector- and water-borne
diseases), and economic systems to the combined
effect of climate change and other stresses such as
land-use change, local pollution, etc. [Q9.22]

The adverse impacts of climate change are expected
to fall disproportionately upon developing countries
and the poor persons within countries. [Q9.20]
Ecosystems and species are vulnerable to climate
change and other stresses (as illustrated by observed
impacts of recent regional temperature changes)
and some will be irreversibly damaged or lost.
[Q9.19]

Identification, quantification, and valuation of
damages associated with climate change. [Q9.16,
Q9.22, & Q9.26]

In some mid- to high latitudes, plant productivity
(trees and some agricultural crops) would increase
with small increases in temperature. Plant
productivity would decrease in most regions of the
world for warming beyond a few C. [Q9.18]
Many physical systems are vulnerable to climate
change (e.g., the impact of coastal storm surges
will be exacerbated by sea-level rise, and glaciers
and permafrost will continue to retreat). [Q9.18]
Greenhouse gas emission reduction (mitigation)
actions would lessen the pressures on natural and
human systems from climate change. [Q9.28]
Mitigation has costs that vary between regions and
sectors. Substantial technological and other
opportunities exist for lowering these costs.
Efficient emissions trading also reduces costs for
those participating in the trading. [Q9.31 &
Q9.35-36]
Emissions constraints on Annex I countries have
well-established, albeit varied, "spill-over" effects
on non-Annex I countries. [Q9.32]
National mitigation responses to climate change
can be more effective if deployed as a portfolio of
policies to limit or reduce net greenhouse gas
emissions. [Q9.35]
Adaptation has the potential to reduce adverse
effects of climate change and can often produce
immediate ancillary benefits, but will not prevent
all damages. [Q9.24]

Costs and benefits of
mitigation and
adaptation options

Understanding the interactions between climate
change and other environmental issues and the
related socio-economic implications. [Q9.40]
The future price of energy, and the cost and
availability of low-emissions technology.
[Q9.33-34]
Identification of means to remove barriers that
impede adoption of low-emission technologies,
and estimation of the costs of overcoming such
barriers. [Q9.35]
Quantification of costs of unplanned and
unexpected mitigation actions with sudden shortterm effects. [Q9.38]
Quantification of mitigation cost estimates
generated by different approaches (e.g., bottom-up
vs. top-down), including ancillary benefits,
technological change, and effects on sectors and
regions. [Q9.35]
Quantification of adaptation costs. [Q9.25]

Adaptation can complement mitigation in a costeffective strategy to reduce climate change risks;
together they can contribute to sustainable
development objectives. [Q9.40]
Inertia in the interacting climate, ecological, and
socio-economic systems is a major reason why
anticipatory adaptation and mitigation actions are
beneficial. [Q9.39]
a

b
c

32

In this report, a robust finding for climate change is defined as one that holds under a variety of approaches, methods, models, and
assumptions and one that is expected to be relatively unaffected by uncertainties. Key uncertainties in this context are those that, if
reduced, may lead to new and robust findings in relation to the questions of this report. This table provides examples and is not an
exhaustive list.
Accounting for these above uncertainties leads to a range of CO2 concentrations in the year 2100 between about 490 and 1,250 ppm.
Accounting for these above uncertainties leads to a range for globally averaged surface temperature increase, 1990-2100, of 1.4 to
5.8C (Figure SPM-10b) and of globally averaged sea-level rise of 0.09 to 0.88 m.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Summary for Policymakers

Q9

Significant progress has been made in the TAR in many aspects of the knowledge required to
understand climate change and the human response to it. However, there remain important areas
where further work is required, in particular:
* The detection and attribution of climate change
* The understanding and prediction of regional changes in climate and climate extremes
* The quantification of climate change impacts at the global, regional, and local levels
* The analysis of adaptation and mitigation activities
* The integration of all aspects of the climate change issue into strategies for sustainable development
* Comprehensive and integrated investigations to support the judgment as to what constitutes
"dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system."

Past and future CO2 atmospheric concentrations
Direct
measurements
Ice core data

ppm

Projections

ppm

1000

1000

900

900

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI

800

800

700

700

600

600

500

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

A2
B1
B2

0
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Figure SPM-10a: Atmospheric CO2 concentration from year 1000 to year 2000 from ice core data and from
direct atmospheric measurements over the past few decades. Projections of CO2 concentrations for the period
2000 to 2100 are based on the six illustrative SRES scenarios and IS92a (for comparison with the SAR).

2100

IS92a

0

Q9 Figure 9-1a

33

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Variations of the Earths surface temperature: years 1000 to 2100
Departures in temperature in C (from the 1990 value)
Global
instrumental
observations

Observations, Northern Hemisphere, proxy data

Projections

Several models
all SRES envelope

6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Bars show
the range in
year 2100
produced by
several models

0.5
0.0

Scenarios
A1B
A1T

-0.5

A1FI

-1.0

A2
B1
B2

1000

1100

1200

1300

1400

1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

Figure SPM-10b: Variations of the Earth's surface temperature: years 1000 to 2100. From year 1000 to
year 1860 variations in average surface temperature of the Northern Hemisphere are shown (corresponding
data from the Southern Hemisphere not available) reconstructed from proxy data (tree rings, corals, ice cores,
and historical records). The line shows the 50-year average, the grey region the 95% confidence limit in the
annual data. From years 1860 to 2000 are shown variations in observations of globally and annually averaged
surface temperature from the instrumental record; the line shows the decadal average. From years 2000 to
2100 projections of globally averaged surface temperature are shown for the six illustrative SRES scenarios
and IS92a using a model with average climate sensitivity. The grey region marked "several models all SRES
envelope" shows the range of results from the full range of 35 SRES scenarios in addition to those from a
range of models with different climate sensitivities. The temperature scale is departure from the 1990 value;
the scale is different from that used in Figure SPM-2.

34

IPCC Third Assessment Report

2000

2100

Q9 Figure 9-1b

IS92a

Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report

Synthesis Report

An Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
This underlying report, approved paragraph by paragraph at IPCC Plenary XVIII (Wembley, United Kingdom, 24-29 September
2001), represents the formally agreed statement of the IPCC concerning key findings and uncertainties contained in the
Working Group contributions to the Third Assessment Report.

Based on a draft prepared by:
Core Writing Team
Robert T. Watson, Daniel L. Albritton, Terry Barker, Igor A. Bashmakov, Osvaldo Canziani, Renate Christ, Ulrich Cubasch,
Ogunlade Davidson, Habiba Gitay, David Griggs, John Houghton, Joanna House, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Murari Lal, Neil
Leary, Christopher Magadza, James J. McCarthy, John F.B. Mitchell, Jose Roberto Moreira, Mohan Munasinghe, Ian Noble,
Rajendra Pachauri, Barrie Pittock, Michael Prather, Richard G. Richels, John B. Robinson, Jayant Sathaye, Stephen
Schneider, Robert Scholes, Thomas Stocker, Narasimhan Sundararaman, Rob Swart, Tomihiro Taniguchi, and D. Zhou
Extended Team
Q.K. Ahmad, Oleg Anisimov, Nigel Arnell, Fons Baede, Tariq Banuri, Leonard Bernstein, Daniel H. Bouille, Timothy Carter,
Catrinus J. Jepma, Liu Chunzhen, John Church, Stewart Cohen, Paul Desanker, William Easterling, Chris Folland, Filippo
Giorgi, Jonathan Gregory, Kirsten Halsnaes, Joanna Haigh, Hideo Harasawa, Bruce Hewitson, Jean-Charles Hourcade, Mike
Hulme, Tom Karl, Pekka E. Kauppi, Rik Leemans, Anil Markandya, Luis Jose Mata, Bryant McAvaney, Anthony McMichael,
Linda Mearns, Jerry Meehl, Gylvan Meira-Filho, Evan Mills, William R. Moomaw, Berrien Moore, Tsuneyuki Morita, M.J.
Mwandosya, Leonard Nurse, Martin Parry, Joyce Penner, Colin Prentice, Venkatachalam Ramaswamy, Sarah Raper, Jim
Salinger, Michael Scott, Roger A. Sedjo, Priyaradshi R. Shukla, Barry Smit, Joel Smith, Leena Srivastava, Ron Stouffer, Kanako
Tanaka, Ferenc L. Toth, Alla Tsyban, John P. Weyant, Tom Wilbanks, Francis Zwiers, and many IPCC authors
Review Editors
Susan Barrell, Rick Bradley, Eduardo Calvo, Ian Carruthers, Oyvind Christophersen, Yuri Izrael, Eberhard Jochem, Fortunat
Joos, Martin Manning, Bert Metz, Alionne Ndiaye, Buruhani Nyenzi, Ramon Pichs-Madruga, Richard Odingo, Michel Petit,
Jan Pretel, Armando Ramirez, Jose Romero, John Stone, R.T.M. Sutamihardja, David Warrilow, Ding Yihui, and John Zillman

Question 1
What can scientific, technical, and socio-economic analyses contribute to
the determination of what constitutes dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system as referred to in Article 2 of the
Framework Convention on Climate Change?
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Article 2
"The ultimate objective of this Convention and any related legal instruments that the
Conference of the Parties may adopt is to achieve, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Convention, stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the
climate system. Such a level should be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow
ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not
threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner."

Q1

Climate Change 2001

1.1

Natural, technical, and social sciences can provide essential information and
evidence needed for decisions on what constitutes "dangerous anthropogenic
interference" with the climate system. At the same time, such decisions are
value judgments determined through socio-political processes, taking into
account considerations such as development, equity, and sustainability, as
well as uncertainties and risk. Scientific evidence helps to reduce uncertainty and
increase knowledge, and can serve as an input for considering precautionary measures.1
Decisions are based on risk assessment, and lead to risk management choices by decision
makers, about actions and policies.2

WGII TAR Section 2.7 &
WGIII TAR Chapter 10

1.2

The basis for determining what constitutes "dangerous anthropogenic
interference" will vary among regions, depending both on the local nature
and consequences of climate change impacts, and also on the adaptive
capacity available to cope with climate change. It also depends upon
mitigative capacity, since the magnitude and the rate of change are both
important. The consequent types of adaptation responses that will be selected depend on
the effectiveness of various adaptation or mitigation responses in reducing vulnerabilities
and improving the sustainability of life-support systems. There is no universally applicable
best set of policies; rather, it is important to consider both the robustness of different policy
measures against a range of possible future worlds, and the degree to which such climatespecific policies can be integrated with broader sustainable development policies.

WGII TAR Chapter 18 &
WGIII TAR Chapter 10

1.3

The Third Assessment Report (TAR) provides an assessment of new scientific
information and evidence as an input for policy makers in their determination
of what constitutes "dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system" with regard to: (1) the magnitudes and rates of changes in the climate system, (2)
the ecological and socio-economic impacts of climate change, and (3) the potential for
achieving a broad range of levels of concentrations through mitigation and information
about how adaptation can reduce vulnerability.

WGI TAR, WGII TAR, &
WGIII TAR

1.4

With regard to the magnitudes and rates of changes in the climate system,
the TAR provides scenario-based projections of future concentrations of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, global and regional patterns of changes
and rates of change in temperature, precipitation, and sea level, and changes
in extreme climate events. It also examines possibilities for abrupt and irreversible
changes in ocean circulation and the major ice sheets.

WGI TAR

1.5

The TAR reviews the biophysical and socio-economic impacts of climate
change. The TAR articulates five reasons for concern, regarding:
* Risks to unique and threatened systems
* Risks associated with extreme weather events
* The distribution of impacts
* Aggregate impacts
* Risks of large-scale, high-impact events.
Of great significance here is an assessment of the likelihood of the critical thresholds at
which natural and human systems exhibit large-scale, abrupt, or irreversible changes in
their response to a changing climate. Since no single indicator (e.g., a monetary unit) captures

WGII TAR Chapter 19

1

Conditions that justify the adoption of precautionary measures are described in Article 3.3 of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
2
The risk associated with an event is most simply defined as the probability of that event, multiplied by the
magnitude of its consequence. Various decision frameworks can facilitate climate risk assessment and management.
These include, among others, cost-benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-attribute analysis, and
tolerable windows. Such techniques help to differentiate the risk levels associated with alternative futures, but in
all cases the analyses are marked by considerable uncertainties.

38

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 1

the range of relevant risks presented by climate change, a variety of analytical approaches
and criteria are required to assess impacts and facilitate decisions about risk management.
1.6

With regard to strategies for addressing climate change, the TAR provides
an assessment of the potential for achieving different levels of concentrations
through mitigation and information about how adaptation can reduce
vulnerability. The causality works in both directions. Different stabilization levels result
from different emission scenarios, which are connected to underlying development paths.
In turn, these development paths strongly affect adaptive capacity in any region. In this
way adaptation and mitigation strategies are dynamically connected with changes in the
climate system and the prospects for ecosystem adaptation, food production, and sustainable
economic development.

WGII TAR Chapter 18 &
WGIII TAR Chapter 2

1.7

An integrated view of climate change considers the dynamics of the complete cycle of
interlinked causes and effects across all sectors concerned. Figure 1-1 shows the cycle,
from the underlying driving forces of population, economy, technology, and governance,
through greenhouse gas and other emissions, changes in the physical climate system,
biophysical and human impacts, to adaptation and mitigation, and back to the driving forces.
The figure presents a schematic view of an ideal "integrated assessment" framework, in
which all the parts of the climate change problem interact mutually. Changes in one part of
the cycle influence other components in a dynamic manner, through multiple paths. The
TAR assesses new policy-relevant information and evidence with regard to all quadrants
of Figure 1-1. In particular, a new contribution has been to fill in the bottom righthand
quadrant of the figure by exploring alternative development paths and their relationship to
greenhouse gas emissions, and by undertaking preliminary work on the linkage between
adaptation, mitigation, and development paths. However, the TAR does not achieve a fully
integrated assessment of climate change, because of the incomplete state of knowledge.

WGII TAR Chapters 1 & 19,
WGIII TAR Chapter 1, &
SRES

1.8

Climate change decision making is essentially a sequential process under
general uncertainties. Decision making has to deal with uncertainties including the
risk of non-linear and/or irreversible changes and entails balancing the risk of either
insufficient or excessive action, and involves careful consideration of the consequences
(both environmental and economic), their likelihood, and society's attitude towards risk.
The latter is likely to vary from country to country and from generation to generation. The
relevant question is "what is the best course for the near term given the expected long-term
climate change and accompanying uncertainties."

WGI TAR, WGII TAR, &
WGIII TAR Section 10.1.4

1.9

Climate change impacts are part of the larger question of how complex social,
economic, and environmental subsystems interact and shape prospects for
sustainable development. There are multiple links. Economic development affects
ecosystem balance and, in turn, is affected by the state of the ecosystem; poverty can be
both a result and a cause of environmental degradation; material- and energy-intensive life
styles and continued high levels of consumption supported by non-renewable resources
and rapid population growth are not likely to be consistent with sustainable development
paths; and extreme socio-economic inequality within communities and between nations
may undermine the social cohesion that would promote sustainability and make policy
responses more effective. At the same time, socio-economic and technology policy decisions
made for non-climate-related reasons have significant implications for climate policy and
climate change impacts, as well as for other environmental issues (see Question 8). In
addition, critical impact thresholds and vulnerability to climate change impacts are directly
connected to environmental, social, and economic conditions and institutional capacity.

WGII TAR

1.10

As a result, the effectiveness of climate policies can be enhanced when they
are integrated with broader strategies designed to make national and regional
development paths more sustainable. This occurs because of the impacts of natural

WGIII TAR Section 10.3.2

39

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Climate Change - an integrated framework

Temperature rise
Sea-level rise
Precipitation change
Droughts and floods

Adaptation

Climate Change

Impacts on human
and natural systems
Food and water resources
Ecosystem and biodiversity
Human settlements
Human health

Emissions and
concentrations
Greenhouse gases
Aerosols

Mitigation

Adaptation

Socio-economic
development paths
Economic growth
Technology
Population
Governance

Figure 1-1: Climate change - an integrated framework. Schematic and simplified representation of an integrated assessment framework for
considering anthropogenic climate change. The yellow arrows show a full clockwise cycle of cause and effect among the four quadrants shown
in the figure, while the blue arrow indicates the societal response to climate change impacts. For both developed and developing countries,
each socio-economic development path explored in the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios has driving forces which give rise to
emissions of greenhouse gases, aerosols, and precursors--with carbon dioxide (CO2) being the most important. The greenhouse gas emissions
accumulate in the atmosphere, changing concentrations and disturbing the natural balances, depending on physical processes such as
solar radiation, cloud formation, and rainfall. The aerosols also give rise to air pollution (e.g., acid rain) that damage human and the natural
systems (not shown). The enhanced greenhouse effect will initiate climate changes well into the future with associated impacts on the
natural and human systems. There is a possibility of some feedback between the changes in these systems and the climate (not shown),
such as albedo effects from changing land use, and other, perhaps larger, interactions between the systems and atmospheric emissions (e.g.,
effects of changes in land use (again not shown)). These changes will ultimately have effects on socio-economic development paths. The
development paths also have direct effects on the natural systems (shown by the anti-clockwise arrow from the development box) such as
changes in land use leading to deforestation. This figure illustrates that the various dimensions of the climate change issue exist in a dynamic
cycle, characterized by significant time delays. Both emissions and impacts, for example, are linked in complex ways to underlying socioeconomic and technological development paths. A major contribution of the TAR has been to explicitly consider the bottom righthand domain
(shown as a rectangle) by examining the relationships between greenhouse gas emissions and development paths (in SRES), and by assessing
preliminary work on the linkage between adaptation, mitigation, and development paths (WGII and WGIII). However, the TAR does not achieve
a fully integrated assessment of climate change, since not all components of the cycle were able to be linked dynamically. Adaptation and
mitigation are shown as modifying the effects shown in the figure.

40

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 1

climate variation and changes, climate policy responses, and associated socio-economic
development will affect the ability of countries to achieve sustainable development goals,
while the pursuit of those goals will in turn affect the opportunities for, and success of,
climate policies. In particular, the socio-economic and technological characteristics of
different development paths will strongly affect emissions, the rate and magnitude of climate
change, climate change impacts, the capability to adapt, and the capacity to mitigate climate.
The Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES, see Box 3-1) outlined multiple plausible
future worlds with different characteristics, each having very different implications for the
future climate and for climate policy.
1.11

The TAR assesses available information on the timing, opportunities, costs,
benefits, and impacts of various mitigation and adaptation options. It indicates
that there are opportunities for countries acting individually, or in cooperation with others,
to reduce costs of mitigation and adaptation and realize benefits associated with achieving
sustainable development.

WGII TAR Chapter 18,
WGIII TAR Chapters 8, 9, &
10, & SRES

41

Question 2
What is the evidence for, causes of, and consequences of changes in the
Earth's climate since the pre-industrial era?
(a)

(b)

Has the Earth's climate changed since the pre-industrial era at the
regional and/or global scale? If so, what part, if any, of the observed
changes can be attributed to human influence and what part, if any,
can be attributed to natural phenomena? What is the basis for that
attribution?
What is known about the environmental, social, and economic
consequences of climate changes since the pre-industrial era with
an emphasis on the last 50 years?

Q2

Climate Change 2001

2.1

This answer focuses on classical measures of climate (e.g., temperature, precipitation, sea level,
plus extreme events including floods, droughts, and storms), on other components of the Earth's
climate system (e.g., greenhouse gases and aerosols, ecological systems), and on human
health and socio-economic sectors. Climate change as defined in IPCC refers to statistically
significant variations that persist for an extended period, typically decades or longer. It
includes shifts in the frequency and magnitude of sporadic weather events as well as the
slow continuous rise in global mean surface temperature. Thus the discussion here includes
climate-weather variations on all temporal and spatial scales, ranging from brief-lived severe
storms to seasonal El Nino events, decadal droughts, and century shifts in temperature and
ice cover. Although short-term climate variations are considered predominantly natural at present,
their impacts are discussed in this question because they represent a class of changes that
may become more prevalent in a future climate perturbed by human activities (see Question
4). Attribution is used here as the process of establishing the most likely causes for the
detected change with some defined level of confidence. The discussion includes both climate
change that is attributable to human influence and climate change that may at present be
natural but might in the future be modified through human influence (see Box 3-1).

2.2

The Earth's climate system has demonstrably changed on both
global and regional scales since the pre-industrial era, with some
of these changes attributable to human activities.

2.3

Emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols due to human
activities continue to alter the atmosphere in ways that are
expected to affect the climate (see Table 2-1).

2.4

Concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases and their radiative forcings
have generally increased over the 20th century as a result of human activities.
Almost all greenhouse gases reached their highest recorded levels in the 1990s and continue
to increase (see Figure 2-1). Atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) have
varied substantially during glacial-interglacial cycles over the past 420,000 years, but even
the largest of these earlier values are much less than their current atmospheric concentrations.
In terms of radiative forcing by greenhouse gases emitted through human activity, CO2 and
CH4 are the first and second most important, respectively. From the years 1750 to 2000, the
concentration of CO2 increased by 314%, and that of CH4 rose by 15125% (see Box 2-1
and Figure 2-1). These rates of increase are unprecedented. Fossil-fuel burning released on
average 5.4 Gt C yr-1 during the 1980s, increasing to 6.3 Gt C yr-1 during the 1990s. About
three-quarters of the increase in atmospheric CO2 during the 1990s was caused by fossilfuel burning, with land-use change including deforestation responsible for the rest. Over
the 19th and much of the 20th century the terrestrial biosphere has been a net source of
atmospheric CO2, but before the end of the 20th century it had become a net sink. The
increase in CH4 can be identified with emissions from energy use, livestock, rice agriculture,
and landfills. Increases in the concentrations of other greenhouse gases--particularly
tropospheric ozone (O3), the third most important--are directly attributable to fossil-fuel
combustion as well as other industrial and agricultural emissions.

Box 2-1

Confidence and likelihood statements.

Where appropriate, the authors of the Third Assessment Report assigned confidence levels that represent
their collective judgment in the validity of a conclusion based on observational evidence, modeling
results, and theory that they have examined. The following words have been used throughout the text
of the Synthesis Report to the TAR relating to WGI findings: virtually certain (greater than 99%
chance that a result is true); very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance); medium likelihood
(33-66% chance); unlikely (10-33% chance); very unlikely (1-10% chance); and exceptionally
unlikely (less than 1% chance). An explicit uncertainty range () is a likely range. Estimates of
confidence relating to WGII findings are: very high (95% or greater), high (67-95%), medium
(33-67%), low (5-33%), and very low (5% or less). No confidence levels were assigned in WGIII.

44

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

WGI TAR Chapters 3 & 4,
& SRAGA

WGI TAR SPM & WGII
TAR SPM

Synthesis Report

Table 2-1

Question 2

20th century changes in the Earth's atmosphere, climate, and biophysical system.a

Indicator

Observed Changes

Concentration indicators
Atmospheric concentration of CO2

280 ppm for the period 1000-1750 to 368 ppm in year 2000 (314% increase). [WGI TAR
Chapter 3]

Terrestrial biospheric CO2 exchange

Cumulative source of about 30 Gt C between the years 1800 and 2000; but during the
1990s, a net sink of about 147 Gt C. [WG1 TAR Chapter 3 & SRLULUCF]

Atmospheric concentration of CH4

700 ppb for the period 1000-1750 to 1,750 ppb in year 2000 (15125% increase). [WGI
TAR Chapter 4]

Atmospheric concentration of N2O

270 ppb for the period 1000-1750 to 316 ppb in year 2000 (175% increase). [WGI TAR
Chapter 4]

Tropospheric concentration of O3

Increased by 3515% from the years 1750 to 2000, varies with region. [WGI TAR
Chapter 4]

Stratospheric concentration of O3

Decreased over the years 1970 to 2000, varies with altitude and latitude. [WGI TAR
Chapters 4 & 6]

Atmospheric concentrations of HFCs,
PFCs, and SF6

Increased globally over the last 50 years. [WGI TAR Chapter 4]

Weather indicators
Global mean surface temperature

Increased by 0.60.2C over the 20th century; land areas warmed more than the oceans
(very likely). [WGI TAR Section 2.2.2.3]

Northern Hemisphere surface
temperature

Increase over the 20th century greater than during any other century in the last 1,000
years; 1990s warmest decade of the millennium (likely). [WGI TAR Chapter 2 ES &
Section 2.3.2.2]

Diurnal surface temperature range

Decreased over the years 1950 to 2000 over land: nighttime minimum temperatures
increased at twice the rate of daytime maximum temperatures (likely). [WGI TAR Section
2.2.2.1]

Hot days / heat index

Increased (likely). [WGI TAR Section 2.7.2.1]

Cold / frost days

Decreased for nearly all land areas during the 20th century (very likely). [WGI TAR
Section 2.7.2.1]

Continental precipitation

Increased by 5-10% over the 20th century in the Northern Hemisphere (very likely),
although decreased in some regions (e.g., north and west Africa and parts of the
Mediterranean). [WGI TAR Chapter 2 ES & Section 2.5.2]

Heavy precipitation events

Increased at mid- and high northern latitudes (likely). [WGI TAR Section 2.7.2.2]

Frequency and severity of drought

Increased summer drying and associated incidence of drought in a few areas (likely). In
some regions, such as parts of Asia and Africa, the frequency and intensity of droughts
have been observed to increase in recent decades. [WGII TAR Sections 10.1.3 & 11.1.2]

2.5

The radiative forcing from the increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gases
since the pre-industrial era is positive (warming) with a small uncertainty range;
that from the direct effects of aerosols is negative (cooling) and smaller; whereas
the negative forcing from the indirect effects of aerosols (on clouds and the
hydrologic cycle) might be large but is not well quantified. Key anthropogenic and
natural factors causing a change in radiative forcing from year 1750 to year 2000 are shown
in Figure 2-2, where the factors whose radiative forcing can be quantified are marked by
wide, colored bars. Only some of the aerosol effects are estimated here and denoted as ranges.
Other factors besides atmospheric constituents--solar irradiance and land-use change--are
also shown. Stratospheric aerosols from large volcanic eruptions have led to important, but
brief-lived, negative forcings (particularly the periods 1880-1920 and 1960-1994), which
are not important over the time scale since the pre-industrial era and not shown. The sum of

WGI TAR Chapter 5 & 6, &
SRAGA Chapter 6

45

Climate Change 2001

Table 2-1

Synthesis Report

20th century changes in the Earth's atmosphere, climate, and biophysical system.a (continued)

Indicator

Observed Changes

Biological and physical indicators
Global mean sea level

Increased at an average annual rate of 1 to 2 mm during the 20th century. [WGI TAR
Chapter 11]

Duration of ice cover of rivers and lakes

Decreased by about 2 weeks over the 20th century in mid- and high latitudes of the
Northern Hemisphere (very likely). [WGI TAR Chapter 2 ES & Section 2.2.5.5, & WGII
TAR Sections 5.7 & 16.1.3.1]

Arctic sea-ice extent and thickness

Thinned by 40% in recent decades in late summer to early autumn (likely) and decreased
in extent by 10-15% since the 1950s in spring and summer. [WGI TAR Section 2.2.5.2 &
WGII TAR Section 16.1.3.1]

Non-polar glaciers

Widespread retreat during the 20th century. [WGI TAR Section 2.2.5.4 & WGII TAR
Section 4.3.11]

Snow cover

Decreased in area by 10% since global observations became available from satellites in
the 1960s (very likely). [WGI TAR Section 2.2.5.1]

Permafrost

Thawed, warmed, and degraded in parts of the polar, sub-polar, and mountainous regions.
[WGI TAR Sections 2.2.5.3 & 11.2.5, & WGII TAR Section 16.1.3.1]

El Nino events

Became more frequent, persistent, and intense during the last 20 to 30 years compared to
the previous 100 years. [WGI TAR Section 7.6.5]

Growing season

Lengthened by about 1 to 4 days per decade during the last 40 years in the Northern
Hemisphere, especially at higher latitudes. [WGII TAR Section 5.2.1]

Plant and animal ranges

Shifted poleward and up in elevation for plants, insects, birds, and fish. [WGII TAR
Sections 5.2, 5.4, 5.9, & 16.1.3.1]

Breeding, flowering, and migration

Earlier plant flowering, earlier bird arrival, earlier dates of breeding season, and earlier
emergence of insects in the Northern Hemisphere. [WGII TAR Sections 5.2.1 & 5.4.3]

Coral reef bleaching

Increased frequency, especially during El Nino events. [WGII TAR Section 6.3.8]

Economic indicators
Weather-related economic losses

a

Global inflation-adjusted losses rose an order of magnitude over the last 40 years (see
Figure 2-7). Part of the observed upward trend is linked to socio-economic factors and
part is linked to climatic factors. [WGII TAR Sections 8.2.1 & 8.2.2]

This table provides examples of key observed changes and is not an exhaustive list. It includes both changes attributable to anthropogenic
climate change and those that may be caused by natural variations or anthropogenic climate change. Confidence levels are reported
where they are explicitly assessed by the relevant Working Group.

quantified factors in Figure 2-2 (greenhouse gases, aerosols and clouds, land-use (albedo), and
solar irradiance) is positive, but this does not include the potentially large, negative forcing
from aerosol indirect effects. The total change in radiative forcing since the pre-industrial era
continues to be a useful tool to estimate, to a first order, the global mean surface temperature
response to human and natural perturbations; however, the sum of forcings is not necessarily
an indicator of the detailed aspects of the potential climate responses such as regional
climate change. For the last half of the 20th century (not shown), the positive forcing due to
well-mixed greenhouse gases has increased rapidly over the past 4 decades, while in contrast
the sum of natural forcings has been negative over the past 2 and possibly even 4 decades.

46

2.6

An increasing body of observations gives a collective picture
of a warming world and other changes in the climate system
(see Table 2-1).

2.7

The global average surface temperature has increased from the 1860s to the
year 2000, the period of instrumental record. Over the 20th century this increase
was 0.6C with a very likely (see Box 2-1) confidence range of 0.4-0.8C (see Figure 2-3).

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR SPM & WGI
TAR Sections 2.2.2, 2.3.2,
& 2.7.2

Synthesis Report

Question 2

Indicators of the human influence on
the atmosphere during the industrial era
Global atmospheric concentrations
of three well-mixed greenhouse gases
Radiative forcing (Wm-2 )

CO2 (ppm)

Carbon Dioxide

360

1.5

340

1.0

320
0.5

300
280

0.0

260
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

Radiative forcing (Wm-2 )

CH4 (ppb)

Methane

1 750

2000

0.50

1 500
1 250

0.25

1 000
750

0.00

1000

1200

1400

1600

2000

Radiative forcing (Wm-2 )

N2O (ppb)

310

1800

0.15

Nitrous Oxide

0.10
290

0.05
0.00

270

250

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Sulfate aerosols deposited in Greenland ice
Sulfate concentration
mg SO42- per tonne of ice
200

SO2 emissions

from United States
and Europe
(Mt S yr -1)

Sulfur

50
100
25

0

0

1400

1600

1800

2000

WGI TAR Figures SPM-2,
3-2b, 4-1a, 4-1b, 4-2, & 5-4a

Figure 2-1: Records of past changes in atmospheric composition
over the last millennium demonstrate the rapid rise in greenhouse
gases and sulfate aerosols that is attributable primarily to industrial
growth since 1750. The top three panels show increasing atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous
oxide (N2O) over the past 1,000 years. Early sporadic data taken from
air trapped in ice (symbols) matches up with continuous atmospheric
observations from recent decades (solid lines). These gases are well
mixed in the atmosphere, and their concentrations reflect emissions
from sources throughout the globe. The estimated positive radiative
forcing from these gases is indicated on the righthand scale. The lowest
panel shows the concentration of sulfate in ice cores from Greenland
(shown by lines for three different cores) from which the episodic effects
of volcanic eruptions have been removed. Sulfate aerosols form from
sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions, deposit readily at the surface, and are
not well mixed in the atmosphere. Specifically, the increase in sulfate
deposited at Greenland is attributed to SO2 emissions from the U.S.
and Europe (shown as symbols), and both show a decline in recent
decades. Sulfate aerosols produce negative radiative forcing.

47

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

It is very likely that the 1990s was the warmest decade, and 1998 the warmest year, of the
instrumental record. Extending the instrumental record with proxy data for the Northern
Hemisphere indicates that over the past 1,000 years the 20th century increase in temperature
is likely to have been the largest of any century, and the 1990s was likely the warmest decade
(see Figure 2-3). Insufficient data are available in the Southern Hemisphere prior to the
year 1860 to compare the recent warming with changes over the last 1,000 years. Since the
year 1950, the increase in sea surface temperature is about half that of the mean land
surface air temperature. During this period the nighttime daily minimum temperatures over
land have increased on average by about 0.2C per decade, about twice the corresponding

Anthropogenic and natural forcing of the climate for the year 2000, relative to 1750
Global mean radiative forcing (Wm -2 )
Greenhouse gases

Warming

3

2

Halocarbons
N2O

Aerosols + clouds
Black
carbon
from
fossilfuel
burning

CH4
1

CO2

Tropospheric
ozone

Mineral
dust

Aviation
Contrails Cirrus

Solar

0

Cooling

Stratospheric
ozone
Sulfate

-1

-2

Organic
carbon Biomass
from
burning
fossilfuel
burning

The height of a bar indicates a best estimate of the forcing, and the
accompanying vertical line a likely range of values. Where no bar is present
the vertical line only indicates the range in best estimates with no likelihood.

Land use
(albedo only)

Aerosol
indirect
effect

LEVEL OF SCIENTIFIC
UNDERSTANDING

Figure 2-2: The influence of external factors on climate can be broadly compared using the concept of
WGI TAR SPM, WGI TAR
Chapter 6 ES, & WGI TAR
radiative forcing. These radiative forcings arise from changes in the atmospheric composition, alteration of
Figures SPM-3 & 6-6
surface reflectance by land use, and variation in the output of the sun. Except for solar variation, some form of
human activity is linked to each. The rectangular bars represent estimates of the contributions of these forcings, some of which yield warming
and some cooling. Forcing due to episodic volcanic events, which lead to a negative forcing lasting only for a few years, is not shown. The
indirect effect of aerosols shown is their effect on the size and number of cloud droplets. A second indirect effect of aerosols on clouds, namely
their effect on cloud lifetime, which would also lead to a negative forcing, is not shown. Effects of aviation on greenhouse gases are included in
the individual bars. The vertical line about the rectangular bars indicates a range of estimates, guided by the spread in the published values of
the forcings and physical understanding. Some of the forcings possess a much greater degree of certainty than others. A vertical line without
a rectangular bar denotes a forcing for which no best estimate can be given owing to large uncertainties. The overall level of scientific understanding
for each forcing varies considerably, as noted. Some of the radiative forcing agents are well mixed over the globe, such as CO2, thereby
perturbing the global heat balance. Others represent perturbations with stronger regional signatures because of their spatial distribution, such
as aerosols. Radiative forcing continues to be a useful tool to estimate, to a first order, the relative climate impacts such as the relative global
mean surface temperature response due to radiatively induced perturbations, but these global mean forcing estimates are not necessarily
indicators of the detailed aspects of the potential climate responses (e.g., regional climate change).

48

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 2

rate of increase in daytime maximum air temperatures. These climate changes have lengthened
the frost-free season in many mid- and high-latitude regions.

Variations of the Earths surface temperature for...
Departures in temperature in C (from the 1961-1990 average)
0.8

0.8

the past 140 years (global)

0.4

0.4

0.0

0.0

-0.4

-0.4
Direct temperatures

-0.8

1860

1900

1880

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

-0.8

Departures in temperature in C (from the 1961-1990 average)
0.8

0.8

the past 1000 years (Northern Hemisphere)

0.4

0.4

0.0

0.0

-0.4

-0.4

-0.8

-0.8
Direct temperatures
Proxy data

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Figure 2-3: The Earth's surface temperature has increased by about 0.6oC over the record of direct
WGI TAR Figures SPM-1,
2-7c, & 2-20
temperature measurements (1860-2000, top panel)--a rise that is unprecedented, at least based on
proxy temperature data for the Northern Hemisphere, over the last millennium (bottom panel). In the top panel the global mean surface
temperature is shown year-by-year (red bars with very likely ranges as thin black whiskers) and approximately decade-by-decade (continuous
red line). Analyses take into account data gaps, random instrumental errors and uncertainties, uncertainties in bias corrections in the ocean
surface temperature data, and also in adjustments for urbanization over the land. The lower panel merges proxy data (year-by-year blue line
with very likely ranges as grey band, 50-year-average purple line) and the direct temperature measurements (red line) for the Northern
Hemisphere. The proxy data consist of tree rings, corals, ice cores, and historical records that have been calibrated against thermometer data.
Insufficient data are available to assess such changes in the Southern Hemisphere.

49

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

In the lowest 8 km of the atmosphere the global temperature increase from
the 1950s to the year 2000, about 0.1C per decade, has been similar to that
at the surface. For the period 1979-2000 both satellite and weather balloon measurements
show nearly identical warming over North America (0.3oC per decade) and Europe (0.4oC
per decade) for both surface and lower atmosphere, but distinct differences over some land
areas and particularly in the tropical regions (0.100.10C per decade for surface versus
0.060.16C per decade for the lower atmosphere). Temperatures of the surface and lower
atmosphere are influenced differently by factors such as stratospheric ozone depletion,
atmospheric aerosols, and the El Nino phenomenon. In addition, spatial sampling techniques
can also explain some of the differences in trends, but these differences are not fully resolved.

2.8

WGI TAR SPM & WGI
TAR Section 2.2.4

Comparison between modeled and observations of temperature rise
since the year 1860
Temperature anomalies in C
1.0

1.0

Temperature anomalies in C
1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

(a) Natural forcing only

-0.5

-0.5 -0.5

-0.5

-1.0
1850

(b) Anthropogenic forcing only

Model results

Model results

Observations

Observations
1900

1950

-1.0
2000

-1.0
1850

1900

1950

Temperature anomalies in C
1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

(c) Natural + Anthropogenic forcing

-1.0
2000

-0.5

-0.5
Model results
Observations
-1.0
1850

1900

1950

-1.0
2000

Figure 2-4: Simulating the Earth's temperature variations and comparing the results to the measured
WGI TAR Figure 12-7
changes can provide insight into the underlying causes of the major changes. A climate model can be
used to simulate the temperature changes that occur from both natural and anthropogenic causes. The simulations represented by the band in
(a) were done with only natural forcings: solar variation and volcanic activity. Those encompassed by the band in (b) were done with anthropogenic
forcings: greenhouse gases and an estimate of sulfate aerosols. Those encompassed by the band in (c) were done with both natural and anthropogenic
forcings included. From (b), it can be seen that the inclusion of anthropogenic forcings provides a plausible explanation for a substantial part of
the observed temperature changes over the past century, but the best match with observations is obtained in (c) when both natural and anthropogenic
factors are included. These results show that the forcings included are sufficient to explain the observed changes, but do not exclude the possibility
that other forcings may also have contributed. Similar results to those in (b) are obtained with other models with anthropogenic forcing.

50

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 2

2.9

There is new and stronger evidence that most of the warming
observed over the last 50 years is attributable to human activities.

2.10

The observed warming over the 20th century is unlikely to be entirely natural
in origin. The increase in surface temperatures over the last 100 years is very unlikely to
be due to internal variability alone. Reconstructions of climate data for the last 1,000 years
also indicate that this 20th century warming was unusual and unlikely to be the response to
natural forcing alone: That is, volcanic eruptions and variation in solar irradiance do not
explain the warming in the latter half of the 20th century (see Figure 2-4a), but they may
have contributed to the observed warming in the first half.

WGI TAR SPM & WGI
TAR Chapter 12

2.11

In the light of new evidence and taking into account the remaining uncertainties,
most of the observed warming over the last 50 years is likely to have been due
to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations. Detection and attribution studies
(including greenhouse gases and sulfate aerosols as anthropogenic forcing) consistently
find evidence for an anthropogenic signal in the climate record of the last 35 to 50 years, despite
uncertainties in forcing due to anthropogenic sulfate aerosols and natural factors (volcanoes
and solar irradiance). The sulfate and natural forcings are negative over this period and
cannot explain the warming (see Figure 2-4a); whereas most of these studies find that, over
the last 50 years, the estimated rate and magnitude of warming due to increasing greenhouse
gases alone are comparable with, or larger than, the observed warming (Figure 2-4b). The
best agreement for the 1860-2000 record is found when the above anthropogenic and
natural forcing factors are combined (see Figure 2-4c). This result does not exclude the
possibility that other forcings may also contribute, and some known anthropogenic factors
(e.g., organic carbon, black carbon (soot), biomass aerosols, and some changes in land
use) have not been used in these detection and attribution studies. Estimates of the magnitude
and geographic distribution of these additional anthropogenic forcings vary considerably.

WGI TAR SPM & WGI
TAR Chapter 12

2.12

Changes in sea level, snow cover, ice extent, and precipitation
are consistent with a warming climate near the Earth's surface
(see Table 2-1). Some of these changes are regional and some may be due to internal

WGI TAR SPM & WGII
TAR Section 4.3.11

climate variations, natural forcings, or regional human activities rather than attributed solely
to global human influence.
2.13

It is very likely that the 20th century warming has contributed significantly to
the observed rise in global average sea level and increase in ocean-heat
content. Warming drives sea-level rise through thermal expansion of seawater and
widespread loss of land ice. Based on tide gauge records, after correcting for land
movements, the average annual rise was between 1 and 2 mm during the 20th century. The
very few long records show that it was less during the 19th century (see Figure 2-5). Within
present uncertainties, observations and models are both consistent with a lack of significant
acceleration of sea-level rise during the 20th century. The observed rate of sea-level rise
during the 20th century is consistent with models. Global ocean-heat content has increased
since the late 1950s, the period with adequate observations of subsurface ocean temperatures.

WGI TAR Sections
2.2.2.5, 11.2, & 11.3.2

2.14

Snow cover and ice extent have decreased. It is very likely that the extent of snow
cover has decreased by about 10% on average in the Northern Hemisphere since the late
1960s (mainly through springtime changes over America and Eurasia) and that the annual
duration of lake- and river-ice cover in the mid- and high latitudes of the Northern
Hemisphere has been reduced by about 2 weeks over the 20th century. There has also been
a widespread retreat of mountain glaciers in non-polar regions during the 20th century. It is
likely that Northern Hemisphere spring and summer sea-ice extent has decreased by about
10 to 15% from the 1950s to the year 2000 and that Arctic sea-ice thickness has declined
by about 40% during late summer and early autumn in the last 3 decades of the 20th
century. While there is no change in overall Antarctic sea-ice extent from 1978 to 2000 in

WGI TAR Section 2.2.5

51

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

parallel with global mean surface temperature increase, regional warming in the Antarctic
Peninsula coincided with the collapse of the Prince Gustav and parts of the Larsen ice
shelves during the 1990s, but the loss of these ice shelves has had little direct impact.
2.15

Precipitation has very likely increased during the 20th century by 5 to 10%
over most mid- and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere continents,
but in contrast, rainfall has likely decreased by 3% on average over much of the subtropical
land areas (see Figure 2-6a). Increasing global mean surface temperature is very likely to
lead to changes in precipitation and atmospheric moisture because of changes in atmospheric
circulation, a more active hydrologic cycle, and increases in the water-holding capacity
throughout the atmosphere. There has likely been a 2 to 4% increase in the frequency of
heavy precipitation events in the mid- and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere over
the latter half of the 20th century. There were relatively small long-term increases over the
20th century in land areas experiencing severe drought or severe wetness, but in many
regions these changes are dominated by inter-decadal and multi-decadal climate variability
with no significant trends evident over the 20th century.

2.16

Changes have also occurred in other important aspects of
climate (see Table 2-1).

WGI TAR Sections 2.5,
2.7.2.2, & 2.7.3

Relative sea level over the last 300 years
1700

1750

1800

1850

Millimeters

1900

1950

2000

Amsterdam

+ 200
+ 100
0
- 100
- 200
Millimeters
+ 200

Brest

+ 100
0
- 100
- 200

Swinoujscie

Millimeters
+ 200
+ 100
0
- 100
- 200

1700

1750

1800

1850

1900

1950

2000

Figure 2-5: A limited number of sites in Europe have nearly continuous records of sea level spanning 300
WGI TAR Figure 11-7
years and show the greatest rise in sea level over the 20th century. Records shown from Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, Brest, France, and Swinoujscie, Poland, as well as other sites, confirm the accelerated rise in sea level over the 20th century as
compared to the 19th.

52

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 2

2.17

Over the 20th century there has been a consistent, large-scale warming of both
the land and ocean surface, with largest increases in temperature over the
mid- and high latitudes of northern continents. The warming of land surface faster
than ocean surface from the years 1976 to 2000 (see Figure 2-6b) is consistent both with the
observed changes in natural climate variations, such as the North Atlantic and Arctic Oscillations,
and with the modeled pattern of greenhouse gas warming. As described below, statistically
significant associations between regional warming and observed changes in biological systems
have been documented in freshwater, terrestrial, and marine environments on all continents.

WGI TAR Sections 2.2.2,
2.6.3, & 2.6.5, & WGII TAR
Section 6.3

2.18

Warm episodes of the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon have
been more frequent, persistent, and intense since the mid-1970s, compared
with the previous 100 years. ENSO consistently affects regional variations of precipitation
and temperature over much of the tropics, subtropics, and some mid-latitude areas. It is not
obvious from models, however, that a warmer world would have a greater frequency of
occurrence of El Nino events.

WGI TAR Section 2.6.2

2.19

Some important aspects of climate appear not to have changed. A few areas of
the globe have not warmed in recent decades, mainly over some parts of the Southern
Hemisphere oceans and parts of Antarctica (see Figure 2-6b). Antarctic sea-ice extent has
stayed almost stable or even increased since 1978, the period of reliable satellite
measurements. Current analyses are unable to draw conclusions about the likelihood of

WGI TAR Sections 2.2.2,
2.2.5, & 2.7.3

Annual precipitation trends: 1900 to 2000

Trends in percentage per century
- 50%

- 40%

- 30%

- 20% - 10%

0

+ 10% + 20%

+ 30% + 40%

+ 50%

Figure 2-6a: Precipitation during the 20th century has on average increased over continents outside
WGI TAR Figure 2-25
the tropics but decreased in the desert regions of Africa and South America. While the record shows an
overall increase consistent with warmer temperatures and more atmospheric moisture, trends in precipitation vary greatly from region to region
and are only available over the 20th century for some continental regions. Over this period, there were relatively small long-term trends in land
areas experiencing severe drought or severe wetness, but in many regions these changes are dominated by inter-decadal and multi-decadal
climate variability that has no trends evident over the 20th century.

53

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Annual temperature trends: 1976 to 2000

Trends in C per decade
-1

- 0.8

- 0.6

- 0.4 - 0.2

0 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8

+1

Figure 2-6b: A consistent, large-scale warming of both the land and ocean surface occurred over the
WGI TAR Figure 2-9d
last quarter of the 20th century, with largest temperature increases over the mid- and high latitudes of
North America, Europe, and Asia. Large regions of cooling occurred only in parts of the Pacific and Southern Oceans and Antarctica.
The warming of land faster than ocean surface is consistent both with the observed changes in natural climate variations such as the North
Atlantic and Arctic Oscillations and with the modeled pattern of greenhouse-gas warming. As described in the text, warming in some regions
is linked with observed changes in biological systems on all continents.

changes in the frequency of tornadoes, thunder days, or hail events for the limited regions
that have been studied. In addition, insufficient data and conflicting analyses prevent an
assessment of changes in intensities of tropical and extra-tropical cyclones and severe
local storm activity in the mid-latitudes.
2.20

Observed changes in regional climate over the past 50 years have
affected biological and hydrological systems in many parts of
the world (see Table 2-1).

2.21

There has been a discernible impact of regional climate change, particularly
increases in temperature, on biological systems in the 20th century. In many
parts of the world the observed changes in these systems3, either anthropogenic or natural,
are coherent across diverse localities and are consistent in direction with the expected effects
of regional changes in temperature. The probability that the observed changes in the expected
direction (with no reference to magnitude) could occur by chance alone is negligible. Such
systems include, for example, species distributions, population sizes, and the timing of
reproduction or migration events. These observations implicate regional climate change as
a prominent contributing causal factor. There have been observed changes in the types
(e.g., fires, droughts, blowdowns), intensity, and frequency of disturbances that are affected
by regional climatic change (either anthropogenic or natural) and land-use practices, and
they in turn affect the productivity of and species composition within an ecosystem,

3

54

There are 44 regional studies of over 400 plants and animals, which varied in length from about 20 to 50 years,
mainly from North America, Europe, and the southern polar region. There are 16 regional studies covering about
100 physical processes over most regions of the world, which varied in length from about 20 to 150 years.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGII TAR Sections 5.4,
5.6.2, 10.1.3.2, 11.2,
13.1.3.1, & 13.2.4.1, &
WGII TAR Figure SPM-1

Synthesis Report

Question 2

particularly at high latitudes and high altitudes. Frequency of pests and disease outbreaks
have also changed, especially in forested systems, and can be linked to changes in climate.
In some regions of Africa, the combination of regional climate changes (Sahelian drought)
and anthropogenic stresses has led to decreased cereal crop production since the year 1970.
There are some positive aspects of warming: For example, the growing season across Europe
has lengthened by about 11 days from the years 1959 to 1993, and energy consumption for
heating in winter has decreased.
2.22

Coral reefs are adversely affected by rising sea surface temperatures. Increasing
sea surface temperatures have been recorded in much of the tropical oceans over the past
several decades. Many corals have undergone major, although often partially reversible,
bleaching episodes when sea surface temperatures rise by 1C in any one season, and
extensive mortality occurs for a 3C rise. This typically occurs during El Nino events and
is exacerbated by rising sea surface temperatures. These bleaching events are often associated
with other stresses such as pollution.

WGI TAR Section 2.2.2.2
& WGII TAR Sections 6.4.5
& 17.2.4.1

2.23

Changes in marine systems, particularly fish populations, have been linked
to large-scale climate oscillations. The El Nino affects fisheries off the coasts of
South America and Africa and the decadal oscillations in the Pacific are linked to decline
of fisheries off the west coast of North America.

WGI TAR Section 2.6.3 &
WGII TAR Sections 10.2.2.2,
14.1.3, & 15.2.3.3

2.24

Changes in stream flow, floods, and droughts have been observed. Evidence
of regional climate change impacts on elements of the hydrological cycle suggest that
warmer temperatures lead to intensification of the hydrological cycle. Peak stream flow
has shifted back from spring to late winter in large parts of eastern Europe, European
Russia, and North America in the last decades. The increasing frequency of droughts and
floods in some areas is related to variations in climate--for example, droughts in Sahel and
in northeast and southern Brazil, and floods in Colombia and northwest Peru.

WGI TAR Section 2.7.3.3,
WGII TAR SPM, WGII TAR
Sections 4.3.6, 10.2.1.2,
14.3, & 19.2.2.1, & WGII
TAR Table 4-1

2.25

There are preliminary indications that some human systems
have been affected by recent increases in floods and droughts.
The rising socio-economic costs related to weather damage and
to regional variations in climate suggest increasing vulnerability
to climate change (see Table 2-1).

2.26

Extreme weather or climatic events cause substantial, and increasing, damage.
Extreme events are currently a major source of climate-related impacts. For example, heavy
losses of human life, property damage, and other environmental damages were recorded
during the El Nino event of the years 1997-1998. The impacts of climatic extremes and
variability are a major concern. Preliminary indications suggest that some social and
economic systems have been affected by recent increases in floods and droughts, with
increases in economic losses for catastrophic weather events. Because these systems are
also affected by changes in socio-economic factors such as demographic shifts and landuse changes, quantifying the relative impacts of climate change (either anthropogenic or
natural) and of socio-economic factors is difficult. For example, direct costs of global
catastrophic weather-related losses, corrected for inflation, have risen an order of magnitude
from the 1950s to the 1990s (see Figure 2-7), and costs for non-catastrophic weather events
have grown similarly. The number of weather-related catastrophic events has risen three
times faster than the number of non-weather-related events, despite generally enhanced
disaster preparedness. Part of this observed upward trend in weather-related losses over
the past 50 years is linked to socio-economic factors (e.g., population growth, increased
wealth, urbanization in vulnerable areas), and part is linked to regional climatic factors
(e.g., changes in precipitation, flooding events).

WGII TAR SPM & WGII
TAR Sections 8.2 & 14.3

55

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

2.27

The fraction of weather-related losses covered by insurance varies considerably
by region, and the uneven impacts of climatic hazards raise issues for development and
equity. Insurers pay only 5% of total economic losses today in Asia and South America,
10% in Africa, and about 30% in Australia, Europe, and North and Central America. The
fraction covered is typically much higher when just storm losses are considered, but floodand crop-related losses have much lower coverage. The balance of the losses are absorbed
by governments and affected individuals and organizations.

WGII TAR Sections
8.3.3.1 & 8.5.4

2.28

Climate-related health effects are observed. Many vector-, food-, and water-borne
infectious diseases are known to be sensitive to changes in climatic conditions. Extensive
experience makes clear that any increase in floods will increase the risk of drowning,
diarrheal and respiratory diseases, water-contamination diseases, and--in developing
countries--hunger and malnutrition (high confidence). Heat waves in Europe and North
America are associated with a significant increase in urban mortality, but warmer wintertime
temperatures also result in reduced wintertime mortality. In some cases health effects are
clearly related to recent climate changes, such as in Sweden where tick-borne encephalitis

WGII TAR SPM & WGII
TAR Sections 9.5.1, 9.7.8,
10.2.4, & 13.2.5

Global costs of extreme weather events (inflation-adjusted)
Annual losses, in thousand million U.S. dollars
70

60

50

40
30

20

10

0

1950

1960
13

1970
16

Total economic losses
Insured losses

1980
29

1990
44

13

1998
72

Number of events
Decadal average

Figure 2-7: The economic losses from catastrophic weather events have risen globally 10-fold (inflationWGII TAR Figure 8-1
adjusted) from the 1950s to the 1990s, much faster than can be accounted for with simple inflation. The
insured portion of these losses rose from a negligible level to about 23% in the 1990s. The total losses from small, non-catastrophic weatherrelated events (not included here) are similar. Part of this observed upward trend in weather-related disaster losses over the past 50 years is
linked to socio-economic factors (e.g., population growth, increased wealth, urbanization in vulnerable areas), and part is linked to regional
climatic factors (e.g., changes in precipitation, flooding events).

56

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 2

incidence increased after milder winters and moved northward following the increased
frequency of milder winters over the years 1980 to 1994.
2.29

The recognition and anticipation of adverse impacts of climate
change has led to both public and governmental responses.

2.30

As a consequence of observed and anticipated climate change, socioeconomic and policy responses have occurred in the last decade. These have
included stimulation of the renewable energy market, development of energy-efficiency
improvement programs enhanced by climate change concerns, integration of climate policies
into broader national policies, carbon taxes in several countries, domestic greenhouse gases
trading regimes in some countries, national and international voluntary agreements with
industries to increase energy efficiency or otherwise decrease greenhouse gas emissions,
creation of carbon exchange markets, public and political pressures for utilities to reduce
or offset carbon emissions from new energy projects, industry reconnaissance into approaches
to offset carbon emissions, and establishment of programs to assist the developing and
least developed countries reduce vulnerabilities and adapt to climate change and engage in
mitigation activities.

WGIII TAR Sections 3.2,
3.4-5, 3.8.4, 6.2.2, 6.3.2, &
9.2.1

57

Question 3
What is known about the regional and global climatic, environmental, and
socio-economic consequences in the next 25, 50, and 100 years associated
with a range of greenhouse gas emissions arising from scenarios used in
the TAR (projections which involve no climate policy intervention)?
To the extent possible evaluate the:
* Projected changes in atmospheric concentrations, climate, and sea level
* Impacts and economic costs and benefits of changes in climate and
atmospheric composition on human health, diversity and productivity of
ecological systems, and socio-economic sectors (particularly agriculture
and water)
* The range of options for adaptation, including the costs, benefits, and
challenges
* Development, sustainability, and equity issues associated with impacts
and adaptation at a regional and global level.

Q3

Climate Change 2001

3.1

Synthesis Report

The greenhouse gas emissions scenarios used as the basis for the climate projections in the
TAR are those contained in the IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (see Box 3-1).
Because the SRES scenarios had only been available for a very short time prior to production
of the TAR, it was not possible to include impact assessments based on these scenarios.
Hence, the impacts assessments in the TAR use climate model results that tend to be based on
equilibrium climate change scenarios (e.g., 2xCO2), a relatively small number of experiments
using a 1% per year CO2 increase transient scenario, or the scenarios used in the Second
Assessment Report (i.e., the IS92 series). The challenge in answering this question therefore
is to try and map these impact results onto the climate change results, which have used the
SRES scenarios. This, by necessity, requires various approximations to be made and in
many cases only qualitative conclusions can be drawn. Projections of changes in climate
variability, extreme events, and abrupt/non-linear changes are covered in Question 4.

Box 3-1

Future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols due to human activities will alter the
atmosphere in ways that are expected to affect the climate.

WGI TAR Chapters 3, 4, 5,
&6

Changes in climate occur as a result of internal variability of the climate system and external factors
(both natural and as a result of human activities). Emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols due to
human activities change the composition of the atmosphere. Future emissions of greenhouse gases and
aerosols are determined by driving forces such as population, socio-economic development, and
technological change, and hence are highly uncertain. Scenarios are alternative images of how the future
might unfold and are an appropriate tool with which to analyze how driving forces may influence future
emission outcomes and to assess the associated uncertainties. The SRES scenarios, developed to update
the IS92 series, consist of six scenario groups, based on narrative storylines, which span a wide range of
these driving forces (see Figure 3-1). They are all plausible and internally consistent, and no
probabilities of occurrence are assigned. They encompass four combinations of demographic change,
social and economic development, and broad technological developments (A1B, A2, B1, B2). Two
further scenario groups, A1FI and A1T, explicitly explore alternative energy technology developments
to A1B (see Figure 3-1a). The resulting emissions of the greenhouse gases CO2, CH4, and N2O, along
with SO2 which leads to the production of sulfate aerosols, are shown in Figures 3-1b to 3-1e; other
gases and particles are also important. These emissions cause changes in the concentrations of these
gases and aerosols in the atmosphere. The changes in the concentrations for the SRES scenarios are
shown in Figures 3-1f to 3-1i. Note that for gases which stay in the atmosphere for a long period, such
as CO2 shown in panel (f), the atmospheric concentration responds to changes in emissions relatively
slowly (e.g., see Figure 5-3); whereas for short-lived gases and aerosols, such as sulfate aerosols shown
in panel (i), the atmospheric concentration responds much more quickly. The influence of changes in the
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols in the atmosphere on the climate system can broadly be
compared using the concept of radiative forcing, which is a measure of the influence a factor has in
altering the balance of incoming and outgoing energy in the Earth-atmosphere system. A positive
radiative forcing, such as that produced by increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases, tends to
warm the surface; conversely a negative radiative forcing, which can arise from an increase in some
types of aerosols such as sulfate aerosols, tends to cool the surface. The radiative forcing resulting from
the increasing concentrations in panels (f) to (i) is shown in panel (j). Note that, as with the IS92
scenarios, all combinations of emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols in the SRES scenarios result
in increased radiative forcing.

60

3.2

Carbon dioxide concentrations, globally averaged surface
temperature, and sea level are projected to increase under all
IPCC emissions scenarios during the 21st century.

3.3

All SRES emissions scenarios result in an increase in the atmospheric
concentration of CO2. For the six illustrative SRES scenarios, the projected concentrations
of CO2--the primary anthropogenic greenhouse gas--in the year 2100 range from 540 to
970 ppm, compared to about 280 ppm in the pre-industrial era and about 368 ppm in the
year 2000 (see Figure 3-1f). These projections include the land and ocean climate feedbacks.
The different socio-economic assumptions (demographic, social, economic, and technological)
result in different levels of future greenhouse gases and aerosols. Further uncertainties,
especially regarding the persistence of the present removal processes (carbon sinks) and
the magnitude of the climate feedback on the terrestrial biosphere, cause a variation of
about -10 to +30% in the year 2100 concentration, around each scenario. The total range
is 490 to 1,260 ppm (75 to 350% above the year 1750 (pre-industrial) concentration).

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Section 3.7.3.3

Synthesis Report

Question 3

3.4

Model calculations of the concentrations of the primary non-CO2 greenhouse
gases by year 2100 vary considerably across the six illustrative SRES scenarios.
For most cases, A1B, A1T, and B1 have the smallest increases, and A1FI and A2 the largest
(see Figures 3-1g and 3-1h).

WGI TAR Section 4.4.5 &
WGI TAR Box 9.1

3.5

The SRES scenarios include the possibility of either increases or decreases
in anthropogenic aerosols, depending on the extent of fossil-fuel use and
policies to abate polluting emissions. As seen in Figure 3-1i, sulfate aerosol
concentrations are projected to fall below present levels by 2100 in all six illustrative
SRES scenarios. This would result in warming relative to present day. In addition, natural
aerosols (e.g., sea salt, dust, and emissions leading to sulfate and carbon aerosols) are
projected to increase as a result of changes in climate.

WGI TAR Section 5.5 &
SRES Section 3.6.4

3.6

The globally averaged surface temperature is projected to increase by 1.4 to
5.8C over the period 1990 to 2100 (see Figure 3-1k). This is about two to ten
times larger than the central value of observed warming over the 20th century
and the projected rate of warming is very likely to be without precedent during
at least the last 10,000 years, based on paleoclimate data (see Figure 9-1). For
the periods 1990 to 2025 and 1990 to 2050, the projected increases are 0.4 to 1.1C and
0.8 to 2.6C, respectively. These results are for the full range of 35 SRES scenarios, based
on a number of climate models.4 Temperature increases are projected to be greater than
those in the SAR, which were about 1.0 to 3.5C based on six IS92 scenarios. The higher
projected temperatures and the wider range are due primarily to lower projected SO2
emissions in the SRES scenarios relative to the IS92 scenarios, because of structural changes
in the energy system as well as concerns about local and regional air pollution.

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3

3.7

By 2100, the range in the surface temperature response across different climate
models for the same emissions scenario is comparable to the range across
different SRES emissions scenarios for a single climate model. Figure 3-1
shows that the SRES scenarios with the highest emissions result in the largest projected
temperature increases. Further uncertainties arise due to uncertainties in the radiative forcing.
The largest forcing uncertainty is that due to the sulfate aerosols.

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3

Figure 3-1: The different socio-economic assumptions underlying the SRES scenarios result in different
WGI TAR Figures 3.12, 4.14,
5.13, 9.13, 9.14, & 11.12,
levels of future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols. These emissions in turn change the
WGII TAR Figure 19-7, &
concentration of these gases and aerosols in the atmosphere, leading to changed radiative forcing of the
SRES Figures SPM-2,
climate system. Radiative forcing due to the SRES scenarios results in projected increases in temperature
SPM-5, SPM-6, & TS-10
and sea level, which in turn will cause impacts. The SRES scenarios do not include additional climate initiatives
and no probabilities of occurrence are assigned. Because the SRES scenarios had only been available for a very short time prior to production
of the TAR, the impacts assessments here use climate model results which tend to be based on equilibrium climate change scenarios (e.g.,
2xCO2), a relatively small number of experiments using a 1% per year CO2 increase transient scenario, or the scenarios used in the Second
Assessment Report (i.e., the IS92 series). Impacts in turn can affect socio-economic development paths through, for example, adaptation and
mitigation. The highlighted boxes along the top of the figure illustrate how the various aspects relate to the integrated assessment framework
for considering climate change (see Figure 1-1).

4

Complex physically based climate models are the main tool for projecting future climate change. In order to
explore the range of scenarios, these are complemented by simple climate models calibrated to yield an equivalent
response in temperature and sea level to complex climate models. These projections are obtained using a simple
climate model whose climate sensitivity and ocean heat uptake are calibrated to each of seven complex climate
models. The climate sensitivity used in the simple model ranges from 1.7 to 4.2C, which is comparable to the
commonly accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5C. For the atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM)
experiments for the end of the 21st century (years 2071 to 2100) compared with the period 1961 to 1990, the
mean warming for SRES scenario A2 is 3.0C with a range of 1.3 to 4.5C, while for SRES scenario B2 the mean
warming is 2.2C with a range of 0.9 to 3.4C.

61

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Socio-Economic
Scenarios

Emissions

Concentrations

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

(b) CO2 emissions (Gt C)

30

900

20

700
500

10
2000

2100

800

A1

A2

- B : balanced
- FI : fossil-intensive
- T : non-fossil

B1

B2

More
environmental

2000

A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

2050

2100

(d) N2O emissions (Tg N)

2050

2100

(g) CH4 concentration (ppb)

1500

2000

2050

2100

(h) N2O concentration (ppb)

500

24

400

20
16
2000

Scenarios

2000

2500

600
More
regional

300

3500

1000

More
economic

More
global

2050

(c) CH4 emissions (Tg CH4)

(a)

(f) CO2 concentration (ppm)

2050

2100

(e) SO2 emissions (Tg S)

300

2000

2050

2100

(i) Sulfate aerosol (Tg S)

1.2

150

0.8

100

0.4

50
2000

2050

2100

0.0

2000

2050

2100

A1FI, A1T, and A1B
The A1 storyline and scenario family describes
a future world of very rapid economic growth,
global population that peaks in mid-century and
declines thereafter, and the rapid introduction of
new and more efficient technologies. Major
underlying themes are convergence among
regions, capacity-building, and increased
cultural and social interactions, with a

62

IPCC Third Assessment Report

substantial reduction in regional differences in
per capita income. The A1 scenario family
develops into three groups that describe
alternative directions of technological change
in the energy system. The three A1 groups are
distinguished by their technological emphasis:
fossil intensive (A1FI), non-fossil energy
sources (A1T), or a balance across all

sources (A1B) (where balanced is defined as
not relying too heavily on one particular
energy source, on the assumption that similar
improvment rates apply to all energy supply
and end use technologies).

Synthesis Report

Question 3

Radiative Forcing

Temperature and Sea-Level Change

Reasons for Concern

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Climate
Change

Impacts on
human and
natural systems

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

Emissions and
concentrations

Socio-economic
development
paths

(l) Sea-level rise (m)
1.0

All IS92

Model ensemble
all SRES envelope

0.8

All SRES envelope
including land-ice
uncertainty

0.6
0.4

Bars show the
range in 2100
produced by
several models

0.2
0.0
2000

(j) Radiative forcing (Wm-2)

(k) Temperature change (C)
6

10
Model ensemble
all SRES envelope

2050

Reasons for concern
(m) Impacts

C
6

Model ensemble
all SRES envelope

5

4

Risks to
many

Large
increase

4

5

Negative
for most
regions

3

2
0
2000

2100

2050

2100

0
2000

2

2050

Bars show the
range in 2100
2100 produced by
several models

1
0

Risks to
some

-1

I

II

I
II
III
IV
V

Scenarios
A1B
A1T

Increase

Negative
for some
regions

Net
negative
in all
metrics
Positive or
negative
market
impacts;
majority of
people
adversely
affected

III

IV

C

6

Higher

5
4
3
2
1

Very low
V

0
-1

Risks to unique and threatened systems
Risks from extreme climate events
Distribution of impacts
Aggregate impacts
Risks from future large-scale discontinuities

A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

A2

B1

B2

The A2 storyline and scenario family describes
a very heterogeneous world. The underlying
theme is self-reliance and preservation of local
identities. Fertility patterns across regions
c o n v e r g e v e r y s l o w l y, w h i c h r e s u l t s i n
continuously increasing population. Economic
development is primarily regionally oriented
and per capita economic growth and
technological change more fragmented and
slower than other storylines.

The B1 storyline and scenario family describes
a convergent world with the same global
population that peaks in mid-century and
declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline, but
with rapid change in economic structures
toward a service and information economy,
with reductions in material intensity and the
introduction of clean and resource-efficient
technologies. The emphasis is on global
solutions to economic, social, and
environmental sustainability, including improved
equity, but without additional climate initiatives.

The B2 storyline and scenario family describes
a world in which the emphasis is on local
solutions to economic, social, and
environmental sustainability. It is a world with
continuously increasing global population, at a
rate lower than A2, intermediate levels of
economic development, and less rapid and
more diverse technological change than in the
B1 and A1 storylines. While the scenario is
also oriented towards environmental protection
and social equity, it focuses on local and
regional levels.
63

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

3.8

Globally averaged annual precipitation is projected to increase during the
21st century. Globally averaged water vapor and evaporation are also projected to increase.

WGI TAR Section 9.3.1

3.9

Global mean sea level is projected to rise by 0.09 to 0.88 m between the years
1990 and 2100, for the full range of SRES scenarios (see Figure 3-1l). For the
periods 1990 to 2025 and 1990 to 2050, the projected rises are 0.03 to 0.14 m and 0.05 to
0.32 m, respectively. This is due primarily to thermal expansion and loss of mass from
glaciers and ice caps. The range of sea-level rise presented in the SAR was 0.13 to 0.94 m,
based on the IS92 scenarios. Despite the higher temperature change projections in this
assessment, the sea-level projections are slightly lower, primarily due to the use of improved
models, which give a smaller contribution from glaciers and ice sheets.

WGI TAR Section 11.5.1

3.10

Substantial differences are projected in regional changes in
climate and sea level, compared to the global mean change.

3.11

It is very likely that nearly all land areas will warm more rapidly than the
global average, particularly those at northern high latitudes in winter. Most
notable of these is the warming in the northern regions of North America, and northern and
central Asia, which exceeds global mean warming in each model by more than 40%. In
contrast, the warming is less than the global mean change in south and southeast Asia in
summer and in southern South America in winter (see Figure 3-2).

WGI TAR Section 10.3.2

3.12

At the regional scale, both increases and decreases in precipitation are
projected, typically of 5 to 20%. It is likely that precipitation will increase over high
latitude regions in both summer and winter. Increases are also projected over northern
mid-latitudes, tropical Africa and Antarctica in winter, and in southern and eastern Asia in
summer. Australia, Central America, and southern Africa show consistent decreases in
winter rainfall. Larger year-to-year variations in precipitation are very likely over most
areas where an increase in mean precipitation is projected (see Figure 3-3).

WGI TAR Section 10.3.2

3.13

The projected range of regional variation in sea-level change is substantial
compared to projected global average sea-level rise, because the level of the
sea at the shoreline is determined by many factors (see Figure 3-4). Confidence
in the regional distribution of sea-level change from complex models is low because there
is little similarity between model results, although nearly all models project greater than
average rise in the Arctic Ocean and less than average rise in the Southern Ocean.

WGI TAR Section 11.5.2

3.14

Glaciers and ice caps are projected to continue their widespread retreat during
the 21st century. Northern Hemisphere snow cover, permafrost, and sea-ice extent are
projected to decrease further. The Antarctic ice sheet is likely to gain mass because of
greater precipitation, while the Greenland ice sheet is likely to lose mass because the increase
in runoff will exceed the precipitation increase. Concerns that have been expressed about
the stability of the West Antarctic ice sheet are covered in Question 4.

WGI TAR Section 11.5.4

Figure 3-2: The background shows the annual mean change of temperature (color shading) for (a) the
WGI TAR Figures 9.10d &
9.10e, & WGI TAR Box 10.1
SRES scenario A2 and (b) the SRES scenario B2. Both SRES scenarios show the period 2071 to 2100
(Figure 1)
relative to the period 1961 to 1990, and were performed by AOGCMs. Scenarios A2 and B2 are shown as no
AOGCM runs were available for the other SRES scenarios. The boxes show an analysis of inter-model consistency in regional relative warming
(i.e., warming relative to each model's global average warming) for the same scenarios. Regions are classified as showing either agreement on
warming in excess of 40% above the global mean annual average (much greater than average warming), agreement on warming greater than
the global mean annual average (greater than average warming), agreement on warming less than the global mean annual average (less than
average warming), or disagreement amongst models on the magnitude of regional relative warming (inconsistent magnitude of warming).
There is also a category for agreement on cooling (this category never occurs). A consistent result from at least seven of the nine models is
defined as being necessary for agreement. The global mean annual average warming of the models used span 1.2 to 4.5C for A2 and 0.9 to
3.4C for B2, and therefore a regional 40% amplification represents warming ranges of 1.7 to 6.3C for A2 and 1.3 to 4.7C for B2.

64

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 3

Change in temperature for scenarios A2 and B2
a) Scenario A2

60N

30N

EQ

30S

60S

180

120W

60W

0

60E

120E

180

60W

0

60E

120E

180

b) Scenario B2

60N

30N

EQ

30S

60S

180

120W

Change in temperature relative to models global mean
Much greater than average warming
Greater than average warming
Less than average warming
Inconsistent magnitude of warming
Cooling

Change in global mean temperature (C)
-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

8

10

12

Dec-Jan-Feb
Jun-Jul-Aug

65

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Change in precipitation for scenarios A2 and B2
a) Scenario A2

60N

30N

EQ

30S

60S

180

120W

60W

0

60E

120E

180

60W

0

60E

120E

180

b) Scenario B2

60N

30N

EQ

30S

60S

180

120W

Change in precipitation
Large increase
Small increase
No change
Small decrease
Large decrease
Inconsistent sign

66

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Change in global mean precipitation (mm day -1)
-1

- 0.75

Dec-Jan-Feb
Jun-Jul-Aug

- 0.50

- 0.25

0

0.25

0.50

0.75

1

1.5

2

3

Synthesis Report

Question 3

Figure 3-3: The background shows the annual mean change of rainfall (color shading) for (a) the SRES
WGI TAR Box 10.1 (Figure 2)
scenario A2 and (b) the SRES scenario B2. Both SRES scenarios show the period 2071 to 2100 relative to
the period 1961 to 1990, and were performed by AOGCMs. Scenarios A2 and B2 are shown as no AOGCM runs were available for the other
SRES scenarios. The boxes show an analysis of inter-model consistency in regional precipitation change. Regions are classified as showing
either agreement on increase with an average change of greater than 20% (large increase), agreement on increase with an average change
between 5 and 20% (small increase), agreement on a change between -5 and +5% or agreement with an average change between -5 and +5%
(no change), agreement on decrease with an average change between -5 and -20% (small decrease), agreement on decrease with an average
change of more than -20% (large decrease), or disagreement (inconsistent sign). A consistent result from at least seven of the nine models is
defined as being necessary for agreement.

3.15

Projected climate change will have beneficial and adverse
environmental and socio-economic effects, but the larger the
changes and rate of change in climate, the more the adverse
effects predominate.

3.16

The impacts of climate change will be more severe the greater the cumulative
emissions of greenhouse gases (medium confidence). Climate change can have
beneficial as well as adverse effects, but adverse effects are projected to predominate for much
of the world. The various effects of climate change pose risks that increase with global mean
temperature. Many of these risks have been organized into five reasons for concern: threats
to endangered species and unique systems, damages from extreme climate events, effects
that fall most heavily on developing countries and the poor within countries, global aggregate
impacts, and large-scale high-impact events (see Box 3-2 and Figure 3-1). The effects of
climate change on human health, ecosystems, food production, water resources, small islands
and low-lying coastal regions, and aggregate market activities are summarized below. However,
note that future changes in the frequency or intensity of extreme events have not been taken
into account in most of these studies (see also Question 4).

WGII TAR Sections 1.2,
19.3, 19.5, & 19.8

What causes the sea level to change ?
Terrestrial water storage,
extraction of groundwater,
building of reservoirs,
changes in runoff, and
seepage into aquifers

Surface and deep ocean
circulation changes, storm surges

Subsidence in river
delta region,
land movements, and
tectonic displacements

As the ocean warms,
the water expands

Exchange of the water
stored on land by
glaciers and ice sheets
with ocean water

Figure 3-4: The level of the sea at the shoreline is determined by many factors in the global environment
WGI TAR Box TS-2
that operate on a great range of time scales, from hours (tidal) to millions of years (ocean basin changes
due to tectonics and sedimentation). On the time scale of decades to centuries, some of the largest influences on the average levels of the
sea are linked to climate and climate change processes.

67

Climate Change 2001

Box 3-2

Synthesis Report

Concerns about the risks from climate change rise with temperature.

* Unique and threatened systems: Some changes in species and systems have already been associated
with observed changes in climate, and some highly vulnerable species and systems may be at risk of
damage or even loss for very small changes in climate. Greater warming would intensify the risks
to these species and systems, and place additional ones at risk.
* Extreme climate events: Increased frequencies and intensities of some extreme events have already
been observed (see Question 2) and are likely to increase with further warming, as would the risks
to human life, property, crops, livestock, and ecosystems. These risks increase where development
is occurring in inherently dynamic and unstable zones (e.g., river floodplains and low-lying coastal
regions) (see also Question 4).
* Uneven distribution of impacts: In general, developing countries are at greater risk of adverse
impacts from climate change than are developed countries, of which some of the latter may
experience market sector benefits for warming less than a few C. For greater warming, most
regions are at risk of predominantly negative effects from climate change. But developing
countries generally would continue to be more severely impacted than developed countries. Within
countries, vulnerability varies and the poorest populations often have higher exposure to impacts
that threaten their lives and livelihoods.
* Global aggregate impacts: Globally aggregated market sector impacts may be positive or negative
up to a few C, though the majority of people may be negatively affected. With greater warming,
the risk of negative global market sector impacts increases, and impacts would be predominantly
negative for most people.
* Large-scale, high-impact events: The probability of large-scale, high-impact events within a 100year time horizon such as shutdown of the thermohaline circulation or collapse of the West Antarctic
ice sheet is very low for warming less than a few C. The risk, which is a product of the probabilities
of these events and the magnitude of their consequences, is largely unquantified. For greater
warming, and over a time horizon longer than 100 years, the probabilities and the risks increase,
but by an amount that cannot now be estimated. See also Question 4.

WGII TAR Sections 5.2,
5.4, & 19.3

WGII TAR Sections 15.2 &
19.6

WGII TAR Section 19.4

WGII TAR Section 19.5

WGII TAR Section 19.6

Human Health
3.17

Overall climate change is projected to increase threats to human health,
particularly in lower income populations predominantly within tropical/
subtropical countries. Climate change can affect human health through multiple pathways,
including direct effects (e.g., reduced cold stress in temperate countries but increased heat
stress, loss of life in floods and storms) and indirect effects that operate through changes in
the ranges of disease vectors (e.g., mosquitoes)5, water-borne pathogens, water quality, air
quality, food availability and quality (e.g., decreased protein content in some cereals), population
displacement, and economic disruption (medium to high confidence). Some effects may be
beneficial (e.g., reduced cold stress, and reduced disease transmission in some cases), but
the predominant effect is anticipated to be adverse (see Table 3-1). Actual impacts will be
strongly influenced by local environmental conditions and socio-economic circumstances, and
for each anticipated adverse health impact there is a range of social, institutional, technological,
and behavioral adaptation options to lessen that impact. Adaptations could, for example,
encompass strengthening of the public health infrastructure, health-oriented management
of the environment (including air and water quality, food safety, urban and housing design,
and surface water management), and the provision of appropriate medical care.

WGII TAR Sections 5.3,
9.1, 9.5, & 9.11

Biodiversity and Productivity of Ecological Systems
3.18

5

68

Diversity in ecological systems is expected to be affected by climate change
and sea-level rise, with an increased risk of extinction of some vulnerable
species (high confidence). Significant disruptions of ecosystems from disturbances
such as fire, drought, pest infestation, invasion of species, storms, and coral bleaching
events are expected to increase (see Table 3-2). The stresses caused by climate change,
added to other stresses on ecological systems (e.g., land conversion, land degradation,
harvesting, and pollution), threaten substantial damage to or complete loss of some unique
ecosystems, and extinction of some critically endangered and endangered species. Coral

Eight studies have modeled the effects of climate change on these diseases, five on malaria and three on dengue.
Seven use a biological or process-based approach, and one uses an empirical, statistical approach.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGII TAR Sections 5.2.3,
5.4.1, 16.2, 17.2, & 19.3.2-3

Synthesis Report

Table 3-1

Question 3

Human health consequences of climate change if no climate policy interventions are made.

2025

2050

2100

CO2 concentrationa

405-460 ppm

445-640 ppm

540-970 ppm

Global mean temperature
change from the year 1990b

0.4-1.1C

0.8-2.6C

1.4-5.8C

Global mean sea-level rise
from the year 1990b

3-14 cm

5-32 cm

9-88 cm

Increase in heat-related deaths
and illness (high confidenced).
Decrease in winter deaths in
some temperate regions (high
confidenced).

Thermal stress effects
amplified (high confidenced).

Thermal stress effects
amplified (high confidenced).

Expansion of areas of potential
transmission of malaria and
dengue (medium to high
confidenced).

Further expansion of areas of
potential transmission (medium
to high confidenced).

Human Health Effectsc
Heat stress and winter mortality
[WGII TAR Section 9.4]

Vector- and water-borne
diseases [WGII TAR Section
9.7]
Floods and storms [WGII TAR
Sections 3.8.5 & 9.5]

Increase in deaths, injuries,
and infections associated with
extreme weather (medium
confidenced).

Greater increases in deaths,
injuries, and infections
(medium confidenced).

Greater increases in deaths,
injuries, and infections
(medium confidenced).

Nutrition [WGII TAR Sections
5.3.6 & 9.9]

Poor are vulnerable to
increased risk of hunger, but
state of science very
incomplete.

Poor remain vulnerable to
increased risk of hunger.

Poor remain vulnerable to
increased risk of hunger.

a

b

c

d

The reported ranges for CO2 concentration are estimated with fast carbon cycle models for the six illustrative SRES scenarios and
correspond to the minimum and maximum values estimated with a fast carbon cycle model for the 35 SRES projections of
greenhouse gas emissions. See WGI TAR Section 3.7.3.
The reported ranges for global mean temperature change and global mean sea-level rise correspond to the minimum and maximum
values estimated with a simple climate model for the 35 SRES projections of greenhouse gas and SO2 emissions. See WGI TAR
Sections 9.3.3 and 11.5.1.
Summary statements about effects of climate change in the years 2025, 2050, and 2100 are inferred from Working Group II's
assessment of studies that investigate the impacts of scenarios other than the SRES projections, as studies that use the SRES
projections have not been published yet. Estimates of the impacts of climate change vary by region and are highly sensitive to
estimates of regional and seasonal patterns of temperature and precipitation changes, changes in the frequencies or intensities of
climate extremes, and rates of change. Estimates of impacts are also highly sensitive to assumptions about characteristics of future
societies and the extent and effectiveness of future adaptations to climate change. In consequence, summary statements about the
impacts of climate change in the years 2025, 2050, and 2100 must necessarily be general and qualitative. The statements in the table
are considered to be valid for a broad range of scenarios. Note, however, that few studies have investigated the effects of climate
changes that would accompany global temperature increases near the upper end of the range reported for the year 2100.
Judgments of confidence use the following scale: very high (95% or greater), high (67-95%), medium (33-67%), low (5-33%), and
very low (5% or less). See WGII TAR Box 1-1.

reefs and atolls, mangroves, boreal and tropical forests, polar and alpine ecosystems, prairie
wetlands, and remnant native grasslands are examples of systems threatened by climate
change. In some cases the threatened ecosystems are those that could mitigate against
some climate change impacts (e.g., coastal systems that buffer the impacts of storms).
Possible adaptation methods to reduce the loss of biodiversity include the establishment of
refuges, parks and reserves with corridors to allow migration of species, and the use of
captive breeding and translocation of species.
3.19

The productivity of ecological systems is highly sensitive to climate change
and projections of change in productivity range from increases to decreases
(medium confidence). Increasing CO2 concentrations would increase net primary
productivity (CO2 fertilization) and net ecosystem productivity in most vegetation systems,
causing carbon to accumulate in vegetation and soils over time. Climate change may either
augment or reduce the direct effects of CO2 on productivity, depending on the type of
vegetation, the region, and the scenario of climate change.

WGI TAR Section 3.7 &
WGII TAR Sections 5.2.2 &
5.6.3

69

Climate Change 2001

Table 3-2

Synthesis Report

Ecosystem effects of climate change if no climate policy interventions are made.*

2025

2050

2100

CO2 concentrationa

405-460 ppm

445-640 ppm

540-970 ppm

Global mean temperature
change from the year 1990b

0.4-1.1C

0.8-2.6C

1.4-5.8C

Global mean sea-level rise
from the year 1990b

3-14 cm

5-32 cm

9-88 cm

Corals [WGII TAR Sections
6.4.5, 12.4.7, & 17.2.4]

Increase in frequency of coral
bleaching and death of corals
(high confidenced).

More extensive coral
bleaching and death (high
confidenced).

More extensive coral bleaching
and death (high confidenced).
Reduced species biodiversity
and fish yields from reefs
(medium confidenced).

Coastal wetlands and
shorelines [WGII TAR
Sections 6.4.2 & 6.4.4]

Loss of some coastal wetlands
to sea-level rise (medium
confidenced).
Increased erosion of shorelines
(medium confidenced).

More extensive loss of coastal
wetlands (medium
confidenced).
Further erosion of shorelines
(medium confidenced).

Further loss of coastal
wetlands (medium
confidenced).
Further erosion of shorelines
(medium confidenced).

Terrestrial ecosystems [WGII
TAR Sections 5.2.1, 5.4.1,
5.4.3, 5.6.2, 16.1.3, & 19.2]

Lengthening of growing
season in mid- and high
latitudes; shifts in ranges of
plant and animal species (high
confidenced).e,f
Increase in net primary
productivity of many mid- and
high-latitude forests (medium
confidenced).
Increase in frequency of
ecosystem disturbance by fire
and insect pests (high
confidenced).

Extinction of some endangered
species; many others pushed
closer to extinction (high
confidenced).
Increase in net primary
productivity may or may not
continue.
Increase in frequency of
ecosystem disturbance by fire
and insect pests (high
confidenced).

Loss of unique habitats and
their endemic species (e.g.,
vegetation of Cape region of
South Africa and some cloud
forests) (medium confidenced).
Increase in frequency of
ecosystem disturbance by fire
and insect pests (high
confidenced).

Ice environments [WGI TAR
Sections 2.2.5 & 11.5; WGII
TAR Sections 4.3.11, 11.2.1,
16.1.3, 16.2.1, 16.2.4, &
16.2.7]

Retreat of glaciers, decreased
sea-ice extent, thawing of
some permafrost, longer icefree seasons on rivers and
lakes (high confidenced).f

Extensive Arctic sea-ice
reduction, benefiting shipping
but harming wildlife (e.g.,
seals, polar bears, walrus)
(medium confidenced).
Ground subsidence leading to
infrastructure damage (high
confidenced).

Substantial loss of ice volume
from glaciers, particularly
tropical glaciers (high
confidenced).

Ecosystem Effectsc

* Refer to footnotes a-d accompanying Table 3-1.
e

f

Aggregate market effects represent the net effects of estimated economic gains and losses summed across market sectors such as
agriculture, commercial forestry, energy, water, and construction. The estimates generally exclude the effects of changes in climate
variability and extremes, do not account for the effects of different rates of change, and only partially account for impacts on goods
and services that are not traded in markets. These omissions are likely to result in underestimates of economic losses and
overestimates of economic gains. Estimates of aggregate impacts are controversial because they treat gains for some as canceling out
losses for others and because the weights that are used to aggregate across individuals are necessarily subjective.
These effects have already been observed and are expected to continue [TAR WGII Sections 5.2.1, 5.4.3, 16.1.3, & 19.2].

3.20

70

The terrestrial ecosystems at present are a carbon sink which may diminish
with increased warming by the end of the 21st century (see Table 3-2) (medium
confidence). The terrestrial ecosystems at present are a sink for carbon. This is partly a
result of delays between enhanced plant growth and plant death and decay. Current enhanced
plant growth is partly due to fertilization effects of elevated CO2 on plant photosynthesis
(either directly via increased carbon assimilation, or indirectly through higher water-use
efficiency), nitrogen deposition (especially in the Northern Hemisphere), climate change,
and land-use practices over past decades. The uptake will decline as forests reach maturity,
fertilization effects saturate and decomposition catches up with growth, and possibly through
changes in disturbance regimes (e.g., fire and insect outbreaks) mediated through climate
change. Some global models project that the net uptake of carbon by terrestrial ecosystems

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Section 3.2.2,
WGII TAR Sections 5.2,
5.5-6, & 5.9, & SRLULUCF
Section 1.4

Synthesis Report

Question 3

will increase during the first half of the 21st century but may diminish and even become a
source with increased warming towards the end of the 21st century.

Agriculture
3.21

Models of cereal crops indicate that in some temperate areas potential yields
increase for small increases in temperature but decrease with larger temperature
changes (medium to low confidence). In most tropical and subtropical regions
potential yields are projected to decrease for most projected increases in
temperature (medium confidence) (see Table 3-3). In mid-latitudes, crop models
indicate that warming of less than a few C and the associated increase in CO2 concentrations
will lead to generally positive responses and generally negative responses with greater
warming. In tropical agricultural areas, similar assessments indicate that yields of some
crops would decrease with even minimal increases in temperature because they are near
their maximum temperature tolerance. Where there is also a large decrease in rainfall in
subtropical and tropical dryland/rainfed systems, crop yields would be even more adversely
affected. Assessments that include autonomous agronomic adaptation (e.g., changes in
planting times and crop varieties) tend to project yields less adversely affected by climate
change than without adaptation. These assessments include the effects of CO2 fertilization
but not technological innovations or changes in the impacts of pests and diseases, degradation
of soil and water resources, or climate extremes. The ability of livestock producers to
adapt their herds to the physiological stresses associated with climate change is poorly
known. Warming of a few C or more is projected to increase food prices globally, and may
increase the risk of hunger in vulnerable populations (low confidence).

Table 3-3

WGII TAR Sections 5.3.4-6,
& 9.9

Agricultural effects of climate change if no climate policy interventions are made.*

2025

2050

2100

CO2 concentrationa

405-460 ppm

445-640 ppm

540-970 ppm

Global mean temperature
change from the year 1990b

0.4-1.1C

0.8-2.6C

1.4-5.8C

Global mean sea-level rise
from the year 1990b

3-14 cm

5-32 cm

9-88 cm

Average crop yieldsg [WGII
TAR Sections 5.3.6, 10.2.2,
11.2.2, 12.5, 13.2.3, 14.2.2, &
15.2.3]

Cereal crop yields increase in
many mid- and high-latitude
regions (low to medium
confidenced).
Cereal crop yields decrease in
most tropical and subtropical
regions (low to medium
confidenced).

Mixed effects on cereal yields
in mid-latitude regions.
More pronounced cereal yield
decreases in tropical and
subtropical regions (low to
medium confidenced).

General reduction in cereal
yields in most mid-latitude
regions for warming of more
than a few C (low to medium
confidenced).

Extreme low and high
temperatures [WGII TAR
Section 5.3.3]

Reduced frost damage to some
crops (high confidenced).
Increased heat stress damage
to some crops (high confidenced).
Increased heat stress in
livestock (high confidenced).

Effects of changes in extreme
temperatures amplified (high
confidenced).

Effects of changes in extreme
temperatures amplified (high
confidenced).

Incomes of poor farmers in
developing countries decrease
(low to medium confidenced).

Food prices increase relative to
projections that exclude climate
change (low to medium
confidenced).

Agricultural Effectsc

Incomes and prices [WGII
TAR Sections 5.3.5-6]

* Refer to footnotes a-d accompanying Table 3-1.
g

These estimates are based on the sensitivity of the present agricultural practices to climate change, allowing (in most cases) for
adaptations based on shifting use of only existing technologies.

71

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Water
3.22

Projected climate change would exacerbate water shortage and quality problems
in many water-scarce areas of the world, but alleviate it in some other areas.
Demand for water is generally increasing due to population growth and economic development,
but is falling in some countries because of increased efficiency of use. Climate change is
projected to reduce streamflow and groundwater recharge in many parts of the world but to
increase it in some other areas (medium confidence). The amount of change varies among
scenarios partly because of differences in projected rainfall (especially rainfall intensity)
and partly because of differences in projected evaporation. Projected streamflow changes
under two climate change scenarios are shown in Figure 3-5. Several hundred million to a
few billion people are projected to suffer a supply reduction of 10% or more by the year
2050 for climate change projections corresponding to 1% per year increase in CO2 emissions
(see Table 3-4). Freshwater quality generally would be degraded by higher water
temperatures (high confidence), but this may be offset by increased flows in some regions.
The effects of climate changes on water scarcity, water quality, and the frequency and
intensity of floods and droughts will intensify challenges for water and flood management.
Unmanaged and poorly managed water systems are the most vulnerable to adverse effects
of climate change.

Table 3-4

WGI TAR Section 9.3.6 &
WGII TAR Sections 4.3-4,
4.5.2, & 4.6

Water resource effects of climate change if no climate policy interventions are made.*

2025

2050

2100

CO2 concentrationa

405-460 ppm

445-640 ppm

540-970 ppm

Global mean temperature
change from the year 1990b

0.4-1.1C

0.8-2.6C

1.4-5.8C

Global mean sea-level rise
from the year 1990b

3-14 cm

5-32 cm

9-88 cm

Water supply [WGII TAR
Sections 4.3.6 & 4.5.2]

Peak river flow shifts from
spring toward winter in basins
where snowfall is an important
source of water (high
confidenced).

Water supply decreased in
many water-stressed countries,
increased in some other waterstressed countries (high
confidenced).

Water supply effects amplified
(high confidenced).

Water quality [WGII TAR
Section 4.3.10]

Water quality degraded by
higher temperatures.
Water quality changes modified
by changes in water flow
volume.
Increase in saltwater intrusion
into coastal aquifers due to
sea-level rise (medium
confidenced).

Water quality degraded by
higher temperatures(high
confidenced).
Water quality changes
modified by changes in water
flow volume (high
confidenced).

Water quality effects amplified
(high confidenced).

Water demand [WGII TAR
Section 4.4.3]

Water demand for irrigation
will respond to changes in
climate; higher temperatures
will tend to increase demand
(high confidenced).

Water demand effects
amplified (high confidenced).

Water demand effects
amplified (high confidenced).

Extreme events [WGI TAR
SPM; WGII TAR SPM]

Increased flood damage due to
more intense precipitation
events (high confidenced).
Increased drought frequency
(high confidenced).

Further increase in flood
damage (high confidenced).
Further increase in drought
events and their impacts.

Flood damage several-fold
higher than "no climate change
scenarios."

Water Resource Effectsc

* Refer to footnotes a-d accompanying Table 3-1.

72

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 3

(a)

(b)

< -250

-250 to -150

-150 to -50

-50 to -25

-25 to 0

0 to 25

Change in Annual Runoff (mm

25 to 50

50 to 150

>150

yr-1)

Figure 3-5: Projected changes in average annual water runoff by the year 2050, relative to average runoff
WGII TAR Section 4.3.6
for the period 1961-1990, largely follow projected changes in precipitation. Changes in runoff are calculated
with a hydrologic model using as inputs climate projections from two versions of the Hadley Centre AOGCM for a scenario of 1% per year increase
in effective CO2 concentration in the atmosphere: (a) HadCM2 ensemble mean and (b) HadCM3. Projected increases in runoff in high latitudes
and southeast Asia, and decreases in central Asia, the area around the Mediterranean, southern Africa, and Australia are broadly consistent
across the Hadley Centre experiments, and with the precipitation projections of other AOGCM experiments. For other areas of the world,
changes in precipitation and runoff are scenario- and model-dependent.

Small Islands and Low-Lying Coasts
3.23

Populations that inhabit small islands and/or low-lying coastal areas are at
particular risk of severe social and economic effects from sea-level rise and
storm surges. Many human settlements will face increased risk of coastal flooding and
erosion, and tens of millions of people living in deltas, low-lying coastal areas, and on
small islands will face the risk of displacement of populations and loss of infrastructure
and/or substantial efforts and costs to protect vulnerable coastal areas. Resources critical

WGII TAR Sections 7.2.2,
17.2, & 19.3.4

73

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

to island and coastal populations such as freshwater, fisheries, coral reefs and atolls, beaches,
and wildlife habitat would also be at risk.
3.24

Projected sea-level rise will increase the average annual number of people
flooded in coastal storm surges (high confidence). The areas of greatest absolute
increase in populations at risk are southern Asia and southeast Asia, with lesser but significant
increases in eastern Africa, western Africa, and the Mediterranean from Turkey to Algeria.
Significant portions of many highly populated coastal cities are also vulnerable to permanent
land submergence and especially to more frequent coastal flooding superimposed on surge
heights, due to sea-level rise. These estimates assume no change in the frequency or intensity of
storms, which could exacerbate the effects of sea-level rise on flooding risks in some areas.

WGII TAR Sections 6.5.1,
7.2.2, & 17.2.2

Market Effects
3.25

The aggregated market sector effects, measured as changes in gross domestic
product (GDP), are estimated to be negative for many developing countries for
all magnitudes of global mean temperature increases studied (low confidence),
and are estimated to be mixed for developed countries for up to a few C warming
(low confidence) and negative for warming beyond a few C (medium to low
confidence). The effects of climate change will have market sector effects by changing
the abundance, quality, and prices of food, fiber, water, and other goods and services (see
Table 3-5). In addition, climate change can have market effects through changes in energy
demand, hydropower supply, transportation, tourism and construction, damages to property
and insurance losses from extreme climate events, loss of coastal land from sea-level rise,
location and relocation decisions for development and populations, and the resource needs
and costs of adapting to climate change. Estimates of net market effects from a few published
studies, aggregated across sectors and to national or regional scales, indicate losses for most
developing countries and regions studied. Both gains and losses are estimated for developed

Table 3-5

WGII TAR Sections 6.5,
7.2-3, 8.3, 18.3.4, 18.4.3,
19.4.1-3, & 19.5

Other market sector effects of climate change if no climate policy interventions are made.*

2025

2050

2100

CO2 concentrationa

405-460 ppm

445-640 ppm

540-970 ppm

Global mean temperature
change from the year 1990b

0.4-1.1C

0.8-2.6C

1.4-5.8C

Global mean sea-level rise
from the year 1990b

3-14 cm

5-32 cm

9-88 cm

Decreased energy demand for
heating buildings (high
confidenced).
Increased energy demand for
cooling buildings (high
confidenced).

Energy demand effects
amplified (high confidenced).

Energy demand effects
amplified (high confidenced).

Increased insurance prices and
reduced insurance availability
(high confidenced).

Effects on financial sector
amplified.

Losses in developing countries
amplified (medium
confidenced).
Gains diminished and losses
amplified in developed
countries (medium confidenced).

Losses in developing countries
amplified (medium confidenced).
Net market sector losses in
developed countries from
warming of more than a few
C (medium confidenced).

Other Market Sector Effectsc
Energy [WGII TAR Section
7.3]

Financial sector [WGII TAR
Section 8.3]
Aggregate market effectse
[WGII TAR Sections 19.4-5]

Net market sector losses in
many developing countries
(low confidenced).
Mixture of market gains and
losses in developed countries
(low confidenced).

* Refer to footnotes a-d accompanying Table 3-1 and footnote e accompanying Table 3-2.

74

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 3

countries and regions for increases in global mean temperature of up to a few C. Economic
losses are estimated for developed countries at larger temperature increases. When aggregated
to a global scale, world GDP would change by plus or minus a few percent for global mean
temperature increases of up to a few C, with increasing net losses for larger increases in
temperature. The estimates generally exclude the effects of changes in climate variability
and extremes, do not account for the effects of different rates of climate change, only
partially account for impacts on goods and services that are not traded in markets, and treat
gains for some as canceling out losses for others. Therefore, confidence in estimates of
market effects for individual countries is generally low, and the various omissions are likely
to result in underestimates of economic losses and overestimates of economic gains.
3.26

Adaptation has the potential to reduce adverse effects of climate
change and can often produce immediate ancillary benefits, but
will not prevent all damages.

3.27

Numerous possible adaptation options for responding to climate change have
been identified that can reduce adverse and enhance beneficial impacts of
climate change, but will incur costs. Quantitative evaluation of their benefits and
costs and how they vary across regions and entities is incomplete. Adaptation to climate
change can take many forms, including actions taken by people with the intent of lessening
impacts or utilizing new opportunities, and structural and functional changes in natural
systems made in response to changes in pressures. The focus in this report is on the adaptive
actions of people. The range of options includes reactive adaptations (actions taken
concurrent with changed conditions and without prior preparation) and planned adaptations
(actions taken either concurrent with or in anticipation of changed conditions, but with
prior preparation). Adaptations can be taken by private entities (e.g., individuals, households,
or business firms) or by public entities (e.g., local, state, or national government agencies).
Examples of identified options are listed in Table 3-6. The benefits and costs of adaptation
options, evaluation of which is incomplete, will also vary across regions and entities. Despite
the incomplete and evolving state of knowledge about adaptation, a number of robust
findings have been derived and summarized.

WGII TAR Sections 18.2.3
& 18.3.5

3.28

Greater and more rapid climate change would pose greater challenges for
adaptation and greater risks of damages than would lesser and slower change.
Key features of climate change to be adapted to include the magnitudes and rates of changes
in climate extremes, variability, and mean conditions. Natural and human systems have
evolved capabilities to cope with a range of climate variability within which the risks of
damage are relatively low and ability to recover is high. Changes in climate that result in
increased frequency of events that fall outside the historic range with which systems have
coped, however, increase the risk of severe damages and incomplete recovery or collapse
of the system. Changes in mean conditions (e.g., increases in average temperature), even in
the absence of changes in variance, can lead to increases in the frequencies of some events
(e.g., more frequent heat waves) that exceed the coping range, and decreases in the
frequencies of others (e.g., less frequent cold spells) (see Question 4 and Figure 4-1).

WGII TAR Sections 18.2.2,
18.3.3, & 18.3.5

3.29

Enhancement of adaptive capacity can extend or shift ranges for coping with
variability and extremes to generate benefits in the present and future. Many
of the adaptation options listed in Table 3-6 are presently employed to cope with current
climate variability and extremes, and their expanded use can enhance both current and
future capacity to cope. But such efforts may not be as effective in the future as the amount
and rate of climate change increase.

WGII TAR Sections 18.2.2
& 18.3.5

3.30

The potential direct benefits of adaptation are substantial and take the form
of reduced adverse and enhanced beneficial impacts of climate change. Results
of studies of future impacts of climate change indicate the potential for adaptation to

WGII TAR Sections 5.3.4,
6.5.1, & 18.3.2

75

Climate Change 2001

Table 3-6

Synthesis Report

Examples of adaptation options for selected sectors.

Sector/System

Adaptation Options

Water [WGII TAR Sections
4.6 & 7.5.4; WGII SAR
Sections 10.6.4 & 14.4]

Increase water-use efficiency with "demand-side" management (e.g., pricing incentives, regulations,
technology standards).
Increase water supply, or reliability of water supply, with "supply-side" management (e.g., construct
new water storage and diversion infrastructure).
Change institutional and legal framework to facilitate transfer of water among users (e.g., establish
water markets).
Reduce nutrient loadings of rivers and protect/augment streamside vegetation to offset eutrophying
effects of higher water temperatures.
Reform flood management plans to reduce downstream flood peaks; reduce paved surfaces and use
vegetation to reduce storm runoff and increase water infiltration.
Reevaluate design criteria of dams, levees, and other infrastructure for flood protection.

Food and fiber [WGII TAR
Sections 5.3.4-5; WGII SAR
Sections 2.9, 4.4.4, 13.9, &
15.6; SRTT Section 11.2.1]

Change timing of planting, harvesting, and other management activities.
Use minimum tillage and other practices to improve nutrient and moisture retention in soils and to
prevent soil erosion.
Alter animal stocking rates on rangelands.
Switch to crops or crop cultivars that are less water-demanding and more tolerant of heat, drought,
and pests.
Conduct research to develop new cultivars.
Promote agroforestry in dryland areas, including establishment of village woodlots and use of shrubs
and trees for fodder.
Replant with mix of tree species to increase diversity and flexibility. Promote revegetation and
reforestation initiatives.
Assist natural migration of tree species with connected protected areas and transplanting.
Improve training and education of rural work forces.
Establish or expand programs to provide secure food supplies as insurance against local supply disruptions.
Reform policies that encourage inefficient, non-sustainable, or risky farming, grazing, and forestry
practices (e.g., subsidies for crops, crop insurance, water).

Coastal areas and marine
fisheries [WGII TAR Sections
6.6 & 7.5.4; WGII SAR
Section 16.3; SRTT Section
15.4]

Prevent or phase-out development in coastal areas vulnerable to erosion, inundation, and storm-surge
flooding.
Use "hard" (dikes, levees, seawalls) or "soft" (beach nourishment, dune and wetland restoration,
afforestation) structures to protect coasts.
Implement storm warning systems and evacuation plans.
Protect and restore wetlands, estuaries, and floodplains to preserve essential habitat for fisheries.
Modify and strengthen fisheries management institutions and policies to promote conservation of
fisheries.
Conduct research and monitoring to better support integrated management of fisheries.

Human health [WGII TAR
Sections 7.5.4 & 9.11; WGII
SAR Section 12.5; SRTT
Section 14.4]

Rebuild and improve public health infrastructure.
Improve epidemic preparedness and develop capacities for epidemic forecasting and early warning.
Monitor environmental, biological, and health status.
Improve housing, sanitation, and water quality.
Integrate urban designs to reduce heat island effect (e.g., use of vegetation and light colored surfaces).
Conduct public education to promote behaviors that reduce health risks.

Financial services [WGII
TAR Section 8.3.4]

Risk spreading through private and public insurance and reinsurance.
Risk reduction through building codes and other standards set or influenced by financial sector as
requirements for insurance or credit.

substantially reduce many of the adverse impacts and enhance beneficial impacts. For
example, analyses of coastal flood risks from storm surges estimate that climate changedriven sea-level rise would increase the average annual number of people flooded manyfold if coastal flood protection is unchanged from the present. But if coastal flood protection
is enhanced in proportion to future GDP growth, the projected increase is cut by as much
as two-thirds (see Figure 3-6). However, estimates such as these indicate only potential
benefits from adaptation, not the likely benefits--as analyses generally use arbitrary
assumptions about adaptation options and obstacles, often omit consideration of changes
in climate extremes and variability, and do not account for imperfect foresight.
3.31

76

Estimates of the costs of adaptation are few; the available estimates indicate
that costs are highly sensitive to decision criteria for the selection and timing
of specific adaptation measures. The costs of measures to protect coastal areas from
sea-level rise are perhaps the best studied to date. Evaluated measures include construction

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGII TAR Sections 6.5.2 &
18.4.3

Synthesis Report

Question 3

Adaptation and average annual number
of people flooded by coastal storm
surges, projection for 2080s
Millions of people
250
200
150
100
WGII TAR Section 6.5.1

50
0
Constant protection

Present sea level

Enhanced protection

40-cm sea-level rise

Figure 3-6: Adaptation and the average annual number of people
flooded by coastal storm surges, projection for the 2080s. The left
two bars show the average annual number of people projected to be
flooded by coastal storm surges in the year 2080 for present sea level
and for a rise in sea level of ~40 cm, assuming that coastal protection is
unchanged from the present and a moderate population increase. The
right two bars show the same, but assuming that coastal protection is
enhanced in proportion to GDP growth.

of "hard structures" such as dikes, levees, and seawalls, and the use of "soft structures"
such as nourishment of beaches with sand and dune restoration. Estimates of the costs of
protecting coasts vary depending on assumptions about what decisions will be made
regarding the extent of the coastline to be protected, the types of structures to be used, the
timing of their implementation (which is influenced by the rate of sea-level rise), and discount
rates. Different assumptions about these factors yield estimates for protection of U.S. coasts
from 0.5-m sea-level rise by the year 2100 that range from US$20 billion to US$150
billion in present value.
3.32

Climate change is expected to negatively impact development,
sustainability, and equity.

3.33

The impacts of climate change will fall disproportionately upon developing
countries and the poor persons within all countries, and thereby exacerbate
inequities in health status and access to adequate food, clean water, and
other resources. As already noted, populations in developing countries are generally
expected to be exposed to relatively high risks of adverse impacts from climate change on
human health, water supplies, agricultural productivity, property, and other resources.
Poverty, lack of training and education, lack of infrastructure, lack of access to technologies,
lack of diversity in income opportunities, degraded natural resource base, misplaced
incentives, inadequate legal framework, and struggling public and private institutions create
conditions of low adaptive capacity in most developing countries. The exposures and low
capacity to adapt combine to make populations in developing countries generally more
vulnerable than populations in developed countries.

WGII TAR Sections 18.5.1-3

3.34

Non-sustainable resource use adds to the vulnerability to climate change.
Conversion of natural habitat to human uses, high harvesting rates of resources from the
environment, cultivation and grazing practices that fail to protect soils from degradation,
and pollution of air and water can reduce the robustness of systems to cope with variations
or change in climate, and the resilience of systems to recover from declines. Such pressures

WGII TAR Sections 1.2.2,
4.7, 5.1, 6.3.4, & 6.4.4

77

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

make systems, and the populations that derive goods, services, and livelihoods from them,
highly vulnerable to climate change. These pressures are present in developed as well as
developing countries, but satisfying development goals in ways that do not place nonsustainable pressures on systems pose a particular dilemma for developing countries.

78

3.35

Hazards associated with climate change can undermine progress toward
sustainable development. More frequent and intensified droughts can exacerbate land
degradation. Increases in heavy precipitation events can increase flooding, landslides, and
mudslides, the destruction from which can set back development efforts by years in some
instances. Advances in health and nutritional status could be set back in some areas by climate
change impacts on human health and agriculture. Hazards such as these can also be exacerbated
by further development in inherently dynamic and unstable zones (e.g., floodplains, barrier
beaches, low-lying coasts, and deforested steep slopes).

WGII TAR Section 18.6.1

3.36

Climate change can detract from the effectiveness of development projects
if not taken into account. Development projects often involve investments in infrastructure,
institutions, and human capital for the management of climate-sensitive resources such as
water, hydropower, agricultural lands, and forests. The performance of these projects can
be affected by climate change and increased climate variability, yet these factors are given
little consideration in the design of projects. Analyses have shown that flexibility to perform
well under a wider range of climate conditions can be built into projects at modest
incremental costs in some instances, and that greater flexibility has immediate value because
of risks from present climate variability.

WGII TAR Section 18.6.1

3.37

Many of the requirements for enhancing capacity to adapt to climate change
are similar to those for promoting sustainable development. Examples of common
requirements for enhancing adaptive capacity and sustainable development include
increasing access to resources and lowering inequities in access, reducing poverty, improving
education and training, investing in infrastructure, involving concerned parties in managing
local resources, and raising institutional capacities and efficiencies. Additionally, initiatives
to slow habitat conversion, manage harvesting practices to better protect the resource, adopt
cultivation and grazing practices that protect soils, and better regulate the discharge of
pollutants can reduce vulnerabilities to climate change while moving toward more sustainable
use of resources.

WGII TAR Section 18.6.1

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Question 4
What is known about the influence of the increasing atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and the projected
human-induced change in climate regionally and globally on:
a.
b.
c.
d.

The frequency and magnitude of climate fluctuations, including daily,
seasonal, inter-annual, and decadal variability, such as the El Nino
Southern Oscillation cycles and others?
The duration, location, frequency, and intensity of extreme events
such as heat waves, droughts, floods, heavy precipitation, avalanches,
storms, tornadoes, and tropical cyclones?
The risk of abrupt/non-linear changes in, among others, the sources
and sinks of greenhouse gases, ocean circulation, and the extent of
polar ice and permafrost? If so, can the risk be quantified?
The risk of abrupt or non-linear changes in ecological systems?

Q4

Climate Change 2001

4.1

This answer focuses on projected changes in the frequency and magnitude of climate fluctuations
as a result of increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols. Particular emphasis
is placed on changes in the frequency, magnitude, and duration of climatic extremes, which
represent important climate change risks for ecological systems and socio-economic sectors.
Projected abrupt or other non-linear changes in the biophysical system are discussed here;
the gradual changes in the physical, biological, and social systems are discussed in Question 3.

4.2

Models project that increasing atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases will result in changes in daily, seasonal, interannual, and decadal variability. There is projected to be a decrease in diurnal

Synthesis Report

WGI TAR Sections 9.3.5-6,
& WGII TAR Section 14.1.3

temperature range in many areas, with nighttime lows increasing more than daytime highs.
A number of models show a general decrease of daily variability of surface air temperature
in winter and increased daily variability in summer in the Northern Hemisphere land areas.
Current projections show little change or a small increase in amplitude for El Nino events
over the next 100 years. Many models show a more El Nino-like mean response in the tropical
Pacific, with the central and eastern equatorial Pacific sea surface temperatures projected
to warm more than the western equatorial Pacific and with a corresponding mean eastward
shift of precipitation. Even with little or no change in El Nino strength, global warming is
likely to lead to greater extremes of drying and heavy rainfall and increase the risk of droughts
and floods that occur with El Nino events in many different regions. There is no clear agreement
between models concerning the changes in frequency or structure of other naturally occurring
atmosphere-ocean circulation pattern such as the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).

80

4.3

The duration, location, frequency, and intensity of extreme weather
and climate events are likely to very likely to change, and would
result in mostly adverse impacts on biophysical systems.

4.4

Natural circulation patterns, such as ENSO and NAO, play a fundamental role in global
climate and its short-term (daily, intra- and inter-annual) and longer term (decadal to multidecadal) variability. Climate change may manifest itself as a shift in means as well as a
change in preference of specific climate circulation patterns that could result in changes in
the variance and frequency of extremes of climatic variables (see Figure 4-1).

WGI TAR Sections 1.2 & 2.7

4.5

More hot days and heat waves and fewer cold and frost days are very likely
over nearly all land areas. Increases in mean temperature will lead to increases in hot
weather and record hot weather, with fewer frost days and cold waves (see Figure 4-1a,b).
A number of models show a generally decreased daily variability of surface air temperature
in winter and increased daily variability in summer in Northern Hemisphere land areas.
The changes in temperature extremes are likely to result in increased crop and livestock
losses, higher energy use for cooling and lower for heating, and increased human morbidity
and heat-stress-related mortality (see Table 4-1). Fewer frost days will result in decreased
cold-related human morbidity and mortality, and decreased risk of damage to a number of
crops, though the risk to other crops may increase. Benefits to agriculture from a small
temperature increase could result in small increases in the GDP of temperate zone countries.

WGI TAR Sections 9.3.6 &
10.3.2, & WGII TAR Sections
5.3, 9.4.2, & 19.5

4.6

The amplitude and frequency of extreme precipitation events is very likely to
increase over many areas and the return period for extreme precipitation events are
projected to decrease. This would lead to more frequent floods and landslides with attendant
loss of life, health impacts (e.g., epidemics, infectious diseases, food poisoning), property
damage, loss to infrastructure and settlements, soil erosion, pollution loads, insurance and
agriculture losses, amongst others. A general drying of the mid-continental areas during
summer is likely to lead to increases in summer droughts and could increase the risk of
wild fires. This general drying is due to a combination of increased temperature and potential
evaporation that is not balanced by increases in precipitation. It is likely that global warming
will lead to an increase in the variability of Asian summer monsoon precipitation.

WGI TAR Section 9.3.6 &
WGII TAR Sections 4.3.8,
9.5.3, 9.7.10, & 9.8

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 4

Probability
of occurrence

Increase in mean temperature
(a)

Previous climate
New climate

More hot
weather
Less cold
weather

COLD

More record
hot weather

AVERAGE

HOT

Probability
of occurence

Increase in variance of temperature
(b)

Previous climate
New climate

More cold
weather

More hot
weather

More
record cold
weather

COLD
Probability
of occurrence

More record
hot weather

AVERAGE

HOT

Increase in mean and variance
of temperature

(c)

Previous climate

Much more
hot weather
More record
hot weather

Less change
for cold weather

COLD

AVERAGE

HOT

New climate

WGI TAR Figure 2.32

Figure 4-1: Schematic diagrams showing
the effects on extreme temperatures
when (a) the mean increases, leading to
more record hot weather, (b) the variance
increases, and (c) when both the mean
and variance increase, leading to much
more record hot weather.

4.7

High resolution modeling studies suggest that over some areas the peak wind
intensity of tropical cyclones is likely to increase by 5 to 10% and precipitation
rates may increase by 20 to 30%, but none of the studies suggest that the locations of the
tropical cyclones will change. There is little consistent modeling evidence for changes in
the frequency of tropical cyclones.

WGI TAR Box 10.2

4.8

There is insufficient information on how very small-scale phenomena may
change. Very small-scale phenomena such as thunderstorms, tornadoes, hail, hailstorms,
and lightning are not simulated in global climate models.

WGI TAR Section 9.3.6

4.9

Greenhouse gas forcing in the 21st century could set in motion
large-scale, high-impact, non-linear, and potentially abrupt
changes in physical and biological systems over the coming
decades to millennia, with a wide range of associated likelihoods.
81

Climate Change 2001

Table 4-1

Examples of climate variability and extreme climate events and examples of their impacts (WGII TAR Table SPM-1).

Projected Changes during the 21st
Century in Extreme Climate Phenomena
and their Likelihood

Representative Examples of Projected Impactsa
(all high confidence of occurrence in some areas)

Higher maximum temperatures, more hot
days and heat wavesb over nearly all land
areas (very likely)

Increased incidence of death and serious illness in older age groups and urban poor.
Increased heat stress in livestock and wildlife.
Shift in tourist destinations.
Increased risk of damage to a number of crops.
Increased electric cooling demand and reduced energy supply reliability.

Higher (increasing) minimum
temperatures, fewer cold days, frost days,
and cold wavesb over nearly all land areas
(very likely)

Decreased cold-related human morbidity and mortality.
Decreased risk of damage to a number of crops, and increased risk to others.
Extended range and activity of some pest and disease vectors.
Reduced heating energy demand.

More intense precipitation events (very
likely, over many areas)

Increased flood, landslide, avalanche, and mudslide damage.
Increased soil erosion.
Increased flood runoff could increase recharge of some floodplain aquifers.
Increased pressure on government and private flood insurance systems and disaster relief.

Increased summer drying over most midlatitude continental interiors and
associated risk of drought (likely)

Decreased crop yields.
Increased damage to building foundations caused by ground shrinkage.
Decreased water resource quantity and quality.
Increased risk of forest fire.

Increase in tropical cyclone peak wind
intensities, mean and peak precipitation
intensities (likely, over some areas)c

Increased risks to human life, risk of infectious disease epidemics and many other risks.
Increased coastal erosion and damage to coastal buildings and infrastructure.
Increased damage to coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs and mangroves.

Intensified droughts and floods associated
with El Nino events in many different
regions (likely)
(see also under droughts and intense
precipitation events)

Decreased agricultural and rangeland productivity in drought- and flood-prone regions.
Decreased hydro-power potential in drought-prone regions.

Increased Asian summer monsoon
precipitation variability (likely)

Increase in flood and drought magnitude and damages in temperate and tropical Asia.

Increased intensity of mid-latitude storms
(little agreement between current models)b

Increased risks to human life and health.
Increased property and infrastructure losses.
Increased damage to coastal ecosystems.

a
b
c

82

Synthesis Report

These impacts can be lessened by appropriate response measures.
Information from WGI TAR Technical Summary (Section F.5).
Changes in regional distribution of tropical cyclones are possible but have not been established.

4.10

The climate system involves many processes that interact in complex non-linear ways, which
can give rise to thresholds (thus potentially abrupt changes) in the climate system that
could be crossed if the system were perturbed sufficiently. These abrupt and other non-linear
changes include large climate-induced increase in greenhouse gas emissions from terrestrial
ecosystems, a collapse of the thermohaline circulation (THC; see Figure 4-2), and disintegration
of the Antarctic and the Greenland ice sheets. Some of these changes have low probability
of occurrence during the 21st century; however, greenhouse gas forcing in the 21st century
could set in motion changes that could lead to such transitions in subsequent centuries (see
Question 5). Some of these changes (e.g., to THC) could be irreversible over centuries to
millennia. There is a large degree of uncertainty about the mechanisms involved and about
the likelihood or time scales of such changes; however, there is evidence from polar ice
cores of atmospheric regimes changing within a few years and large-scale hemispheric changes
as fast as a few decades with large consequences on the biophysical systems.

WGI TAR Sections 7.3,
9.3.4, & 11.5.4; WGII TAR
Sections 5.2 & 5.8; &
SRLULUCF Chapters 3 & 4

4.11

Large climate-induced increases in greenhouse gas emissions due to largescale changes in soils and vegetation may be possible in the 21st century.
Global warming interacting with other environmental stresses and human activity could
lead to the rapid breakdown of existing ecosystems. Examples include drying of the tundra,

WGII TAR Sections 5.2,
5.8, & 5.9; & SRLULUCF
Chapters 3 & 4

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 4

boreal and tropical forests, and their associated peatlands leaving them susceptible to fires.
Such breakdowns could induce further climate change through increased emissions of CO2
and other greenhouse gases from plants and soil and changes in surface properties and albedo.
4.12

Large, rapid increases in atmospheric CH4 either from reductions in the
atmospheric chemical sink or from release of buried CH4 reservoirs appear
exceptionally unlikely. The rapid increase in CH4 lifetime possible with large emissions
of tropospheric pollutants does not occur within the range of SRES scenarios. The CH4
reservoir buried in solid hydrate deposits under permafrost and ocean sediments is enormous,
more than 1,000-fold the current atmospheric content. A proposed climate feedback occurs
when the hydrates decompose in response to warming and release large amounts of CH4;
however, most of the CH4 gas released from the solid form is decomposed by bacteria in
the sediments and water column, thus limiting the amount emitted to the atmosphere unless
explosive ebullient emissions occur. The feedback has not been quantified, but there are no
observations to support a rapid, massive CH4 release in the record of atmospheric CH4
over the past 50,000 years.

WGI TAR Section 4.2.1.1

Great ocean conveyor belt
Heat release
to atmosphere

Pacific
Ocean

Atlantic
Ocean

Indian
Ocean

Warm surface
current

Cold saline
deep current
Heat release
to atmosphere
Figure 4-2: Schematic illustration of the global circulation system in the world ocean consisting of major north-south thermohaline
circulation routes in each ocean basin joining in the Antarctic circumpolar circulation. Warm surface currents and cold deep currents are
connected in the few areas of deepwater formation in the high latitudes of the Atlantic and around Antarctica (blue), where the major ocean-toatmosphere heat transfer occurs. This current system contributes substantially to the transport and redistribution of heat (e.g., the poleward
flowing currents in the North Atlantic warm northwestern Europe by up to 10C). Model simulations indicate that the North Atlantic branch of
this circulation system is particularly vulnerable to changes in atmospheric temperature and in the hydrological cycle. Such perturbations caused
by global warming could disrupt the current system, which would have a strong impact on regional-to-hemispheric climate. Note that this is a
schematic diagram and it does not give the exact locations of the water currents that form part of the THC.

83

Climate Change 2001

84

Synthesis Report

4.13

Most models project a weakening of the ocean thermohaline circulation, which
leads to a reduction of the heat transport into high latitudes of Europe (see
Figure 4-2). However, even in models where THC weakens, there is still a warming over
Europe due to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases. The current projections do
not exhibit a complete shutdown of THC by the year 2100. Beyond the year 2100, some
models suggest that THC could completely, and possibly irreversibly, shut down in either
hemisphere if the change in radiative forcing is large enough and applied long enough.
Models indicate that a decrease in THC reduces its resilience to perturbations (i.e., a oncereduced THC appears to be less stable and a shutdown can become more likely).

WGI TAR SPM & WGI
TAR Sections 7.3 & 9.3.4

4.14

The Antarctic ice sheet as a whole is likely to increase in mass during the
21st century. However, the West Antarctic ice sheet could lose mass over the
next 1,000 years with an associated sea-level rise of several meters, but there
is an incomplete understanding of some of the underlying processes. Concerns
have been expressed about the stability of the West Antarctic ice sheet because it is grounded
below sea level. However, loss of grounded ice leading to substantial sea-level rise from
this source is widely agreed to be very unlikely during the 21st century. Current climate
and ice dynamic models project that over the next 100 years the Antarctic ice sheet as a
whole is likely to gain mass because of a projected increase in precipitation, contributing
to a relative decrease of several centimeters to sea level. Over the next 1,000 years, these
models project that the West Antarctic ice sheet could contribute up to 3 m to sea-level rise.

WGI TAR Section 11.5.4

4.15

The Greenland ice sheet is likely to lose mass during the 21st century and
contribute a few centimeters to sea-level rise. Over the 21st century, the Greenland
ice sheet is likely to lose mass because the projected increase in runoff will exceed the
increase in precipitation and contribute 10 cm maximum to the total sea-level rise. The ice
sheets will continue to react to climate warming and contribute to sea-level rise for thousands
of years after climate has stabilized. Climate models indicate that the local warming over
Greenland is likely to be one to three times the global average. Ice sheet models project
that a local warming of larger than 3C, if sustained for thousands of years, would lead to
virtually a complete melting of the Greenland ice sheet with a resulting sea-level rise of
about 7 m. A local warming of 5.5C, if sustained for 1,000 years, would likely result in a
contribution from Greenland of about 3 m to sea-level rise (see Question 3).

WGI TAR Section 11.5.4

4.16

Pronounced changes in permafrost temperature, surface morphology, and
distribution are expected in the 21st century. Permafrost currently underlies 24.5%
of the exposed land area of the Northern Hemisphere. Under climatic warming, much of
this terrain would be vulnerable to subsidence, particularly in areas of relatively warm,
discontinuous permafrost. The area of the Northern Hemisphere occupied by permafrost
could eventually be reduced by 12 to 22% of its current extent and could eventually disappear
from half the present-day Canadian permafrost region. The changes on the southern limit
may become obvious by the late 21st century, but some thick ice-rich permafrost could
persist in relict form for centuries or millennia. Thawing of ice-rich permafrost can be
accompanied by mass movements and subsidence of the surface, possibly increasing the
sediment loads in water courses and causing damage to the infrastructure in developed
regions. Depending on the precipitation regime and drainage conditions, degradation of
permafrost could lead to emission of greenhouse gases, conversion of forest to bogs,
grasslands, or wetland ecosystems and could cause major erosion problems and landslides.

WGII TAR Sections 16.1-2

4.17

Many natural and managed ecosystems may change abruptly
or non-linearly during the 21st century. The greater the magnitude
and rate of the change, the greater the risk of adverse impacts.

4.18

Changes in climate could increase the risk of abrupt and non-linear changes
in many ecosystems, which would affect their biodiversity, productivity, and

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGII TAR Sections 5.2,
6.4.5, & 17.2.4

Synthesis Report

Question 4

function. For example, sustained increases in water temperatures of as little as 1C, alone
or in combination with any of several stresses (e.g., excessive pollution and siltation), can
lead to corals ejecting their algae (coral bleaching; see Figure 4-3 and Question 2), the
eventual death of the corals, and a possible loss of biodiversity. Climate change will also
shift suitable habitats for many terrestrial and marine organisms polewards or terrestrial
ones to higher altitudes in mountainous areas. Increased disturbances along with the shift
in habitats and the more restrictive conditions needed for establishment of species could
lead to abrupt and rapid breakdown of terrestrial and marine ecosystems, which could
result in new plant and animal assemblages that are less diverse, that include more "weedy"
species, and that increase risk of extinctions (see Question 3).
4.19

Ecological systems have many interacting non-linear processes and are thus
subject to abrupt changes and threshold effects arising from relatively small
changes in driving variables, such as climate. For example:
* Temperature increase beyond a threshold, which varies by crop and variety, can affect
key development stages of some crops and result in severe losses in crop yields. Examples
of key development stages and their critical thresholds include spikelet sterility in rice
(e.g., temperatures greater than 35C for more than 1 hour during the flowering and
pollination process greatly reduce flower formation and eventually grain production),
loss of pollen viability in maize (>35C), reversal of cold-hardening in wheat (>30C
for more than 8 hours), and reduced formation of tubers and tuber bulking in potatoes
(>20C). Yield losses in these crops can be severe if temperatures exceed critical limits
for even short periods.
* Mangroves occupy a transition zone between sea and land that is set by a balance between
the erosional processes from the sea and siltation processes from land. The erosional

Figure 4-3: The diversity of corals could be affected with the branching corals (e.g., staghorn coral) decreasing
or becoming locally extinct as they tend to be more severely affected by increases in sea surface temperatures,
and the massive corals (e.g., brain corals) increasing.

WGII SAR Sections 13.2.2
& 13.6.2

WGII TAR Sections 5.3,
10.2.2, 15.2, & 17.2

WGII TAR Section 17.2.4

85

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

processes from the sea might be expected to increase with sea-level rise, and the siltation
processes through climate change and other human activities (e.g., coastal development).
Thus, the impact on the mangrove forests will be determined by the balance between
these two processes, which will determine whether mangrove systems migrate landward
or seaward.
4.20

86

Large-scale changes in vegetation cover could affect regional climate. Changes
in land surface characteristics, such as those created by land cover, can modify energy,
water, and gas fluxes and affect atmospheric composition creating changes in local/regional
climate and thus changing the disturbance regime (e.g., in the Arctic). In areas without
surface water (typically semi-arid or arid), evapotranspiration and albedo affect the local
hydrologic cycle, thus a reduction in vegetative cover could lead to reduced precipitation
at the local/regional scale and change the frequency and persistence of droughts.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGII TAR Sections 1.3.1,
5.2, 5.9, 10.2.6.3, 13.2.2,
13.6.2, & 14.2.1

Question 5
What is known about the inertia and time scales associated with the
changes in the climate system, ecological systems, and socio-economic
sectors and their interactions?

Q5

Climate Change 2001

Box 5-1

Synthesis Report

Time scale and inertia.

The terms "time scale" and "inertia" have no generally accepted meaning across all the disciplines
involved in the TAR. The following definitions are applied for the purpose of responding to this question:
* "Time scale" is the time taken for a perturbation in a process to show at least half of its final effect.
The time scales of some key Earth system processes are shown in Figure 5-1.
* "Inertia" means a delay, slowness, or resistance in the response of climate, biological, or human
systems to factors that alter their rate of change, including continuation of change in the system
after the cause of that change has been removed.
These are only two of several concepts used in the literature to describe the responses of complex,
non-linear, adaptive systems to external forcing.

Characteristic time scales in the Earth system
Process : (Period in years)
Mixing of GHGs in global atmosphere (2 to 4)
Time for 50% of a CO2 pulse to disappear (50 to 200) - WGI:3,4
Time for 50% of a CH4 pulse to disappear (8 to 12) - WGI:4

Atmospheric
composition

Air temperature to respond to CO2 rise (120 to150) - WGI:9
Transport of heat and CO2 to the deep ocean (100 to 200) - WGI:9,11
(Up to 10,000) Sea level to respond to temperature change - WGI:9,11
(Up to 10,000) Ice caps to respond to temperature change - WGI:11

Climate
system

Acclimation of plants to high CO2 (1 to 100) - WGI:3
Life of plants (1 to 1,000) - WGI:3, WGII:5
Decay of plant material (0.5 to 500) - WGI:3

Ecological
system

Change in energy end-use technologies (1 to 10) - WGIII:3,5,9
Change in energy-supply technologies (10 to 50) - WGIII:3,5,9
Infrastructure (30 to 100) - WGIII:3,5,9
Social norms and governance (30 to 100) - WGIII:3,5,9

Socio-economic
system
0

200

400

600

800

1,000

1,200

Years

Figure 5-1: The characteristic time scales of some key processes in the Earth system: atmospheric
WGI TAR Chapters 3, 4, 7,
& 11, WGII TAR Chapter 5,
composition (blue), climate system (red), ecological system (green), and socio-economic system (purple).
& WGIII TAR Chapters 5,
"Time scale" is defined here as the time needed for at least half of the consequences of a change in a driver
6, & 10
of the process to have been expressed. Problems of adaptation arise when response process (such as the
longevity of some plants) are much slower than driving process (the change in temperature). Inter-generational equity problems arise for all
processes with time scales greater than a human generation, since a large part of the consequences of activities of a given generation will be
borne by future generations.

88

5.1

This response dicusses, and gives examples of, inertia and varying time scales associated
with important processes in the interacting climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems.
It then discusses potentially irreversible changes--that is, situations where parts of the
climate, ecological, or socio-economic systems may fail to return to their former state
within time scales of multiple human generations after the driving forces leading to change
are reduced or removed. Finally, it explores how the effects of inertia may influence decisions
regarding the mitigation of, or adaptation to, climate change.

5.2

Inertia is a widespread inherent characteristic of the interacting
climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems. Thus some
impacts of anthropogenic climate change may be slow to become
apparent, and some could be irreversible if climate change is not
limited in both rate and magnitude before associated thresholds,
whose positions may be poorly known, are crossed.

5.3

The combined effect of the interacting inertias of the various component
processes is such that stabilization of the climate and climate-impacted

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Sections 3.2, 3.7, &
4.2, & WGI TAR Figure 9.16

Synthesis Report

Question 5

systems will only be achieved long after anthropogenic emissions of
greenhouse gases have been reduced. The perturbation of the atmosphere and
oceans, resulting from CO2 already emitted due to human activities since 1750, will persist
for centuries because of the slow redistribution of carbon between large ocean and terrestrial
reservoirs with slow turnover (see Figures 5-2 and 5-4). The future atmospheric concentration
of CO2 is projected to remain for centuries near the highest level reached, since natural
processes can only return the concentration to pre-industrial levels over geological time
scales. By contrast, stabilization of emissions of shorter lived greenhouse gases such as
CH4 leads, within decades, to stabilization of atmospheric concentrations. Inertia also implies
that avoidance of emissions of long-lived greenhouse gases has long-lasting benefits.
5.4

The oceans and cryosphere (ice caps, ice sheets, glaciers, and permafrost)
are the main sources of physical inertia in the climate system for time scales
up to 1,000 years. Due to the great mass, thickness, and thermal capacity of the oceans
and cryosphere, and the slowness of the heat transport process, linked ocean-climate models
predict that the average temperature of the atmosphere near the Earth's surface will take
hundreds of years to finally approach the new "equilibrium" temperature following a change
in radiative forcing. Penetration of heat from the atmosphere into the upper "mixed layer"
of the ocean occurs within decades, but transport of heat into the deep ocean requires
centuries. An associated consequence is that human-induced sea-level rise will continue
inexorably for many centuries after the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases has
been stabilized.

WGI TAR Sections 7.3,
7.5, & 11.5.4, & WGI TAR
Figures 9.1, 9.24, & 11.16

CO2 concentration, temperature, and sea level
continue to rise long after emissions are reduced
Magnitude of response

Time taken to reach
equilibrium
Sea-level rise due to ice melting:
several millennia

CO2 emissions peak
0 to 100 years

Sea-level rise due to thermal
expansion:
centuries to millennia
Temperature stabilization:
a few centuries
CO2 stabilization:
100 to 300 years

CO2 emissions
Today 100 years

1,000 years

Figure 5-2: After CO2 emissions are reduced and atmospheric concentrations stabilize, surface air
WGI TAR Sections 3.7,
9.3, & 11.5, & WGI TAR
temperature continues to rise by a few tenths of a degree per century for a century or more. Thermal
Figures 3.13, 9.16, 9.19,
expansion of the ocean continues long after CO2 emissions have been reduced, and melting of ice sheets
11.15, & 11.16
continues to contribute to sea-level rise for many centuries. This figure is a generic illustration for stabilization
at any level between 450 and 1,000 ppm, and therefore has no units on the response axis. Responses to stabilization trajectories in this range
show broadly similar time courses, but the impacts become progressively larger at higher concentrations of CO2.

89

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

5.5

The lower the stabilization target for atmospheric CO2, the sooner emissions
of CO2 would need to decrease to meet it. If emissions were held at present levels,
carbon cycle models indicate that the atmospheric concentration of CO2 would continue to
rise (see Figure 5-3).
* Stabilization of CO2 concentrations at any level requires ultimate reduction of global
net emissions to a small fraction of the current emission level.
* Stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations at 450, 650, or 1,000 ppm would require
global anthropogenic CO2 emissions to drop below the year 1990 level, within a few
decades, about a century, or about 2 centuries, respectively, and continue to decrease
steadily thereafter (see Figure 6-1).
These time constraints are partly due to the rate of CO2 uptake by the ocean, which is limited
by the slow transport of carbon between the surface and deep waters. There is sufficient
uptake capacity in the ocean to incorporate 70 to 80% of foreseeable anthropogenic CO2 emissions
to the atmosphere, but this would take several centuries. Chemical reaction involving ocean
sediments has the potential to remove up to a further 15% over a period of 5,000 years.

WGI TAR Sections 3.2.3.2,
3.7.3, & 9.3.3.1

5.6

A delay between biospheric carbon uptake and carbon release is manifest
as a temporary net carbon uptake. The main flows in the global carbon cycle have
widely differing characteristic time scales (see Figures 5-1 and 5-4). The net terrestrial
carbon uptake that has developed over the past few decades is partly a result of the time lag
between photosynthetic carbon uptake and carbon release when plants eventually die and decay.
For example, the uptake resulting from regrowth of forests on agricultural lands, abandoned
over the last century in the Northern Hemisphere, will decline as the forests reach their mature
biomass, growth slows, and death increases. Enhancement of plant carbon uptake due to elevated
CO2 or nitrogen deposition will eventually saturate, then decomposition of the increased
biomass will catch up. Climate change is likely to increase disturbance and decomposition
rates in the future. Some models project that the recent global net terrestrial carbon uptake
will peak, then level off or decrease. The peak could be passed within the 21st century
according to several model projections. Projections of the global net terrestrial carbon
exchange with the atmosphere beyond a few decades remain uncertain (see Figure 5-5).

WGI TAR Sections 3.2.2-3
& 3.7.1-2, & WGI TAR
Figure 3.10

Impact of stabilizing emissions versus stabilizing concentrations of CO2
CO2 emissions (Gt C yr -1)
12

CO2 emissions

10

CO2 concentration (ppm)
900
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations
800

8

700

6

600

4

500

2

400

0
2000

2100

2200

2300

300
2000

Constant CO2 emissions at year 2000 level

Temperature change (C)
4
Temperature response
3
2
1

2100

2200

2300

0
2000

2100

2200

2300

Emissions path to stabilize CO2 concentration at 550 ppm

Figure 5-3: Stabilizing CO2 emissions at current levels will result in a continously rising atmospheric
WGI TAR Sections 3.7 & 9.3
CO2 concentration and temperature. Stabilization of atmospheric CO2 and temperature change will eventually
require the emissions to drop well below current levels. In all three panels the red curves illustrate the result of emissions held constant at the
level prescribed by the WRE 550 profile for the year 2000 (which is slightly higher than the actual emissions for the year 2000), while the blue
curves are the result of emissions following the WRE 550 stabilization profile. Both cases are illustrative only: Constant global emissions are
unrealistic in the short term, and no preference is expressed for the WRE 550 profile over others. Other stabilization profiles are illustrated in
Figure 6-1. Figure 5-3 was constructed using the models described in WGI TAR Chapters 3 & 9.

90

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 5

5.7

Although warming reduces the uptake of CO2 by the ocean, the oceanic net carbon uptake
is projected to persist under rising atmospheric CO2, at least for the 21st century. Movement
of carbon from the surface to the deep ocean takes centuries, and its equilibration there
with ocean sediments takes millennia.

WGI TAR Sections 3.2.3 &
3.7.2, & WGI TAR Figures
3.10c,d

5.8

When subjected to rapid climate change, ecological systems are likely to be
disrupted as a consequence of the differences in response times within the
system. The resulting loss of capacity by the ecosystem to supply services such as food,
timber, and biodiversity maintenance on a sustainable basis may not be immediately apparent.
Climate change may lead to conditions unsuitable for the establishment of key species, but
the slow and delayed response of long-lived plants hides the importance of the change until
the already established individuals die or are killed in a disturbance. For example, for
climate change of the degree possible within the 21st century, it is likely, in some forests,
that when a stand is disturbed by fire, wind, pests, or harvesting, instead of the community
regenerating as in the past, species may be lost or replaced by different species.

WGII TAR Section 5.2

5.9

Humans have shown a capacity to adapt to long-term mean climate conditions,
but there is less success in adapting to extremes and to year-to-year variations
in climatic conditions. Climatic changes in the next 100 years are expected to exceed

WGII TAR SPM 2.7, WGII
TAR Sections 4.6.4, 18.2-4,
& 18.8, & WGIII TAR
Section 10.4.2

Fast and slow processes in the carbon cycle

A

Vegetation

t

m

o

s

p

h

e

r

i

c

C

O

2

Fire

Fossil fuel

Soil
Surface water

Speed of exchange processes
Very fast (less than 1 year)
Fast (1 to 10 years)
Slow (10 to 100 years)

Deep water

Sediment

Very slow (more than 100 years)

Figure 5-4: The range of time scales of major processes within the global carbon cycle leads to a range of response times for perturbations
of CO2 in the atmosphere, and contributes to the development of transient sinks, as when the atmospheric CO2 concentration rose above its
pre-1750 equilibrium level.

91

Climate Change 2001

Gt C yr -1

Synthesis Report

Changes over time in the global
net carbon uptake on land

4

WGI TAR Figure 3.10b

Source

2
0
-2

Sink

-4

Hybrid
LPJ
IBIS
SDGVM
VECODE
TRIFFID

-6
-8
-10
-12
1850

1900

1950

2000

2050

2100

Figure 5-5: The recent net uptake of carbon on the
land is partly due to enhanced CO2 uptake through
plant growth, with a delay before this carbon is
returned to the atmosphere via the decay of plant
material and soil organic matter. Several processes
contribute to the enhanced plant growth: changes in
land use and management, fertilizing effects of elevated
CO2 and nitrogen, and some climate changes (such as
a longer growing season at high latitudes). A range of
models (identified by their acronyms in the figure)
project a continued increase in the strength of the net
carbon uptake on land for several decades, then a
leveling off or decline late in the 21st century for reasons
explained in the text. The model results illustrated here
arise from the IS92a scenario, but similar conclusions
are reached using other scenarios.

any experienced by human societies over at least the past 5 millennia. The magnitude and
rate of these changes will pose a major challenge for humanity. The time needed for socioeconomic adaptation varies from years to decades, depending on the sector and the resources
available to assist the transition. There is inertia in decision making in the area of adaptation
and mitigation, and in implementing those decisions, on the order of decades. The fact that
adaptation and mitigation decisions are generally not made by the same entities compounds
the difficulties inherent in the identification and implementation of the best possible
combination of strategies, and hence contributes to the delays of climate change response.

92

5.10

There is typically a delay of years to decades between perceiving a need to
respond to a major challenge, planning, researching and developing a solution,
and implementing it. This delay can be shortened by anticipating needs through the application
of foresight, and thus developing technologies in advance. The response of technological
development to energy price changes has historically been relatively rapid (typically, less
than 5 years elapses between a price shock and the response in terms of patenting activity
and introduction of new model offerings) but its diffusion takes much longer. The diffusion
rate often depends on the rate of retirement of previously installed equipment. Early
deployment of rapidly improving technologies allows learning-curve cost reductions
(learning by doing), without premature lock-in to existing, low-efficiency technology. The
rate of technology diffusion is strongly dependent not only on economic feasibility but also
on socio-economic pressures. For some technologies, such as the adoption of new crop
varieties, the availability of, and information on, pre-existing adaptation options allows for
rapid adaptation. In many regions, however, population pressures on limited land and water
resources, government policies impeding change, or limited access to information or
financial resources make adaptation difficult and slow. Optimal adaptation to climate change
trends, such as more frequent droughts, may be delayed if they are perceived to be due to
natural variability, while they might actually be related to climate change. Conversely,
maladaptation can occur if climate variability is mistaken for a trend.

WGII TAR Sections 1.4.1,
12.8.4, & 18.3.5, & WGIII
TAR Sections 3.2, 5.3.1, &
10.4

5.11

Social structures and personal values interact with society's physical infrastructure,
institutions, and the technologies embodied within them, and the combined
system evolves relatively slowly. This is obvious, for instance, in relation to the impact of
urban design and infrastructure on energy consumption for heating, cooling, and transport.
Markets sometimes "lock in" to technologies and practices that are sub-optimal because of
the investment in supporting infrastructure, which block out alternatives. Diffusion of many

WGIII TAR Sections 3.2,
3.8.6, 5.2-3, & 10.3, SRTT
SPM, & SRTT Chapter 4 ES

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 5

innovations comes up against people's traditional preferences and other social and cultural
barriers. Unless advantages are very clear, social or behavioral changes on the part of technology
users may require decades. Energy use and greenhouse gas mitigation are peripheral interests
in most people's everyday lives. Their consumption patterns are driven not only by demographic,
economic and technological change, resource availability, infrastructure, and time constraints,
but also by motivation, habit, need, compulsion, social structures, and other factors.
5.12

Social and economic time scales are not fixed: They are sensitive to social
and economic forces, and could be changed by policies and the choices
made by individuals. Behavioral and technological changes can occur rapidly under
severe economic conditions. For example, the oil crises of the 1970s triggered societal
interest in energy conservation and alternative sources of energy, and the economy in most
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries deviated
strongly from the traditional tie between energy consumption and economic development
growth rates (see Figure 5-6). Another example is the observed reduction in CO2 emissions
caused by the disruption of the economy of the Former Soviet Union (FSU) countries in
1988. The response in both cases was very rapid (within a few years). The converse is also
apparently true: In situations where pressure to change is small, inertia is large. This has
implicitly been assumed to be the case in the SRES scenarios, since they do not consider
major stresses, such as economic recession, large-scale conflict, or collapses in food stocks
and associated human suffering, which are inherently difficult to forecast.

WGIII TAR Chapter 2,
WGIII TAR Sections 3.2 &
10.1.4.3, & WGII SAR
Section 20.1

5.13

Stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentration at levels below about 600 ppm
is only possible with reductions in carbon intensity and/or energy intensity
greater than have been achieved historically. This implies shifts toward alternative
development pathways with new social, institutional, and technological configurations that
address environmental constraints. Low historical rates of improvement in energy intensity
(energy use per unit GDP) reflect the relatively low priority placed on energy efficiency by
most producers and users of technology. By contrast, labor productivity increased at higher
rates over the period 1980 to 1992. The historically recorded annual rates of improvement
of global energy intensity (1 to 1.5% per year) would have to be increased and maintained
over long time frames to achieve stabilization of CO2 concentrations at about 600 ppm or
below (see Figure 5-7). Carbon intensity (carbon per unit energy produced) reduction rates
would eventually have to change by even more (e.g., up to 1.5% per year (the historical
baseline is 0.3 to 0.4% per year)). In reality, both energy intensity and carbon intensity are
likely to continue to improve, but greenhouse gas stabilization at levels below 600 ppm
requires that at least one of them do so at a rate much higher than historically achieved. The
lower the stabilization target and the higher the level of baseline emissions, the larger the
CO2 divergence from the baseline that is needed, and the earlier it would need to occur.

WGI TAR Section 3.7.3.4,
WGIII TAR Section 2.5, &
SRES Section 3.3.4

5.14

Some climate, ecological, and socio-economic system changes
are effectively irreversible over many human lifetimes, and
others are intrinsically irreversible.

5.15

There are two types of apparent irreversibility. "Effective irreversibility" derives
from processes that have the potential to return to their pre-disturbance state, but take
centuries to millennia to do so. An example is the partial melting of the Greenland ice
sheet. Another is the projected rise in mean sea level, partly as a result of melting of the
cryosphere, but primarily due to thermal expansion of the oceans. The world is already
committed to some sea-level rise as a consequence of the surface atmospheric warming
that has occurred over the past century. "Intrinsic irreversibility" results from crossing a
threshold beyond which the system no longer spontaneously returns to the previous state.
An example of an intrinsically irreversible change due to crossing a threshold is the extinction
of species, resulting from a combination of climate change and habitat loss.

WGI TAR Chapter 11, WGII
TAR Chapter 5, & WGII TAR
Sections 16.2.1 & 17.2.5

93

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Comparison between GDP and CO2 emissions
for selected countries
CO2 emissions (thin line)
Mt C yr -1

GDP (thick line)
Billions of 1990 U.S. dollars PPP

2,500

7,000 United
States

6,000

2,000

United
States

5,000

1,500

4,000

Oil crisis

Former
Soviet
Union

3,000

1,000

Former
Soviet Union
500

2,000
3,000

Japan

2,000
1,000

0
1960

0 Japan
1970
Oil crisis

94

1980

1990

1997

End of Soviet Union

2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000

WGIII TAR Table 3.1 & WGII
SAR Figure 20-1

Figure 5-6: The response of the energy system,
as indicated by the emission of CO2 (expressed
as carbon), to economic changes, indicated by GDP
(expressed in Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
terms). The response can be almost without inertia
if the shock is large. The "oil crisis"--during which
energy prices rose substantially over a short period
of time--led to an almost immediate and sustained
divergence of the formerly closely linked emissions
and GDP in most developed countries: Japan and
United States are shown as examples. At the breakup
of the Former Soviet Union, the two indicators
remained closely linked, leading the emission to drop
rapidly in tandem with declining GDP.

5.16

The location of a threshold, and the resistance to change in its vicinity, can be
affected by the rate at which the threshold is approached. Model results indicate
that a threshold may exist in the ocean thermohaline circulation (see Question 4) such that
a transition to a new ocean circulation, as occurred during the emergence from the last
glacial period, could be induced if the world warms rapidly. While such a transition is very
unlikely during the 21st century, some models suggest that it would be irreversible (i.e., the
new circulation would persist even after the perturbation disappeared). For slower rates of
warming, THC would likely gradually adjust and thresholds may not be crossed. This
implies that the greenhouse gas emission trajectory is important in determining the evolution
of THC. When a system approaches a threshold, as is the case for a weakening THC under
global warming, resilience to perturbations decreases.

WGI TAR Sections 2.4.3,
7.3.7, & 9.3.4.3, & WGII
TAR Section 1.4.3.5

5.17

Higher rates of warming and the compounded effects of multiple stresses
increase the likelihood of a threshold crossing. An example of an ecological
threshold is provided by the migration of plant species as they respond to a changing
climate. Fossil records indicate that the maximum rate at which most plant species have
migrated in the past is about 1 km per year. Known constraints imposed by the dispersal
process (e.g., the mean period between germination and the production of seeds, and the
mean distance that an individual seed can travel) suggest that, without human intervention,
many species would not be able to keep up with the rate of movement of their preferred
climatic niche projected for the 21st century, even if there were no barriers to their movement
imposed by land use. An example of a socio-economic threshold is provided by conflicts in
already stressed situations--for example, a river basin shared by several nations with
competition for a limited water resource. Further pressure from an environmental stress

WGII TAR Sections 1.2.1.2,
4.7.3, & 5.2, WGIII TAR TS
2.3, SRES Box 4.2, & WGII
SAR A.4.1

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 5

Acceleration of energy system change
(a)

Ranges of rates of energy-intensity change
in different mitigation scenarios
provided by different models and model runs for 1990-2100
Long-term annual average rates of energy-intensity improvement (%)

2.5
2.0
1.5

H I S T O R I C A L L Y

A C H I E V E D

L E V E L S

1.0
0.5
0

450

550

650

750

Emission stabilization levels (in ppm)

(b)

Ranges of rates of carbon-intensity change
in different mitigation scenarios
provided by different models and model runs for 1990-2100

WGIII TAR Figures 2.8 &
2.18

Long-term annual average rates of carbon-intensity improvement (%)

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

H I S T O R I C A L LY

450

A C H I E V E D

550

L E V E L S

650

Emission stabilization levels (in ppm)

750

Figure 5-7: (a) The required rate of decrease in energy intensity (energy
per unit GDP) in order to meet given CO2 concentration stabilization
targets is within the range of historically achieved rates for stabilization
above 550 ppm, and possibly even at 450 ppm, but (b) the required
rate of improvement in carbon intensity (carbon emissions per unit
energy) to stabilize at levels below about 600 ppm is higher than
the historically achieved rates. As a consequence, the cost of mitigation
rises as the stabilization level decreases, and does so more steeply
below a target of about 600 ppm than above (see Figure 7-3).

such as reduced stream flow could trigger more severe conflict. If impacted systems are
not fully understood, the presence of a threshold may not be apparent until it is reached.
5.18

Inertia in the climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems
makes adaptation inevitable and already necessary in some
cases, and inertia affects the optimal mix of adaptation and
mitigation strategies.

5.19

As a result of the time lags and inertias inherent in the Earth system, including
its social components, some of the consequences of actions taken, or not
taken, will only be felt many years in the future. For example, the differences in the
initial trajectories of the various SRES and stabilization scenarios are small, but the outcomes
in terms of the climate in the year 2100 are large. The choice of development path has
consequences at all the affected time scales; thus, long-term total costs and benefits may
differ considerably from short-term ones.

WGIII TAR Section 8.4.2

5.20

In the presence of inertia, well-founded actions to adapt to or mitigate climate
change are more effective, and under some circumstances may be cheaper,
if taken earlier rather than later. Time lags provide a breathing space between emissions
and impacts, thus allowing time for planned adaptation. The inertia of technology
development and capital stock replacement is an important argument for gradual mitigation.
The essential point of inertia in economic structures and processes is that deviation from any
given trend incurs costs, and these costs rise with the speed of deviations (e.g., the costs of
early retirement of carbon-intensive facilities). Earlier mitigation action may reduce the
risk of incurring severe lasting or irreversible impacts, while reducing the need for more
rapid mitigation later. Accelerated action may help to drive down the costs of mitigation and

WGII TAR Sections 1.3.4 &
2.7.1, WGIII TAR Chapter
2, WGIII TAR Sections
10.1 & 10.4.2-3, & WGIII
TAR Table 10.7

95

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

adaptation in the long term by accelerating technology development and the early realization
of benefits currently obscured by market imperfections. Abatement over the next few years
is economically valuable if there is a significant probability of having to stay below ceilings
that would otherwise be reached within the characteristic time scales of the systems
producing greenhouse gases. Climate change mitigation decisions depend on the interplay
of inertia and uncertainty, resulting in a sequential decision-making process. Foresight and
early adaptation will be most advantageous in sectors with long-lived infrastructure, such
as dams and bridges, and large social inertia, such as misallocated property rights.
Anticipatory adaptive action can be very cost-effective if the anticipated trend materializes.

96

5.21

The existence of time lags, inertia, and irreversibility in the Earth system
means that a mitigation action or technology development can have different
outcomes, depending on when it is taken. For example, in one model analysis of
the hypothetical effect of reducing anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions to zero in the
year 1995, on sea-level rise during the 21st century in the Pacific, showed that the sea-level
rise that would inevitably occur due to warming incurred to 1995 (5 to 12 cm) would be
substantially less than if the same emission reduction occurred in the year 2020 (14 to 32
cm). This demonstrates the increasing commitment to future sea-level rise due to past and
present emissions, and the effect of delaying the hypothetical emissions reduction.

WGII TAR Sections 2.7.1
& 17.2.1

5.22

Technological inertia in less developed countries can be reduced through
"leapfrogging" (i.e., adopting anticipative strategies to avoid the problems
faced today by industrial societies). It cannot be assumed that developing countries
will automatically follow the past development paths of industrialized countries. For
example, some developing countries have bypassed land-lines for communication, and
proceeded directly to mobile phones. Developing countries could avoid the past energyinefficient practices of developed countries by adopting technologies that use energy in a
more sustainable way, recycling more wastes and products, and handling residual wastes in
a more acceptable manner. This may be easier to achieve in new infrastructure and energy
systems in developing countries since large investments are needed in any case. Transfer
of technology between countries and regions can reduce technological inertia.

WGII TAR Chapter 2,
WGIII TAR Section 10.3.3,
SRES Section 3.3.4.8, &
SRTT SPM

5.23

Inertia and uncertainty in the climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems
imply that safety margins should be considered in setting strategies, targets,
and time tables for avoiding dangerous levels of interference in the climate
system. Stabilization target levels of, for instance, atmospheric CO2 concentration,
temperature, or sea level may be affected by:
* The inertia of the climate system, which will cause climate change to continue for a
period after mitigation actions are implemented
* Uncertainty regarding the location of possible thresholds of irreversible change and the
behavior of the system in their vicinity
* The time lags between adoption of mitigation goals and their achievement.
Similarly, adaptation is affected by time lags involved in identifying climate change impacts,
developing effective adaptation strategies, and implementing adaptive measures. Hedging
strategies and sequential decision making (iterative action, assessment, and revised action)
may be appropriate responses to the combination of inertia and uncertainty. Inertia has
different consequences for adaptation than for mitigation, with adaptation being primarily
oriented to address localized impacts of climate change, while mitigation aims to address
the impacts on the climate system. Both issues involve time lags and inertia, with inertia
suggesting a generally greater sense of urgency for mitigation.

WGII TAR Section 2.7.1 &
WGIII TAR Sections
10.1.4.1-3

5.24

The pervasiveness of inertia and the possibility of irreversibility in the interacting
climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems are major reasons why
anticipatory adaptation and mitigation actions are beneficial. A number of
opportunities to exercise adaptation and mitigation options may be lost if action is delayed.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Question 6
a)

How does the extent and timing of the introduction of a range of
emissions reduction actions determine and affect the rate, magnitude,
and impacts of climate change, and affect the global and regional
economy, taking into account the historical and current emissions?

b)

What is known from sensitivity studies about regional and global
climatic, environmental, and socio-economic consequences of stabilizing
the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (in carbon
dioxide equivalents), at a range of levels from today's to double that
level or more, taking into account to the extent possible the effects of
aerosols? For each stabilization scenario, including different pathways
to stabilization, evaluate the range of costs and benefits, relative to
the range of scenarios considered in Question 3, in terms of:
* Projected changes in atmospheric concentrations, climate, and
sea level, including changes beyond 100 years
* Impacts and economic costs and benefits of changes in climate
and atmospheric composition on human health, diversity and
productivity of ecological systems, and socio-economic sectors
(particularly agriculture and water)
* The range of options for adaptation, including the costs, benefits,
and challenges
* The range of technologies, policies, and practices that could be
used to achieve each of the stabilization levels, with an evaluation
of the national and global costs and benefits, and an assessment
of how these costs and benefits would compare, either qualitatively
or quantitatively, to the avoided environmental harm that would
be achieved by the emissions reductions
* Development, sustainability, and equity issues associated with
impacts, adaptation, and mitigation at a regional and global level.

Q6

Climate Change 2001

6.1

The climatic, environmental, and socio-economic consequences of greenhouse gas emissions
were assessed in Question 3 for scenarios that do not include any climate policy interventions.
These same issues are addressed here in Question 6, but this time to assess the benefits that
would result from a set of climate policy interventions. Among the emission reduction
scenarios considered are scenarios that would achieve stabilization of CO2 concentrations
in the atmosphere. The role of adaptation as a complement to mitigation and the potential
contributions of reducing emissions to the goals of sustainable development and equity are
evaluated. The policies and technologies that might be used to implement the emission
reductions and their costs are considered in Question 7.

6.2

The projected rate and magnitude of warming and sea-level rise
can be lessened by reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

6.3

The greater the reductions in emissions and the earlier they are introduced,
the smaller and slower the projected warming and rise in sea levels. Future
climate change is determined by historic, current, and future emissions. Estimates have
been made of the global mean temperature and sea-level rise effects of a 2% per year
reduction in CO2 emissions by developed countries over the period 2000 to 2100, assuming
that developing countries do not reduce their emissions.6 Under these assumptions, global
emissions and the atmospheric concentration of CO2 grow throughout the century but at a
diminished rate compared to scenarios that assume no actions to reduce developed country
emissions. The effects of the emission limit accrue slowly but build with time. By the year
2030, the projected concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is reduced roughly 20% relative
to the IS92a scenario of unabated emissions, which diminishes warming and sea-level rise
by a small amount within this time frame. By the year 2100, the projected CO2 concentration
is reduced by 35% relative to the IS92a scenario, projected global mean warming reduced
by 25%, and projected sea-level rise reduced by 20%. Analyses of CO2 emission reductions
of 1% per year by developed countries indicate that the lesser reductions would yield
smaller reductions in CO2 concentration, temperature change, and sea-level rise. Actions
such as these taken now would have a greater effect at the year 2100 than the same emissions
reductions implemented at a later time.

IPCC TP4

6.4

Reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and the gases that control their
concentration would be necessary to stabilize radiative forcing. For example,
for the most important anthropogenic greenhouse gas, carbon cycle models indicate that
stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations at 450, 650, or 1,000 ppm would require
global anthropogenic CO2 emissions to drop below year 1990 levels within a few decades,
about a century, or about 2 centuries, respectively, and continue to decrease steadily thereafter
(see Figure 6-1). These models illustrate that emissions would peak in about 1 to 2 decades
(450 ppm) and roughly a century (1,000 ppm) from the present (see Table 6-1). Eventually
CO2 emissions would need to decline to a very small fraction of current emissions. The
benefits of different stabilization levels are discussed later in Question 6 and the costs of
these stabilization levels are discussed in Question 7.

WGI TAR Section 3.7.3

6.5

There is a wide band of uncertainty in the amount of warming that would result
from any stabilized greenhouse gas concentration. Estimates of global mean
temperature change for scenarios that would stabilize the concentration of CO2 at different
levels, and hold them constant thereafter, are presented in Figure 6-1c. The uncertainty about
climate sensitivity yields a wide range of estimates of temperature change that would result

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3

6

98

Synthesis Report

In these analyses, emissions by developed countries of CH4, N2O, and SO2 are kept constant at their year 1990
values, and halocarbons follow a scenario consistent with the Copenhagen version of the Montreal Protocol.
Developing country emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases are assumed to follow the IS92 scenario
projections. The temperature projections were made with a simple climate model. The IS92 scenarios are described
in the IPCC Special Report on Radiative Forcing of Climate Change.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 6

Emissions, concentrations, and temperature changes corresponding
to different stabilization levels for CO2 concentrations
(a) CO2 emissions (Gt C)

(b) CO2 concentration (ppm)

A2

20

1,100

18

1,000

16

900

14

A1B

12
10

700

8

600

6

2050

2100

B1

400

2
0
2000

A1B

500

B1

4

A2

800

2150

2200

2250

2300

300
2000

2050

2100

2150

2200

2250

2300

(c) Global mean temperature change (C)
7
6

WRE profiles

5

WRE 1000

4

WRE 750
WRE 650

A2
A1B

3

WRE 550
WRE 450

B1

2

S profiles

1
0
2000

SRES scenarios
2050

2100

2150

2200

2250

2300

Figure 6-1: Stabilizing CO2 concentrations would require substantial reductions of emissions below
WGI TAR Sections 3.7.3 &
9.3.3, & IPCC TP3
current levels and would slow the rate of warming.
a)
CO2 emissions: The time paths of CO2 emissions that would lead to stabilization of the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere at 450,
550, 650, 750, and 1,000 ppm are estimated for the WRE stabilization profiles using carbon cycle models. Lower CO2 concentration
levels would require an earlier reversal of emissions growth and earlier decreases to levels below current emissions. The shaded area
illustrates the range of uncertainty in estimating CO2 emissions corresponding to specified concentration time paths, as represented in
carbon cycle models. Also shown for comparison are CO2 emissions for three of the SRES scenarios (A1B, A2, and B1), which do not
include greenhouse gas emission limits.
b)
CO2 concentrations: The CO2 concentrations specified for the WRE profiles gradually approach stabilized levels that range from 450
to 1,000 ppm. Also shown for comparison are estimates of CO2 concentrations that would result from three of the SRES projections of
emissions (A1B, A2, and B1).
c)
Global mean temperature changes: Global mean temperature changes are estimated for the WRE stabilization profiles using a simple
climate model tuned in turn to each of several more complex models. Estimated warming slows as growth in the atmospheric concentration
of CO2 slows and warming continues after the time at which the CO2 concentration is stabilized (indicated by black spots) but at a much
diminished rate. It is assumed that emissions of gases other than CO2 follow the SRES A1B projection until the year 2100 and are constant
thereafter. This scenario was chosen as it is in the middle of the range of the SRES scenarios. The dashed lines show the temperature
changes projected for the S profiles, an alternate set of CO2 stabilization profiles (not shown in panels (a) or (b)). The shaded area
illustrates the effect of a range of climate sensitivity across the five stabilization cases. The colored bars on the righthand side show, for
each WRE profile, the range at the year 2300 due to the different climate model tunings and the diamonds on the righthand side show
the equilibrium (very long-term) warming for each stabilization level using average climate model results. Also shown for comparison
are temperature increases in the year 2100 estimated for the SRES emission scenarios (indicated by red crosses).

99

Climate Change 2001

Table 6-1

Synthesis Report

Projected CO2 concentrations for the SRES emissions scenarios and deduced emissions for the WRE profiles leading to
stabilization of atmospheric CO2.a

CO2 Emissions
(Gt C yr-1)
2050

Accumulated
CO2 Emissions

Year in which Emissions

2100

2001 to 2100 (Gt C) Peak

13.5
4.3
28.2
29.1
4.2
13.3

1,415
985
2,105
1,780
900
1,080

1.0-3.7
2.7-7.7
4.8-11.7
6.6-14.6
9.1-18.4

365-735
590-1,135
735-1,370
820-1,500
905-1,620

Fall below
1990 Levelsb

Atmospheric
Concentration (ppm)
2050

2100

490-600
465-560
520-640
490-600
455-545
445-530

615-920
505-735
825-1,250
735-1,080
485-680
545-770

445
485
500
505
510

450
540
605
640
675

Year of
Concentration
Stabilization

SRES Emissions Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2

16.4
12.3
23.9
17.4
11.3
11.0

WRE Stabilization Profiles
450
550
650
750
1,000
a

b

3.0-6.9
6.4-12.6
8.1-15.3
8.9-16.4
9.5-17.2

2005-2015
2020-2030
2030-2045
2040-2060
2065-2090

<2000-2045
2030-2100
2055-2145
2080-2180
2135-2270

2090
2150
2200
2250
2375

blue text = prescribed and black text = model results; both fossil-fuel and land-use change emissions are considered. Ranges from two
simple carbon cycle models: ISAM model range is based on complex model results, while BERN-CC model range is based on
uncertainties in system responses and feedbacks. The SRES results can be found in Appendix II.1.1 of the WGI TAR. The exact
timing of the WRE emissions depends on the pathway to stabilization.
1990 emissions are taken to be 7.8 Gt C; this value is uncertain primarily due to the uncertainty in the size of the land-use change
emissions, assumed here to be 1.7 Gt C, the annual average value through the 1980s.

from emissions corresponding to a selected concentration level.7 This is shown more clearly
in Figure 6-2, which shows eventual CO2 concentration stabilization levels and the corresponding
range of temperature change that is estimated to be realized in the year 2100 and at long-run
equilibrium. To estimate temperature changes for these scenarios, it is assumed that emissions
of greenhouse gases other than CO2 would follow the SRES A1B scenario until the year
2100 and that emissions of these gases would be constant thereafter. Different assumptions
about emissions of other greenhouse gases would result in different estimates of warming
for each CO2 stabilization level.
6.6

7

100

Emission reductions that would eventually stabilize the atmospheric concentration
of CO2 at a level below 1,000 ppm, based on profiles shown in Figure 6-1, and
assuming that emissions of gases other than CO2 follow the SRES A1B
projection until the year 2100 and are constant thereafter, are estimated to
limit global mean temperature increase to 3.5oC or less through the year 2100.
Global average surface temperature is estimated to increase 1.2 to 3.5C by the year 2100
for profiles that would limit CO2 emissions so as to eventually stabilize the concentration
of CO2 at a level from 450 to 1,000 ppm. Thus, although all of the CO2 concentration
stabilization profiles analyzed would prevent, during the 21st century, much of the upper
end of the SRES projections of warming (1.4 to 5.8C by the year 2100), it should be noted
that for most of the profiles the concentration of CO2 would continue to rise beyond the
year 2100. Owing to the large inertia of the ocean (see Question 5), temperatures are
projected to continue to rise even after stabilization of CO2 and other greenhouse gas
concentrations, though at a rate that is slower than is projected for the period prior to
stabilization and that diminishes with time. The equilibrium temperature rise would take
many centuries to reach, and ranges from 1.5 to 3.9C above the year 1990 levels for

The equilibrium global mean temperature response to doubling atmospheric CO2 is often used as a measure of
climate sensitivity. The temperatures shown in Figures 6-1 and 6-2 are derived from a simple model calibrated to
give the same response as a number of complex models that have climate sensitivities ranging from 1.7 to 4.2C.
This range is comparable to the commonly accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5C.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3 &
WGI TAR Table 9.3

Synthesis Report

Question 6

There is a wide band of uncertainty in the amount
of warming that would result from any
stabilized concentration of greenhouse gases
Temperature change relative to 1990 (C)
10

9
8

7

Temperature
change at
equilibrium

6

5
4

3

Temperature
change
in year 2100

2

1

0
450

550

650
750
850
Eventual CO2 stabilization level (ppm)

950 1,000

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3

Figure 6-2: Temperature changes relative to 1990
in (a) year 2100 and (b) at equilibrium are estimated
using a simple climate model for the WRE profiles
as in Figure 6-1. The lowest and highest estimates for
each stabilization level assume a climate sensitivity of
1.7 and 4.2C, respectively. The center line is an
average of the low and high estimates.

stabilization at 450 ppm and 3.5 to 8.7C above the year 1990 levels for stabilization at
1,000 ppm.8 Furthermore, for a specific temperature stabilization target, there is a very
wide range of uncertainty associated with the required stabilization level of greenhouse
gas concentration (see Figure 6-2). The level at which CO2 concentration is required to be
stabilized for a given temperature target also depends on the levels of the non-CO2 gases.
Results from the only comprehensive climate model that has been used to analyze the
regional effects of stabilizing CO2 concentrations project that regionally averaged
temperature changes would be similar in geographic pattern but less in magnitude than
those projected for a baseline scenario with a 1% per year increase in CO2 emissions from
the year 1990.9
6.7

Different time paths of emissions that lead to a common level for stabilization
of the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases yield different time
paths of temperature change. For CO2 stabilization levels of 450, 550, 650, and 750
ppm, two sets of emission time paths have been analyzed in previous IPCC reports and are

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3.1

8

For all these scenarios, the contribution to the equilibrium warming from other greenhouse gases and aerosols is
0.6C for a low climate sensitivity and 1.4C for a high climate sensitivity. The accompanying increase in radiative
forcing is equivalent to that occurring with an additional 28% in the final CO2 concentrations.
9
This rate of emission growth closely approximates the IS92a emission scenario.

101

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

referred to as the S and WRE profiles.10 The WRE profiles allow higher emissions in early
decades than do the S profiles, but then must require lower emissions in later decades to
achieve a specified stabilization level. This deferment of emission reductions in the WRE
profiles is estimated to reduce mitigation costs (see Question 7) but would result in a more
rapid rate of warming initially. The difference in temperature projections for the two sets of
pathways is 0.2oC or less in the year 2050, when the difference is most pronounced. Beyond
the year 2100, the temperature changes of the WRE and S profiles converge. The temperature
projections for the S and WRE profiles are compared in Figure 6-1c.
6.8

Sea level and ice sheets would continue to respond to warming for many centuries
after greenhouse gas concentrations have been stabilized (see Question 5).
The projected range of sea-level rise due to thermal expansion at equilibrium is 0.5 to 2 m
for an increase in CO2 concentration from the pre-industrial level of 280 to 560 ppm and 1
to 4 m for an increase in CO2 concentration from 280 to 1,120 ppm. The observed rise over
the 20th century was 0.1 to 0.2 m. The projected rise would be larger if the effect of increases
in other greenhouse gas concentrations were to be taken into account. There are other contributions
to sea-level rise over time scales of centuries to millennia (see Question 5). Models assessed
in the TAR project sea-level rise of several meters from polar ice sheets (see Question 4)
and land ice even for stabilization levels of 550 ppm CO2-equivalent.

6.9

Reducing emissions of greenhouse gases to stabilize their
atmospheric concentrations would delay and reduce damages
caused by climate change.

6.10

Greenhouse gas emission reduction (mitigation) actions would lessen the
pressures on natural and human systems from climate change. Slower rates of
increase in global mean temperature and sea level would allow more time for adaptation.
Consequently, mitigation actions are expected to delay and reduce damages caused by
climate change and thereby generate environmental and socio-economic benefits. Mitigation
actions and their associated costs are assessed in the response to Question 7.

WGII TAR Sections 1.4.3,
18.8, & 19.5

6.11

Mitigation actions to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases at lower levels would generate greater benefits in terms of less damage.
Stabilization at lower levels reduces the risk of exceeding temperature thresholds in
biophysical systems where these exist. Stabilization of CO2 at, for example, 450 ppm is
estimated to yield an increase in global mean temperature in the year 2100 that is about
0.75 to 1.25oC less than is estimated for stabilization at 1,000 ppm (see Figure 6-2). At
equilibrium the difference is about 2 to 5oC. The geographical extent of the damage to or
loss of natural systems, and the number of systems affected, which increase with the
magnitude and rate of climate change, would be lower for a lower stabilization level.
Similarly, for a lower stabilization level the severity of impacts from climate extremes is
expected to be less, fewer regions would suffer adverse net market sector impacts, global
aggregate impacts would be smaller, and risks of large-scale high-impact events would be
reduced. Figure 6-3 presents a summary of climate change risks or reasons for concern
(see Box 3-2) juxtaposed against the ranges of global mean temperature change in the year
2100 that have been estimated for different scenarios.11

WGI TAR Section 9.3.3 &
WGII TAR Sections 1.4.3.5,
5.2, 5.4, & 19.3-6

6.12

Comprehensive, quantitative estimates of the benefits of stabilization at various
levels of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases do not yet exist.

WGII TAR Sections 19.4-5

10
11

102

The S and WRE profiles are discussed in the WGI SAR and are described in more detail in IPCC Technical Paper 3.
Climate change impacts will vary by region and sector or system, and the impacts will be influenced by regional
and seasonal changes in mean temperature and precipitation, climate variability, the frequencies and intensities
of extreme climate events, and sea-level rise. Global mean temperature change is used as a summary measure of
the pressures exerted by climate change.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR SPM & WGI TAR
Section 11.5.4

Synthesis Report

Question 6

Risks of climate change damages would be reduced by stabilizing CO2 concentrations
Global mean
temperature change

Ranges of global mean temperature
change in 2100 estimated
for different scenarios (C)

Reasons for Concern

6 SRES

6
5

Risks to
many

Large
increase

Negative
for most
regions

Net negative
in all metrics

Higher

4

4

3
2
1

Risks to
some

Increase

Negative
for some
regions

Positive or
negative
market
impacts;
majority of
people
adversely
affected

3

Very low

II

III

IV

750
650

550
450

1
0

I

1000

2

0
-1

5

V

WRE Stabilization
Scenarios

-1

I. Unique and Threatened Systems
Extinction of species.
Loss of unique habitats, coastal wetlands.
Bleaching and death of coral.

II. Extreme Climate Events
Health, property, and environmental impacts from increased frequency and intensity of some climate extremes.

III. Distribution of Impacts
Cereal crop yield changes that vary from increases to decreases across regions but which are estimated to decrease in most tropical
and subtropical regions.
Decrease in water availability in some water-stressed countries, increase in others.
Greater risks to health in developing countries than in developed countries.
Net market sector losses estimated for many developing countries; mixed effects estimated for developed countries up to a few degrees warming
and negative effects for greater warming.

IV. Global Aggregate Impacts
Estimates of globally aggregated net market sector impacts are positive and negative up to a few degrees warming and negative for greater warming.
More people adversely affected than beneficially affected even for warming less than a few degrees.

V. Large-Scale, High-Impact Events
Significant slowing of thermohaline circulation possible by 2100.
Melting and collapse of ice sheets adding substantially to sea-level rise (very low likelihood before 2100; likelihood higher on multi-century time scale).

Figure 6-3: Risks of climate change damages would be reduced by stabilizing CO2 concentration. The
WGI TAR Section 9.3.3 &
WGII TAR Section 19.8.2
risks of adverse impacts from climate change are depicted for different magnitudes of global mean temperature
change, where global mean temperature change is used as a proxy for the magnitude of climate change.
Estimates of global mean temperature change by the year 2100 relative to the year 1990 are shown on the righthand side of the figure for
scenarios that would lead to stabilization of the atmospheric concentration of CO2, as well as for the full set of SRES projections. Many risks
associated with warming above 3.5oC by the year 2100 would be avoided by stabilizing CO2 concentration at or below 1,000 ppm. Stabilization
at a lower level would reduce risks further. White indicates neutral or small negative or small positive impacts or risks; yellow indicates negative
impacts for some systems or low risks; and red means negative impacts or risks that are more widespread and/or greater in magnitude. The
assessment of impacts or risks takes into account only the magnitude of change and not the rate of change. Global mean annual temperature
change is used as a proxy for the magnitude of climate change, but impacts would be a function of, among other factors, the magnitude and rate
of global and regional changes in mean climate, climate variability and extreme climate phenomena, social and economic conditions, and
adaptation.

103

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

While advances have been made in understanding the qualitative character of the impacts
of future climate change, the impacts that would result under different scenarios are
incompletely quantified. Because of uncertainty in climate sensitivity, and uncertainty about
the geographic and seasonal patterns of changes in temperatures, precipitation, and other
climate variables and phenomena, the impacts of climate change cannot be uniquely
determined for individual emission scenarios. There are also uncertainties about key
processes and sensitivities and adaptive capacities of systems to changes in climate. In
addition, impacts such as changes in the composition and function of ecological systems,
species extinction, and changes in human health, and disparity in the distribution of impacts
across different populations and regions, are not readily expressed in monetary or other
common units. Because of these limitations, the benefits of different greenhouse gas
reduction actions, including actions to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations at selected
levels, are incompletely characterized and cannot be compared directly to mitigation costs
for the purpose of estimating the net economic effects of mitigation.
6.13

Adaptation is a necessary strategy at all scales to complement
climate change mitigation efforts. Together they can contribute
to sustainable development objectives.

6.14

Adaptation can complement mitigation in a cost-effective strategy to reduce
climate change risks. Reductions of greenhouse gas emissions, even stabilization of
their concentrations in the atmosphere at a low level, will neither altogether prevent climate
change or sea-level rise nor altogether prevent their impacts. Many reactive adaptations
will occur in response to the changing climate and rising seas and some have already occurred.
In addition, the development of planned adaptation strategies to address risks and utilize
opportunities can complement mitigation actions to lessen climate change impacts. However,
adaptation would entail costs and cannot prevent all damages. Adaptation implemented in
combination with mitigation can be a more cost-effective approach to reducing the impacts
of climate change than either applied alone. The potential for adaptation to substantially
reduce many of the adverse impacts of climate change was assessed in Question 3. Because
there are overlapping ranges of global temperature increases associated with the various
stabilization levels (see Figure 6-1c), many adaptation options will be appropriate for a
range of stabilization levels. Improved knowledge will narrow the uncertainties associated
with particular stabilization levels and identification of appropriate adaptation strategies.

WGII TAR Sections 1.4.4.2,
18.3.5, & 18.4.1

6.15

Adaptation costs and challenges can be lessened by mitigation of climate
change. Greenhouse gas emission reductions would reduce the magnitude and rate of
changes to be adapted to, possibly including changes in the frequencies and intensities of
extreme events. The smaller changes to which systems would be exposed, and slower pace
at which stresses would increase, would allow more time for adaptation and lessen the
degree to which current practices for coping with climate variability and extremes might
need to be modified (see Question 3). More aggressive mitigation efforts will therefore
reduce adaptation costs to attain a specified level of effectiveness.

WGII TAR Sections 18.2.2,
18.3, & 18.8

6.16

Mitigation and adaptation actions can, if appropriately designed, advance
sustainable development objectives. As described in Question 3, risks associated
with climate change have the potential to undermine progress toward sustainable development
(e.g., damages from extreme climate events, water shortage and degraded water quality,
food supply disruptions and hunger, land degradation, and diminished human health). By
reducing these risks, climate change mitigation and adaptation policies can improve the
prospects for sustainable development.12

WGII TAR Section 18.6.1, &
WGIII TAR Sections 2.2.3 &
10.3.2

12

104

The relationships between mitigation actions themselves and sustainable development and equity are addressed in
Question 7. The relationships among adaptation, sustainable development, and equity are covered in Question 3.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 6

6.17

The impact of climate change is projected to have different effects within
and between countries. The challenge of addressing climate change raises
an important issue of equity. Climate change pressures can exacerbate inequities
between developing and developed countries; lessening these pressures through mitigation
and enhancement of adaptive capacity can reduce these inequities. People in developing
countries, particularly the poorest people in these countries, are considered to be more
vulnerable to climate change than people in developed countries (see Question 3). Reducing
the rate of warming and sea-level rise and increasing the capacity to adapt to climate change
would benefit all countries, particularly developing countries.

WGII TAR Sections 18.5.3
& 19.4

6.18

Reducing and slowing climate change can also promote inter-generational
equity. Emissions of the present generation will affect many future generations because of
inertia in the atmosphere-ocean-climate system and the long-lived and sometimes irreversible
effects of climate change on the environment. Future generations are generally anticipated
to be wealthier, better educated and informed, and technologically more advanced than the
present generation and consequently better able to adapt in many respects. But the changes
set in motion in coming decades will accumulate and some could reach magnitudes that
would severely test the abilities of many societies to cope. For irreversible impacts, such as
the extinction of species or loss of unique ecosystems, there are no adaptation responses
that can fully remedy the losses. Mitigating climate change would lessen the risks to future
generations from the actions of the present generation.

WGII TAR Sections 1.2 &
18.5.2, & WGIII TAR
Section 10.4.3

105

Question 7
What is known about the potential for, and costs and benefits of, and time
frame for reducing greenhouse gas emissions?
* What would be the economic and social costs and benefits and equity
implications of options for policies and measures, and the mechanisms
of the Kyoto Protocol, that might be considered to address climate
change regionally and globally?
* What portfolios of options of research and development, investments,
and other policies might be considered that would be most effective to
enhance the development and deployment of technologies that address
climate change?
* What kind of economic and other policy options might be considered to
remove existing and potential barriers and to stimulate private- and
public-sector technology transfer and deployment among countries, and
what effect might these have on projected emissions?
* How does the timing of the options contained in the above affect
associated economic costs and benefits, and the atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases over the next century and beyond?

Q7

Climate Change 2001

7.1

Synthesis Report

This question focuses on the potential for, and costs of, mitigation both in the near and long
term. The issue of the primary mitigation benefits (the avoided costs and damages of slowing
climate change) is addressed in Questions 5 and 6, and that of ancillary mitigation benefits
is addressed in this response and the one to Question 8. This response describes a variety
of factors that contribute to significant differences and uncertainties in the quantitative estimates
of the costs of mitigation options. The SAR described two categories of approaches to estimating
costs: bottom-up approaches, which often assess near-term cost and potential, and are built
up from assessments of specific technologies and sectors; and top-down approaches, which
proceed from macro-economic relationships. These two approaches lead to differences in
the estimates of costs, which have been narrowed since the SAR. The response below
reports on cost estimates from both approaches for the near term, and from the top-down
approach for the long term. Mitigation options and their potential to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and sequester carbon are discussed first. This is followed by a discussion of the
costs for achieving emissions reductions to meet near-term emissions constraints, and longterm stabilization goals, and the timing of reductions to achieve such goals. This response
concludes with a discussion of equity as it relates to climate change mitigation.

Potential, Barriers, Opportunities, Policies, and Costs of Reducing
Greenhouse Gas Emissions in the Near Term
7.2

Significant technological and biological potential exists for nearterm mitigation.

7.3

Significant technical progress relevant to greenhouse gas emissions reduction
has been made since the SAR, and has been faster than anticipated. Advances
are taking place in a wide range of technologies at different stages of development--for
example, the market introduction of wind turbines; the rapid elimination of industrial by-product
gases, such as N2O from adipic acid production and perfluorocarbons from aluminum production;
efficient hybrid engine cars; the advancement of fuel cell technology; and the demonstration
of underground CO2 storage. Technological options for emissions reduction include improved
efficiency of end-use devices and energy conversion technologies, shift to zero- and low-carbon
energy technologies, improved energy management, reduction of industrial by-product and
process gas emissions, and carbon removal and storage. Table 7-1 summarizes the results
from many sectoral studies, largely at the project, national, and regional level with some at
the global level, providing estimates of potential greenhouse gas emissions reductions to
the 2010 and 2020 time frame.

WGIII TAR Sections 3.3-8,
& WGIII TAR Chapter 3
Appendix

7.4

Forests, agricultural lands, and other terrestrial ecosystems offer significant
carbon mitigation potential. Conservation and sequestration of carbon, although
not necessarily permanent, may allow time for other options to be further
developed and implemented (see Table 7-2). Biological mitigation can occur by three
strategies: a) conservation of existing carbon pools, b) sequestration by increasing the size
of carbon pools,13 and c) substitution of sustainably produced biological products (e.g.,
wood for energy-intensive construction products and biomass for fossil fuels). Conservation
of threatened carbon pools may help to avoid emissions, if leakage can be prevented, and
can only become sustainable if the socio-economic drivers for deforestation and other
losses of carbon pools can be addressed. Sequestration reflects the biological dynamics of
growth, often starting slowly, passing through a maximum, and then declining over decades
to centuries. The potential of biological mitigation options is on the order of 100 Gt C
(cumulative) by the year 2050, equivalent to about 10 to 20% of projected fossil-fuel
emissions during that period, although there are substantial uncertainties associated with

WGIII TAR Sections 3.6.4
& 4.2-4, & SRLULUCF

13

108

Changing land use could influence atmospheric CO2 concentration. Hypothetically, if all of the carbon released
by historical land-use changes could be restored to the terrestrial biosphere over the course of the century (e.g.,
by reforestation), CO2 concentration would be reduced by 40 to 70 ppm.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Table 7-1

Question 7

Estimates of potential global greenhouse gas emission reductions in 2010 and in 2020 (WGIII SPM Table SPM-1).

Sector

Historic
Emissions
in 1990
[Mt Ceq yr-1]

Historic Ceq
Annual Growth
Rate over
1990-1995 [%]

Potential Emission Potential Emission
Reductions in 2010 Reductions in 2020 Net Direct Costs per Tonne of
[Mt Ceq yr-1]
[Mt Ceq yr-1]
Carbon Avoided

Buildingsa
CO2 only

1,650

1.0

700-750

1,000-1,100

Transport
CO2 only

1,080

2.4

100-300

300-700

Industry
CO2 only
- Energy efficiency

2,300

0.4
300-500

700-900

~200

~600

More than half available at net
negative direct costs.
Costs are uncertain.

~100

~100

N2O emissions reduction costs are
US$0-10 per t Ceq.

- Material efficiency
Industry
Non-CO2 gases

170

Agricultureb
CO2 only
Non-CO2 gases

210
1,250-2,800

n/a

150-300

350-750

Wasteb
CH4 only

240

1.0

~200

~200

Montreal Protocol
replacement
applications
Non-CO2 gases

0

Energy supply and
conversionc
CO2 only

(1,620)

Total

6,900-8,400d

a
b
c
d

e

n/a

1.5

~100

n/a

50-150

350-700

1,900-2,600e

3,600-5,050e

Most reductions are available at
negative net direct costs.
Most studies indicate net direct
costs less than US$25 per t C but
two suggest net direct costs will
exceed US$50 per t C.

Most reductions will cost between
US$0-100 per t Ceq with limited
opportunities for negative net
direct cost options.
About 75% of the savings as CH4
recovery from landfills at net
negative direct cost; 25% at a cost
of US$20 per t Ceq.
About half of reductions due to
difference in study baseline and
SRES baseline values. Remaining
half of the reductions available at net
direct costs below US$200 per t Ceq.
Limited net negative direct cost
options exist; many options are
available for less than US$100
per t Ceq.

Buildings include appliances, buildings, and the building shell.
The range for agriculture is mainly caused by large uncertainties about CH4, N2O, and soil-related emissions of CO2. Waste is
dominated by methane landfill and the other sectors could be estimated with more precision as they are dominated by fossil CO2.
Included in sector values above. Reductions include electricity generation options only (fuel switching to gas/nuclear, CO2 capture
and storage, improved power station efficiencies, and renewables).
Total includes all sectors reviewed in WGIII TAR Chapter 3 for all six gases. It excludes non-energy related sources of CO2 (cement
production, 160 Mt C; gas flaring, 60 Mt C; and land-use change, 600-1,400 Mt C) and energy used for conversion of fuels in the
end-use sector totals (630 Mt C). If petroleum refining and coke oven gas were added, global year 1990 CO2 emissions of 7,100 Mt C
would increase by 12%. Note that forestry emissions and their carbon sink mitigation options are not included.
The baseline SRES scenarios (for six gases included in the Kyoto Protocol) project a range of emissions of 11,500-14,000 Mt Ceq for
the year 2010 and of 12,000-16,000 Mt Ceq for the year 2020. The emissions reduction estimates are most compatible with baseline
emissions trends in the SRES B2 scenario. The potential reductions take into account regular turnover of capital stock. They are not
limited to cost-effective options, but exclude options with costs above US$100 t Ceq (except for Montreal Protocol gases) or options
that will not be adopted through the use of generally accepted policies.

this estimate. Realization of this potential depends upon land and water availability as well
as the rates of adoption of land management practices. The largest biological potential for
atmospheric carbon mitigation is in subtropical and tropical regions.
7.5

Adoption of opportunities including greenhouse gas-reducing
technologies and measures may require overcoming barriers
through the implementation of policy measures.
109

Climate Change 2001

Table 7-2

Synthesis Report

Estimates of potential global greenhouse gas emission reductions in the year 2010: land use, land-use change, and forestry.

Potential Emission
Reductions in 2010 Potential Emission
Categories of Mitigation Options [Mt C yr-1]
Reductions [Mt C]
Afforestation/reforestation (AR)a

197-584

Reducing deforestation (D)b
570

Land-use change (LC)c

435

Total

1,202-1,589

b
c

110

1,788

Improved management within a
land use (IM)c

a

Includes carbon in above- and below-ground biomass.
Excludes carbon in soils and in dead organic matter.
Potential for reducing deforestation is very uncertain for
the tropics and could be in error by as much as 50%.
Assumed to be the best available suite of management
practices for each land use and climatic zone.

1,788

Source: SRLULUCF Table SPM-3. Based on IPCC definitional scenario. Information is not available for other definitional scenarios.
Potential refers to the estimated range of accounted average stock change for the period 2008-2012 (Mt C yr-1).
Source: SRLULUCF Table SPM-3. Based on IPCC definitional scenario. Information is not available for other definitional
scenarios. Potential refers to the estimated average stock change (Mt C).
Source: SRLULUCF Table SPM-4. Potential refers to the estimated net change in carbon stocks in the year 2010 (Mt C yr-1). The list
of activities is not exclusive or complete, and it is unlikely that all countries will apply all activities. Some of these estimates reflect
considerable uncertainty.

7.6

The successful implementation of greenhouse gas mitigation options
would need to overcome technical, economic, political, cultural, social,
behavioral, and/or institutional barriers that prevent the full exploitation of
the technological, economic, and social opportunities of these mitigation
options (see Figure 7-1). The potential mitigation opportunities and types of barriers
vary by region and sector, and over time. Most countries could benefit from innovative
financing, social learning and innovation, and institutional reforms, removing barriers to
trade, and poverty eradication. This is caused by a wide variation in mitigation capacity.
The poor in any country are faced with limited opportunities to adopt technologies or
change their social behavior, particularly if they are not part of a cash economy. Most
countries could benefit from innovative financing and institutional reform and removing
barriers to trade. In the industrialized countries, future opportunities lie primarily in removing
social and behavioral barriers; in countries with economies in transition, in price
rationalization; and in developing countries, in price rationalization, increased access to
data and information, availability of advanced technologies, financial resources, and training
and capacity building. Opportunities for any given country, however, might be found in the
removal of any combination of barriers.

WGIII TAR Sections 1.5 &
5.3-5

7.7

National responses to climate change can be more effective if deployed as a
portfolio of policy instruments to limit or reduce net greenhouse gas emissions.
The portfolio of national climate policy instruments may include--according to national
circumstances--emissions/carbon/energy taxes, tradable or non-tradable permits, provision
and/or removal of subsidies, land-use policies, deposit/refund systems, technology or
performance standards, energy mix requirements, product bans, voluntary agreements,
information campaigns, environmental labeling, government spending and investment, and
support for research and development (R&D). The literature in general gives no preference
for any particular policy instrument.

WGIII TAR Sections 1.5.3,
5.3-4, & 6.2

7.8

Coordinated actions among countries and sectors may help to reduce
mitigation cost by addressing competitiveness concerns, potential conflicts
with international trade rules, and carbon leakage. A group of countries that
wants to limit its collective greenhouse gas emissions could agree to implement
well-designed international instruments. Instruments assessed in the WGIII TAR,
and being developed in the Kyoto Protocol, are emissions trading, Joint Implementation

WGIII TAR Sections 6.3-4
& 10.2

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 7

Concepts of mitigation potentials
Mitigation potential

EXAMPLES OF BARRIERS

Physical potential:

EXAMPLES OF ACTIONS
TO OVERCOME BARRIERS

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT
DEMONSTRATION OF
NEW TECHNOLOGIES

Theoretical upper bound, may shift over time

NETWORK CREATION
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
IN POLICY MAKING
ALTERNATIVE LIFESTYLES

Technological potential: Approached by
implementing technology that has
already been demonstrated

LIMITED AVAILABILITY
AND KNOWLEDGE
ABOUT NEW
TECHNOLOGIES

EDUCATION
POLICY INITIATIVES
INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

SOCIAL NORMS

SUBSIDY REFORM

INDIVIDUAL HABITS

Socio-economic potential: Approached by
adoption of changes in behavior, lifestyles,
social structure, and institutions

ATTITUDES

MICRO-CREDIT

VALUES
VESTED INTERESTS

RURAL ELECTRIFICATION
COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS
NEW MEASURES
(TAXES, INCENTIVES)

LACK OF COMPETITION
TRADE BARRIERS

Economic potential: Approached by

creation of markets, reduction of market failures, and
increased financial and technology transfers

Achieved
potential

Today

MULTI- AND
BILATERAL PROJECTS

UNDEFINED
PROPERTY RIGHTS
INADEQUATE
INFORMATION

Market potential:

Actual use of environmentally sound
technologies and practices

Time

Figure 7-1: Penetration of environmentally sound technologies (including practices): a conceptual
WGIII TAR Section 5.2
framework. Various barriers prevent the different potentials from being realized. Opportunities exist to overcome
barriers through innovative projects, programs, and financing arrangements. An action can address more than one barrier. Actions may be
pursued to address barriers at all levels simultaneously. Their implementation may require public policies, measures, and instruments. The
socio-economic potential may lie anywhere in the space between the economic and technological potential.

111

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

(JI), and the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). Other international instruments also
assessed in the WGIII TAR include coordinated or harmonized emission/carbon/energy
taxes, an emission/carbon/energy tax, technology and product standards, voluntary agreements
with industries, direct transfers of financial resources and technology, and coordinated
creation of enabling environments such as reduction of fossil-fuel subsidies. Some of these
have been considered only in some regions to date.
7.9

Transfer of technologies between countries and regions would
widen the choice of options at the regional level, and economies
of scale and learning will lower the costs of their adoption.

7.10

Adequate human and organizational capacity at every stage can increase the
flow, and improve the quality, of technologies transferred within and across
countries. The transfer of environmentally sound technologies has come to be seen as a
major element of global strategies to achieve sustainable development and climate change
mitigation. The local availability of technical, business, management, and regulatory skills
can enhance the flow of international capital, helping to promote technology transfer. Technical
skills are enhanced by the creation of competence in associated services, organizational
know-how, and capacity improvement to formulate and enforce regulations. Capacity building
is a continuous process that needs to keep up with the evolution of mitigation options as
they respond to technological and social changes.

WGIII TAR Sections 2.4.5
& 10.3.3, & SRTT SPM

7.11

Governments through sound economic policy and regulatory frameworks,
transparency, and political stability can create an enabling environment for
private- and public-sector technology transfers. At the macro-level, actions to
consider include reform of the legal system, protection of intellectual property rights, open
and competitive markets, reduced corruption, discouragement of restrictive business
practices, reform of export credit, political risk insurance, reduction of tied aid, development
of physical and communications infrastructure, and improvement of macro-economic stability.
At the sectoral and project levels, actions include fuel and electricity price rationalization,
energy industry institutional reform, improving land tenure, transparent project approval
procedures, ensuring assessment of local technology needs and social impact of technologies,
cross-country R&D on innovative technologies, and demonstration programs.

WGIII TAR Section 10.3.3
& SRTT SPM

7.12

Networking among private and public stakeholders, and focusing on products
and techniques with multiple ancillary benefits that meet or adapt to local
development needs and priorities foster effective technology transfer. National
systems of innovation (NSI) can help achieve this through activities such as (a) strengthening
educational institutions; (b) collection, assessment, and dissemination of technical,
commercial, financial, and legal information; (c) technology assessment, demonstration
projects, and extension services; (d) supporting market intermediary organizations; and (e)
innovative financial mechanisms. Increasing flows of national and multilateral assistance
can help to mobilize and multiply additional financial resources, including official development
assistance, to support NSI activities.

WGIII TAR Section 10.3.3
& SRTT SPM

7.13

For participating countries, an increasing scale of international
cooperation, such as emissions trading14 and technology transfer,
will lower mitigation costs.

7.14

A large number of studies using both top-down and bottom-up approaches (see Box 7-1 for
definitions) report on the costs of greenhouse gas mitigation. Estimates of the costs of

14

112

This market-based approach to achieve environmental objectives allows those reducing greenhouse gas emissions
below what is required to use or trade the excess reductions to offset emissions at another source inside or outside
the country. Here the term is broadly used to include trade in emission allowances and project-based collaboration.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Box 7-1

Bottom-up and top-down approaches to cost estimates: critical factors and the importance of
uncertainties.

For a variety of reasons, significant differences and uncertainties surround specific quantitative estimates
of mitigation costs. Cost estimates differ because of the (a) methodology used in the analysis, and (b)
underlying factors and assumptions built into the analysis. Bottom-up models incorporate detailed
studies of engineering costs of a wide range of available and anticipated technologies, and describe
energy consumption in great detail. However, they typically incorporate relatively little detail on nonenergy consumer behavior and interactions with other sectors of the economy. The costs estimated by
bottom-up models can range from negative values (due to the adoption of "no-regrets" options) to
positive values. Negative costs indicate that the direct energy benefits of a mitigation option exceed its
direct costs (net capital, operating, and maintenance costs). Market and institutional barriers, however,
can prevent, delay, or make more costly the adoption of these options. Inclusion of implementation and
policy costs would add to the costs estimated by bottom-up models.

Question 7

WGIII TAR Sections 3.3-8,
7.6.3, 8.2-3, & 9.4, &
WGIII TAR Box SPM-2

Top-down models are aggregate models of the economy that often draw on analysis of historical trends
and relationships to predict the large-scale interactions between sectors of the economy, especially the
interactions between the energy sector and the rest of the economy. Top-down models typically
incorporate relatively little detail on energy consumption and technological change. The costs estimated
by top-down models usually range from zero to positive values. This is because negative cost options
estimated in bottom-up models are assumed to be adopted in both the baseline and policy scenarios.
This is an important factor in the differences in the estimates from these two types of models.
The inclusion of some factors will lead to lower cost estimates and others to higher estimates.
Incorporating multiple greenhouse gases, sinks, induced technical change, and emissions trading can
lower costs. Further, studies suggest that some sources of greenhouse gas emissions can be limited at
no or negative net social cost to the extent that policies can exploit no-regret opportunities such as
correcting market imperfections, inclusion of ancillary benefits, and efficient tax revenue recycling.
International cooperation that facilitates cost-effective emissions reductions can lower mitigation costs.
On the other hand, accounting for potential short-term macro shocks to the economy, constraints on the
use of domestic and international market mechanisms, high transaction costs, inclusion of ancillary
costs, and ineffective tax recycling measures can increase estimated costs. Since no analysis
incorporates all relevant factors affecting mitigation costs, estimated costs may not reflect the actual costs
of implementing mitigation actions.

limiting fossil-fuel greenhouse gas emissions vary widely and depend on choice of
methodologies, underlying assumptions, emissions scenarios, policy instruments, reporting
year, and other criteria.
7.15

Bottom-up studies indicate that substantial low-cost mitigation opportunities
exist. According to bottom-up assessments (see Box 7-1) of specific technologies and sectors,
half of the potential emissions reductions noted in Table 7-1 may be achieved by the year
2020 with direct benefits exceeding direct costs, and the other half at a net direct cost of up
to US$100 per t Ceq (at 1998 prices). However, for reasons described below, the realized potential
may be different. These cost estimates are derived using discount rates in the range of 5 to
12%, consistent with public-sector discount rates. Private internal rates of return vary greatly,
and are often significantly higher, affecting the rate of adoption of these technologies by
private entities. Depending on the emissions scenario, this could allow global emissions to be
reduced below year 2000 levels in the period 2010-2020 at these net direct costs. Realizing
these reductions involves additional implementation costs, which in some cases may be
substantial, the possible need for supporting policies, increased R&D, effective technology
transfer, and overcoming other barriers. The various global, regional, national, sector, and project
studies assessed in the WGIII TAR have different scopes and assumptions. Studies do not
exist for every sector and region.

WGIII TAR Sections 1.5,
3.3-8, 5.3-4, & 6.2

7.16

Cost estimates using bottom-up analyses reported to date for biological
mitigation vary significantly and do not consistently account for all significant
components of cost. Cost estimates using bottom-up analyses reported to date for biological
mitigation vary significantly from US$0.1 to about US$20 per t C in several tropical countries
and from US$20 to US$100 per t C in non-tropical countries. Methods of financial analyses
and carbon accounting have not been comparable. Moreover, the cost calculations do not cover,
in many instances, inter alia, costs for infrastructure, appropriate discounting, monitoring,
data collection and implementation costs, opportunity costs of land and maintenance, or

WGIII TAR Sections 4.3-4

113

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

other recurring costs, which are often excluded or overlooked. The lower end of the range
is assessed to be biased downwards, but understanding and treatment of costs is improving
over time. Biological mitigation options may reduce or increase non-CO2 greenhouse gas
emissions.
7.17

Projections of abatement cost of near-term policy options implemented without
Annex B emissions trade for meeting a given near-term CO2 emissions target as
reported by several models15 of the global economy (top-down models) vary
within regions (as shown by the brown lines in Figure 7-2a for Annex II regions
and in Table 7-3a). Reasons for the differentiation among models within regions is due to
varying assumptions about future GDP growth rates and changes in carbon and energy
intensity (different socio-economic development paths). The same reasons also apply to
differences across regions. These models assume that national policy instruments are efficient
and consistent with international policy instruments. That is, they assume that reductions
are made through the use of market mechanisms (e.g., cap and trade) within each region.
To the extent that regions employ a mix of market mechanisms and command and control
policies, costs will likely be higher. On the other hand, inclusion of carbon sinks, non-CO2
greenhouse gases, induced technical change, ancillary benefits, or targeted revenue recycling
could reduce costs.

WGIII TAR Sections 8.2-3

7.18

The models used in the above study show that the Kyoto mechanisms are
important in controlling risks of high costs in given countries, and thus could
complement domestic policy mechanisms, and could minimize risks of
inequitable international impacts. For example, the brown and blue lines in Figure 7-2b
and Table 7-3b show that the national marginal costs to meet the Kyoto targets range from
about US$20 up to US$600 per t C without Annex B trading, and range from about US$15
up to US$150 per t C with Annex B trading, respectively. At the time of these studies, most
models did not include sinks, non-CO2 greenhouse gases, CDM, negative cost options,
ancillary benefits, or targeted revenue recycling, which will reduce estimated costs. On the
other hand, these models make assumptions which underestimate costs because they assume
full use of emissions trading without transaction costs, both within and among Annex B
countries, and that mitigation responses would be perfectly efficient and that economies
begin to adjust to the need to meet Kyoto targets between the years 1990 and 2000. The
cost reductions from Annex B trading will depend on the details of implementation, including
the compatibility of domestic and international mechanisms, constraints, and transaction
costs. The following is indicative of the broad variation in the change in GDP reported for
Annex B countries:
* For Annex II countries, the above modeling studies show reductions in GDP, compared
to projected levels in the year 2010. Figure 7-2 indicates that in the absence of Annex
B trading losses range from 0.2 to 2% of GDP. With Annex B trading, losses range from
0.1 to 1% of GDP. National studies, which explore a more diverse set of policy packages
and take account of specific national circumstances, vary even more widely.
* For most economies in transition, GDP effects range from negligible to a several percent
increase, reflecting opportunities for energy-efficiency improvements not available to Annex
II countries. Under assumptions of drastic energy-efficiency improvement and/or
continuing economic recessions in some countries, the assigned amounts may exceed
projected emissions in the first commitment period. In this case, models show increased
GDP due to revenues from trading assigned amounts. However, for some economies in
transition, implementing the Kyoto Protocol will have similar impact on GDP as for
Annex II countries.

WGIII TAR Sections TS
8.3, 7.3, 8.3, 9.2, & 10.2

15

114

The above-referenced models report results for Energy Modeling Forum scenarios examining the benefits of
emissions trading. For the analyses reported here, these models exclude sinks, multiple gases, ancillary benefits,
macro-economic shocks, and induced technical change, but include lump sum tax revenue recycling. In the
model baseline, additional no-regrets options, which are not listed above, are included.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Question 7

Synthesis Report

Projections of GDP losses and marginal cost in Annex II countries in the year 2010
from global models
(a) GDP losses

Canada

Percentage of GDP loss in the year 2010
2.4

OECD countries
of Europe

United States

Japan

2.2
2.0

2.02

1.96

1.8
1.6

Australia
New
Zealand

1.53

1.50

1.4
1.23

1.2

1.20

1.14

1.0
0.91

0.8
0.6

0.59

0

0.81

0.65

0.64
0.42

0.4

0.52
0.24

0.23

0.2

0.82

0.31

0.45

0.37
0.13

0.19

0.21
0.05

Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand

United States

OECD countries
of Europe

Japan

(b) Marginal cost
1990 US$ per t C
700
665

645

600

500

400

425

200

211

201

178
135

100
46

0

331

322

300

68
14

Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand

135
76

135

68
14

United States

68
20

68

14

OECD countries
of Europe

Range of outcomes for two scenarios
Absence of international trade in carbon
emissions rights: each region must take
the prescribed reduction

135
97

Full Annex B trading of carbon emissions
rights permitted

14

Japan
The three numbers on each bar
represent the highest, median,
and lowest projections from the
set of models.

Figure 7-2: Projections of GDP losses and marginal costs in Annex II countries in the year 2010 from global
WGIII TAR Sections 8.3.1 &
10.4.4
models: (a) GDP losses and (b) marginal costs. The reductions in projected GDP are for the year 2010 relative
to the model reference case GDP. These estimates are based on results of an Energy Modeling Forum study. The projections reported in the
figures are for four regions, which constitute Annex II. The models examined two scenarios. In the first, each region makes the prescribed
reduction with only domestic trading in carbon emissions. In the second, Annex B trading is permitted and thereby marginal costs are equal
across regions. For the key factors, assumptions, and uncertainties underlying the studies, see Box 7-1.

115

Climate Change 2001

Table 7-3

Synthesis Report

Results of model comparison from the Energy Modeling Forum.a

(a) Calculated losses (as % of total GDP) for various postulated trading regimes associated with meeting the Kyoto targets in Annex B countries.
No Trading
Model

CANZ

USA

ABARE-GTEM
AIM
CETA
G-Cubed
GRAPE
MERGE3
MS-MRT
RICE

1.96
0.59
1.83

1.96
0.45
1.93
0.42

2.02
1.83
0.96

1.06
1.88
0.94

Annex I Trading

OECD
Europe

Japan

CANZ

USA

0.94
0.31

0.72
0.25

0.23
0.36

1.50
0.81
0.99
0.63
0.55

0.57
0.19
0.80
1.20
0.78

0.72

0.47
0.31
0.67
0.24

1.14
0.88
0.54

0.51
0.91
0.56

OECD
Europe

Japan

0.13
0.17

0.05
0.13

0.61
0.81
0.47
0.13
0.28

0.45
0.10
0.19
0.22
0.30

(b) Marginal abatement costs (in 1990 US$ per t C; 2010 Kyoto target).
Model

CANZ

USA

OECD
Europe

Japan

Annex I Trading

ABARE-GTEM
AIM
CETA
Fund
G-Cubed
GRAPE
MERGE3
MIT_EPPA
MS-MRT
RICE
SGM
WorldScan

425
147

322
153
168

665
198

645
234

157

76

250
247
213
145
201
46

264
193
236
132
188
85

227
204
218
276
179
159
407
20

97
304
500
501
402
251
357
122

106
65
46
14
53
70
135
76
77
62
84
20

(c) Costs of Kyoto Protocol implementation for oil-exporting countries according to various models.b
Modelc

Without Tradingd

With Annex I Trading

With "Global Trading"

G-Cubed
GREEN
GTEM
MS-MRT
OPEC
CLIMOX

-25% oil revenue
-3% real income
0.2% GDP loss
1.39% welfare loss
-17% OPEC revenue
n/a

-13% oil revenue
"substantially reduced loss"
<0.05% GDP loss
1.15% welfare loss
-10% OPEC revenue
-10% some oil exporters' revenues

-7% oil revenue
n/a
n/a
0.36% welfare loss
-8% OPEC revenue
n/a

a
b

Table 7-3a derived from WGIII TAR Table TS-5, Table 7-3b from WGIII TAR Table TS-4, and Table 7-3c from WGIII TAR Table TS-6.
The definition of oil-exporting country varies. For G-Cubed and the OPEC models, it is the OPEC countries; for GREEN, a group of
oil-exporting countries; for GTEM, Mexico and Indonesia; for MS-MRT, OPEC countries plus Mexico; and for CLIMOX, west
Asian and north African oil exporters.
c The models report impact on the global economy in the year 2010 with mitigation according to the Kyoto Protocol targets (usually in
the models applied to CO2 mitigation by the year 2010 rather than greenhouse gas emissions to the period 2008-2012) achieved by
imposing a carbon tax or auctioned emission permits with revenues recycled through lump-sum payments to consumers. No ancillary
benefits, such as reductions in local air pollution damages, are taken into account in the results.
d "Trading" denotes trading in emission permits between countries.
n/a = not available.

7.19

16
17

116

Emission constraints on Annex I countries have well-established, albeit varied,
"spill-over" effects16 on non-Annex I countries.
* Oil-exporting, non-Annex I countries: Analyses report costs differently, including, inter alia,
reductions in projected GDP and reductions in projected oil revenues. The study reporting
the lowest costs shows reductions of 0.2% of projected GDP with no emissions trading, and
less than 0.05% of projected GDP with Annex B emissions trading in the year 2010.17

Spill-over effects incorporate only economic, not environmental, effects.
These estimated costs can be expressed as differences in GDP growth rates over the period 2000-2010. With no
emissions trading, GDP growth rate is reduced by 0.02 percentage points per year; with Annex B emissions
trading, growth rate is reduced by less than 0.005 percentage points per year.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGIII TAR Sections 8.3.2
& 9.3.1-2

Synthesis Report

Question 7

The study reporting the highest costs shows reductions of 25% of projected oil revenues
with no emissions trading, and 13% of projected oil revenues with Annex B emissions
trading in the year 2010 (see Table 7-3c). These studies do not consider policies and
measures18 other than Annex B emissions trading, which could lessen the impact on
non-Annex I, oil-exporting countries, and therefore tend to overstate both the costs to
these countries and overall costs. The effects on these countries can be further reduced by
removal of subsidies for fossil fuels, energy tax restructuring according to carbon content,
increased use of natural gas, and diversification of the economies of non-Annex I, oilexporting countries.
* Other non-Annex I countries: They may be adversely affected by reductions in demand
for their exports to OECD nations and by the price increase of those carbon-intensive
and other products they continue to import. These countries may benefit from the reduction
in fuel prices, increased exports of carbon-intensive products, and the transfer of
environmentally sound technologies and know-how. The net balance for a given country
depends on which of these factors dominates. Because of these complexities, the
breakdown of winners and losers remains uncertain.
* Carbon leakage: The possible relocation of some carbon-intensive industries to nonAnnex I countries and wider impacts on trade flows in response to changing prices may
lead to leakage on the order of 5-20%.19 Exemptions (e.g., for energy-intensive industries)
make the higher model estimates for carbon leakage unlikely, but would raise aggregate
costs. The transfer of environmentally sound technologies and know-how, not included
in models, may lead to lower leakage and especially on the longer term may more than
offset the leakage.
7.20

Some sources of greenhouse gas emissions can be limited at no, or negative,
net social cost to the extent that policies can exploit no-regret opportunities.
This may be achieved by removal of market imperfections, accounting for
ancillary benefits (see Question 8), and recycling revenues to finance reductions
in distortionary taxes ("double dividend").
* Market imperfections: Reduction of existing market or institutional failures and other
barriers that impede adoption of cost-effective emission reduction measures can lower
private costs compared to current practice. This can also reduce private costs overall.
* Ancillary benefits: Climate change mitigation measures will have effects on other societal
issues. For example, reducing carbon emissions in many cases will result in the simultaneous
reduction in local and regional air pollution. It is likely that mitigation strategies will also
affect transportation, agriculture, land-use practices, and waste management and will have
an impact on other issues of social concern, such as employment, and energy security.
However, not all of the effects will be positive; careful policy selection and design can better
ensure positive effects and minimize negative impacts. In some cases, the magnitude of
ancillary benefits of mitigation may be comparable to the costs of the mitigating measures,
adding to the no-regret potential, although estimates are difficult to make and vary widely.
* Double dividend: Instruments (such as taxes or auctioned permits) provide revenues to
the government. If used to finance reductions in existing distortionary taxes ("revenue
recycling"), these revenues reduce the economic cost of achieving greenhouse gas
reductions. The magnitude of this offset depends on the existing tax structure, type of
tax cuts, labor market conditions, and method of recycling. Under some circumstances,
it is possible that the economic benefits may exceed the costs of mitigation.

WGIII TAR Sections 5.3-5,
7.3.3, 8.2.2, 8.2.4, 9.2.1-2,
9.2.4, 9.2.8, & 10.4

18

These policies and measures include those for non-CO2 gases and non-energy sources of all gases; offsets from
sinks; industry restructuring (e.g., from energy producer to supplier of energy services); use of OPEC's market
power; and actions (e.g., of Annex B Parties) related to funding, insurance, and the transfer of technology. In
addition, the studies typically do not include the following policies and effects that can reduce the total cost of
mitigation: the use of tax revenues to reduce tax burdens or finance other mitigation measures; environmental
ancillary benefits of reductions in fossil-fuel use; and induced technical change from mitigation policies.
19
Carbon leakage is defined here as the increase in emissions in non-Annex B countries due to implementation of
reductions in Annex B, expressed as a percentage of Annex B reductions.

117

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Potential, Barriers, Opportunities, Policies, and Costs of Stabilizing
Atmospheric Greenhouse Gas Concentrations in the Long Term
7.21

Cost of stabilization depends on both the target and the emissions
pathway.

7.22

There is no single path to a low-emission future, and countries and regions
will have to choose their own path. Most model results indicate that known
technological options20 could achieve a broad range of atmospheric CO2
stabilization levels, such as 550 ppmv, 450 ppmv, or below over the next 100
years or more, but implementation would require associated socio-economic
and institutional changes. To achieve stabilization at these levels, the scenarios suggest
that a very significant reduction in world carbon emissions per unit of GDP from year 1990
levels will be necessary. For the crucial energy sector, almost all greenhouse gas mitigation
and concentration stabilization scenarios are characterized by the introduction of efficient
technologies for both energy use and supply, and of low- or no-carbon energy. However,
no single technology option will provide all of the emissions reductions needed for
stabilization. Reduction options in non-energy sources and non-CO2 greenhouse gases will
also provide significant potential for reducing emissions.

WGIII TAR Sections 2.3.2,
2.4.5, 2.5.1-2, 3.5, & 8.4,
& WGIII TAR Chapter 3
Appendix

7.23

The development and diffusion of new economically competitive and
environmentally sound technology can substantially reduce the costs of
stabilizing concentrations at a given level. A substantial body of work has considered
the implication of technology development and diffusion on the cost of meeting alternative
stabilization levels. The principal conclusion is that the cost of emissions mitigation depends
crucially on the ability to develop and deploy new technology. The value of successful
technology diffusion appears to be large and depends upon the magnitude and timing of
emissions mitigation, the assumed reference scenario, and the economic competitiveness
of the technology.

WGIII TAR Section 10.3.3

7.24

The pathway to stabilization can be as important as the stabilization level itself
in determining mitigation cost. Economic modeling studies completed since the SAR
indicate that a gradual near-term transition from the world's present energy system towards
a less carbon-emitting economy minimizes costs associated with premature retirement of
existing capital stock. It also provides time for investment in technology development and
diffusion, and may reduce the risk of lock-in to early versions of rapidly developing lowemission technology. On the other hand, more rapid near-term action would increase
flexibility in moving towards stabilization, decrease environmental and human risks
associated with rapid climatic changes, while minimizing potential implications of inertia
in climate and ecological systems (see Question 5). It may also stimulate more rapid
deployment of existing low-emission technologies and provide strong near-term incentives
to future technological changes that may help reduce the risks of lock-in to carbon-intensive
technologies. It also would give greater scope for later tightening of targets should that be
deemed desirable in light of evolving scientific understanding.

WGIII TAR Sections 2.3.2,
5.3.1, 8.4, & 10.4.2-3

7.25

Cost-effectiveness studies with a century time scale estimate that the mitigation
costs of stabilizing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere increase as the
concentration stabilization level declines. Different baselines can have a
strong influence on absolute costs. While there is a moderate increase in the costs
when passing from a 750 to a 550 ppmv concentration stabilization level, there is a larger

WGIII TAR Sections 2.5.2,
8.4.1, 8.4.3, & 10.4.6

20

118

"Known technological options" refer to technologies that exist in operation or pilot plant stage today, as referenced
in the mitigation scenarios discussed in this report. It does not include any new technologies that will require
drastic technological breakthroughs. In this way it can be considered to be a conservative estimate, considering
the length of the scenario period.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 7

increase in costs passing from 550 to 450 ppmv (see Figure 7-3) unless the emissions in the
baseline scenario are very low (see Figure 7-4). Although model projections indicate longterm global growth paths of GDP are not significantly affected by mitigation actions towards
stabilization, these do not show the larger variations that occur over some shorter time periods,
sectors, or regions. These results, however, do not incorporate carbon sequestration, and did
not examine the possible effect of more ambitious targets on induced technological change.
Costs associated with each concentration level depend on numerous factors including the rate
of discount, distribution of emission reductions over time, policies and measures employed,
and particularly the choice of the baseline scenario. For scenarios characterized by a focus
on local and regional sustainable development for example, total costs of stabilizing at a
particular level are significantly lower than for other scenarios. Also, the issue of uncertainty
takes on increasing importance as the time frame is expanded.
7.26

Energy R&D and social learning can contribute to the flow and
adoption of improved energy technologies throughout the 21st
century.

7.27

Lower emissions scenarios require different patterns of energy resource
development and an increase in energy R&D to assist accelerating the
development and deployment of advanced environmentally sound energy
technologies. Emissions of CO2 due to fossil-fuel burning are virtually certain to be the
dominant influence on the atmospheric CO2 concentration trend during the 21st century.
Resource data assessed in the TAR may imply a change in the energy mix and the introduction
of new sources of energy during the 21st century. Fossil-fuel resources will not limit carbon

WGIII TAR Sections 2.5.1-2,
3.8.4, & 8.4.5

What will it cost to stabilize CO2 concentrations?
Trillions (10 12 ) of 1990 US$
1,800

Gt C
1,800

1,600

1,600

1,400

1,348

1,400

1,239
1,200

1,200
1,043

1,000

1,000
800

800

714

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

450 ppmv

550 ppmv

Cumulative carbon emissions
between years 1990 and 2100

650 ppmv
Models :
Scenarios :

FUND
S
WRE

750 ppmv
MERGE
S
WRE

MiniCAM
S
WRE

0

WGIII TAR Sections 2.5.2,
8.4.1, 8.4.3, & 10.4.6

Figure 7-3: The mitigation costs (1990
US$, present value discounted at 5% per
year for the period 1990 to 2100) of
stabilizing CO2 concentrations at 450 to
750 ppmv are calculated using three
global models, based on different modeldependent baselines. Avoided impacts of
climate change are not included. In each
instance, costs were calculated based on
two emission pathways for achieving the
prescribed target: S (referred as WGI
emissions pathways in WGIII TAR) and
WRE as described in response to Question
6. The bars show cumulative carbon
emissions between the years 1990 and
2100. Cumulative future emissions until
carbon budget ceiling is reached are
reported above the bars in Gt C.

119

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Global average GDP reduction in the year 2050
Percentage reduction relative to baseline
4.5

Scenarios:

4.0

A1B

3.5
A1T

3.0
2.5

A1FI

2.0
A2

1.5
1.0

B1

0.5
0

B2

450

550

650

750

Eventual CO2 stabilization level (ppm)
Figure 7-4: Indicative relationship in the year 2050 between the relative GDP reduction caused by
WGIII TAR Figure 8-18
mitigation activities, the SRES scenarios, and the stabilization level. The reduction in GDP tends to
increase with the stringency of the stabilization level, but the costs are very sensitive to the choice of the baseline scenario. These projected
mitigation costs do not take into account potential benefits of avoided climate change.

emissions during the 21st century (see Figure 7-5). The carbon in proven conventional oil
and gas reserves is much less than the cumulative carbon emissions associated with
stabilization of CO2 at levels of 450 ppmv or higher.21 These resource data may imply a
change in the energy mix and the introduction of new sources of energy during the 21st
century. The choice of energy mix and associated technologies and investments--either
more in the direction of exploitation of unconventional oil and gas resources, or in the
direction of non-fossil energy sources or fossil energy technology with carbon capture and
storage--will determine whether, and if so, at what level and cost, greenhouse concentrations
can be stabilized.
7.28

The decline in energy R&D expenditure is inconsistent with the goal of
accelerating the development and deployment of advanced energy technologies.
Energy-related R&D expenditure by Annex II governments increased dramatically after
the 1970 oil price increases, but as a group it has decreased steadily in real terms since the
early 1980s. In some countries the decrease has been as great as 75%. The support for energy
conservation and renewable energy R&D has increased. However, other important energy
technologies relevant to climate change, such as, for example, commercial biomass and
carbon capture and storage, remain minor constituents of the energy R&D portfolio.

WGIII TAR Section 10.3.3 &
SRTT Section 2.3

7.29

Social learning and innovation and changes in institutional structure could
contribute to climate change mitigation. Changes in collective rules and individual
behaviors may have significant effects on greenhouse gas emissions, but take place within a
complex institutional, regulatory, and legal setting. Several studies suggest that current incentive
systems can encourage resource-intensive production and consumption patterns that increase
greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors (e.g., transport and housing). In the shorter term, there
are opportunities to influence through social innovations individual and organizational behaviors.

WGIII TAR Sections 1.4.3,
5.3.7, 10.3.2, & 10.3.4

21

120

The reference to a particular concentration level does not imply an agreed-upon desirability of stabilization at
this level.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 7

In the longer term, such innovations in combination with technological change may further
enhance socio-economic potential, particularly if preferences and cultural norms shift towards
lower emitting and sustainable behaviors. These innovations frequently meet with resistance,
which may be addressed by encouraging greater public participation in the decision-making
process. This can help contribute to new approaches to sustainability and equity.

Integrating Near- and Long-Term Considerations
7.30

Climate change decision making is a sequential process under
uncertainty. Decision making at any point in time entails balancing
the risks of either insufficient or excessive action.

7.31

Development of a prudent risk management strategy involves careful
consideration of the consequences (both environmental and economic), their
likelihood, and society's attitude toward risk. The latter is likely to vary from country
to country and perhaps even from generation to generation. This report therefore confirms the
SAR finding that the value of better information about climate change processes and impacts

WGIII TAR Section 10.4.3

Carbon in fossil-fuel reserves and resources compared with historical fossil-fuel
carbon emissions, and with cumulative carbon emissions from a range
of SRES scenario and TAR stabilization scenarios until the year 2100
Gt C
4,000
Coal
Conventional reserves

3,500

Conventional resources (upper estimate)
Unconventional reserves and resources

3,000

2,500
A1FI

2,000

A2
A1B

1,500

1,000

WRE1000
WRE750

Oil

Historical
fossil-fuel
emissions
1860-1998

Gas

500

B1

A1T

WRE650

B2

WRE550
WRE450
WRE350

Coal
Gas
Oil

0

Reserves and resources

Emissions

SRES scenarios

Stabilization scenarios

Figure 7-5: Carbon in oil, gas, and coal reserves and resources is compared with historic fossil-fuel
WGIII TAR Section 3.8.1
carbon emissions over the period 1860-1998, and with cumulative carbon emissions from a range of
SRES scenarios and TAR stabilization scenarios until the year 2100. Data for current reserves and resources are shown in the lefthand
columns. Unconventional oil and gas includes tar sands, shale oil, other heavy oil, coal bed methane, deep geopressured gas, gas in aquifers,
etc. Gas hydrates (clathrates) that amount to an estimated 12,000 Gt C are not shown. The scenario columns show both SRES reference
scenarios as well as scenarios that lead to stabilization of CO2 concentrations at a range of levels. Note that if by the year 2100 cumulative
emissions associated with SRES scenarios are equal to or smaller than those for stabilization scenarios, this does not imply that these
scenarios equally lead to stabilization.

121

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

and society's responses to them is likely to be great. Decisions about near-term climate
policies are in the process of being made while the concentration stabilization target is still
being debated. The literature suggests a step-by-step resolution aimed at stabilizing greenhouse
gas concentrations. This will also involve balancing the risks of either insufficient or excessive
action. The relevant question is not "what is the best course for the next 100 years," but
rather "what is the best course for the near term given the expected long-term climate
change and accompanying uncertainties."
7.32

Stabilizing atmospheric concentrations would depend upon emissions
reductions beyond those agreed to in the Kyoto Protocol. Most post-SRES
scenario analyses suggest that achievement of stabilization at 450 ppmv may require emission
reductions during the period 2008 to 2012 in Annex I countries that are significantly stronger
than the Kyoto Protocol commitments. This analysis also suggests that achieving the
aggregate Kyoto commitments may be consistent with trajectories that achieve stabilization
at 550 ppmv or higher. Other analyses suggest a more gradual departure from emissions
baselines even for 450 ppmv followed by sharper reductions in subsequent budget periods.
The path is influenced by the representation of inertia in the system and expectations about
how initial reductions by Annex I countries may relate to the strength and scope of emissions
limitation in subsequent periods.

7.33

Climate change mitigation raises both inter-regional and intertemporal equity considerations.

7.34

Differences in the distribution of technological, natural, and financial resources
among and within nations and regions, and between generations, as well as
differences in mitigation costs, are often key considerations in the analysis
of climate change mitigation options. Much of the debate about the future differentiation
of contributions of countries to mitigation and related equity issues also considers these
circumstances.22 The challenge of addressing climate change raises an important issue of
equity, namely the extent to which the impacts of climate change or mitigation policies
ameliorate or exacerbate inequities both within and across nations and regions, and between
generations. Findings with respect to these different aspects of equity include:
* Equity within nations: Most studies show that the distributional effects of a carbon tax
are regressive unless the tax revenues are used either directly or indirectly in favor of
the low-income groups; the regressive aspect can be totally or partially compensated
by a revenue-recycling policy.
* Equity across nations and regions: Greenhouse gas stabilization scenarios assessed in
this report assume that developed countries and countries with economies in transition
limit and reduce their greenhouse gas emissions first.23 Another aspect of equity across
nations and regions is that mitigation of climate change can offset inequities that would
be exacerbated by the impacts of climate change (see Question 6).
* Equity between generations: Stabilization of concentrations depends more upon cumulative
than annual emissions; emissions reductions by any generation will reduce the need for
those by future generations.24 Inter-generational equity can be promoted by reducing climate
change impacts through mitigation of climate change by any generation, since not only
would impacts--which are expected to affect especially those with the fewest resources--
be reduced, but also subsequent generations will have less climate change to adapt to
(see Question 6).

22

Approaches to equity have been classified into a variety of categories, including those based on allocation,
outcome, process, rights, liability, poverty, and opportunity, reflecting the diverse expectations of fairness used
to judge policy processes and the corresponding outcomes.
23
Emissions from all regions diverge from baselines at some point. Global emissions diverge earlier and to a greater
extent as stabilization levels are lower or underlying scenarios are higher. Such scenarios are uncertain, and do not
provide information on equity implications and how such changes may be achieved or who may bear any costs incurred.
24
See above for other aspects of timing of greenhouse gas emissions reductions.

122

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGIII TAR Sections 2.5.2 &
8.4

WGIII TAR Sections 1.3,
2.5.2, 8.2.2, 10.2, & 10.4.5

Question 8
What is known about the interactions between projected human-induced
changes in climate and other environmental issues (e.g., urban air pollution,
regional acid deposition, loss of biological diversity, stratospheric ozone
depletion, and desertification and land degradation)? What is known about
environmental, social, and economic costs and benefits and implications
of these interactions for integrating climate change response strategies in
an equitable manner into broad sustainable development strategies at
the local, regional, and global scales?

Q8

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

8.1

The answer to this question recognizes two major points. The first is that the human impacts on
the environment are manifested in several issues, many driven by common factors associated
with the meeting of human needs. The second is that many of these issues--their causes
and impacts--are biogeophysically and socio-economically interrelated. With a central
emphasis on climate change, this answer assesses the current understanding of the interrelations
between the causes and impacts of the key environmental issues of today. To that is added
a summary of the now largely separate policy approaches to these issues. In so doing, this
answer frames how choices associated with one issue may positively or negatively influence
another. With such knowledge, there is the prospect of efficient integrated approaches.

8.2

Local, regional, and global environmental issues often combine in
ways that jointly affect the sustainable meeting of human needs.

8.3

Meeting human needs is degrading the environment in many instances, and
environmental degradation is hampering the meeting of human needs. Society
has a range of socio-economic paths to development; however, these will only be sustainable
if due consideration is given to the environment. Environmental degradation is already evident
at the local, regional, and global scale, such as air pollution, scarcity of freshwater, deforestation,
desertification, acid deposition, loss of biological diversity and changes at the genetic and
species level, land degradation, stratospheric ozone depletion, and climate change. Very
frequently, addressing human needs causes or exacerbates several environmental problems,
which may increase the vulnerability to climatic changes. For example, with the aim of higher
agricultural production, there is increased use of nitrogeneous fertilizers, irrigation, and
conversion of forested areas to croplands. These agricultural activities can affect the Earth's
climate through release of greenhouse gases, degrade land by erosion and salinization, and
reduce biodiversity. In turn, an environmental change can impact meeting human needs. For
example, agricultural productivity can be adversely affected by changes in the magnitude and
pattern of rainfall, and human health in an urban environment can be impacted by heat waves.

WGI TAR Sections 3.4, 4.1,
& 5.2, WGII TAR Sections
4.1 & 5.1-2, & WGIII TAR
Sections 3.6 & 4.2

8.4

Just as different environmental problems are often caused by the same
underlying driving forces (economic growth, broad technological changes,
life-style patterns, demographic shifts (population size, age structure, and
migration), and governance structures), common barriers inhibit solutions to
a variety of environmental and socio-economic issues. Approaches to the amelioration
of environmental issues can be hampered by many of the same barriers, for example:
* Increased demand for natural resources and energy
* Market imperfections, including subsidies that lead to the inefficient use of resources
and act as a barrier to the market penetration of environmentally sound technologies;
the lack of recognition of the true value of natural resources; failure to appropriate for
the global values of natural resources at the local level; and failure to internalize the
costs of environmental degradation into the market price of a resource
* Limited availability and transfer of technology, inefficient use of technologies, and
inadequate investment in research and development for the technologies of the future
* Failure to manage adequately the use of natural resources and energy.

WGIII TAR Chapter 5,
SRES Chapter 3, & SRTT
TS 1.5

8.5

Several environmental issues that traditionally have been viewed
as separate are indeed linked with climate change via common
biogeochemical and socio-economic processes.

8.6

Figure 8-1 illustrates how climate change is interlinked with several other environmental issues.

Surface Ozone Air Pollution and Climate Change
8.7

124

Surface ozone air pollution and the emissions that drive it are important
contributors to global climate change. The same pollutants that generate surface

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Sections 4.2.3-4

Synthesis Report

Question 8

Linkages between climate change and other environmental issues

Stratospheric
ozone depletion

Biodiversity
Air
quality

Desertification

Climate
Change

Water

Forestry

Figure 8-1: Climate is controlled by geochemical processes and cycles resulting from the interplay among the environment's components
involved, as affected by human action. The scheme shows some of these issues. For simplicity, the single double-ended arrows between issues
represent some of the linkages involved. For example, biological and ecological processes play an important role in modulating the Earth's
climate at both regional and global scale by controlling the amounts of water vapor and other greenhouse gases that enter into or are depleted
from the atmosphere. Changes in climate affect the boundaries, composition, and functioning of ecological systems, such as forests, and changes
in the structure and functioning of forests affect the Earth's climate system through changes in the biogeochemical cycles, particularly cycles
of carbon, nitrogen, and water. There are other linkages such as the connection between air quality and forestry, directly or through acid precipitation, which
for simplicity are not shown here.

ozone pollution (nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and volatile organic compounds) also
contribute to the rise in global tropospheric ozone, making it the third most important
contributor to radiative forcing after CO2 and CH4 (see Figure 2-2). In some regions
emissions of ozone precursor substances are controlled by regional environmental treaties
(see Table 8-3) and other regulations.
8.8

Global climate changes and rising tropospheric ozone levels may exacerbate
urban air pollution problems. Projections based on some SRES scenarios show increases
in tropospheric ozone of more than 40 ppb over most of the Northern Hemisphere mid-latitudes.
Such increases would approximately double the baseline levels of ozone entering many metropolitan
regions, substantially degrading air quality. Climate change would affect the meteorological
conditions (regional temperature, cloud cover, and surface wind) that influence photochemistry,
and the occurrence of major pollution episodes. While warmer temperatures would generally
contribute to more urban ozone, the change in frequency and intensity of pollution episodes

WGI TAR Sections 4.4.4 &
4.5-6, & WGII TAR Sections
7.2.2.3 & 9.6

125

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

has not been evaluated. Adverse health effects attributable to urban air quality would be
exacerbated by increases in heat waves that would accompany anthropogenic climate change.

Acid Deposition and Climate Change
8.9

The sulfate aerosols formed from sulfur emissions from the burning of fossil
fuels lead to both acid deposition and a cooling of the climate system. Acid
deposition has adverse impacts on both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and causes damage
to human health and many materials. Some of these impacts could be exacerbated by climate
change (e.g., through increase in humidity and temperature). Actions to reduce sulfur
emissions have been taken in many countries, and declines in sulfate deposition have been
observed in some regions in recent years (see Table 8-3). In the SRES scenarios, this
situation has led to projections of future sulfate aerosol abundances that are lower than
those in the SAR. This has led, in turn, to less negative projections for the radiative forcing
by aerosols, hence less of a cooling effect to offset the greenhouse gas-induced warming.

WGI TAR Sections 5.2.2.6,
5.5.3, 6.7, & 6.15, WGII TAR
Sections 5.6, 5.7.3, &
15.2.4.2, & SRES Section
3.6.4

Stratospheric Ozone Depletion and Climate Change
8.10

Depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer leads to an increased penetration
of UV-B radiation and to a cooling of the climate system. Ozone depletion has
allowed for increased penetration of UV-B radiation, with harmful effects on human and
animal health, plants, etc. During the last 2 decades, the observed losses of stratospheric
ozone have decreased the downward infrared emissions to the troposphere from the (now
colder) lower stratosphere. Stratospheric ozone depletion has also altered tropospheric ozone
concentrations, and, by allowing more ultraviolet sunlight into the troposphere, it has led
to more rapid photochemical destruction of CH4 thereby reducing its radiative forcing.
These effects lead also to a cooling of the climate system.

WGI TAR Sections 4.2.2 &
6.4

8.11

Many of the halocarbons that cause depletion of the ozone layer are also important
greenhouse gases. Chlorofluorocarbons, for example, add a notable fraction to the
total positive radiative forcing since the pre-industrial era. The negative radiative forcing
from the associated stratospheric ozone depletion (noted above) reduces this by about half.
The Montreal Protocol will eventually eliminate both of these radiative-forcing contributions.
However, one class of substitutes for the now-banned chlorofluorocarbons is hydrofluorocarbons,
which are among the greenhouse gases listed under the Kyoto Protocol. This overlap can give
rise to a potential conflict beween the goals of the two Protocols.

WGI TAR Sections 4.2.2 &
6.3.3

8.12

Climate change will alter the temperature and wind patterns of the stratosphere,
possibly enhancing chlorofluorocarbon depletion of stratospheric ozone over
the next 50 years. Increases in greenhouse gases lead in general to a colder stratosphere,
which alters stratospheric chemistry. Some studies predict that current rates of climate change
will result in significant increases in the depletion of the Arctic stratospheric ozone layer
over the next decade before chlorofluorocarbon concentrations have declined substantially.
Although many climate/ozone-layer feedbacks have been identified, no quantitative consensus
is reached in this assessment.

WGI TAR Sections 4.5, 6.4,
& 7.2.4.2

Biodiversity, Agriculture and Forestry, and Climate Change
8.13

126

Changes in terrestrial and marine ecosystems are closely linked to changes
in climate and vice versa. Changes in climate and in atmospheric concentrations of CO2
cause changes in the biodiversity and function of some ecosystems. In turn, ecosystem changes
influence the land-atmosphere exchange of greenhouse gases (e.g., CO2, CH4, and N2O)
and of water and energy, and change surface albedo. Therefore, understanding these combined
effects and feedbacks are a requisite for evaluating the future state of the atmosphere and
the natural systems and their biodiversity.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Section 4.5.3

Synthesis Report

Question 8

8.14

Natural climate variations have illustrated the impacts of climate change on
natural and managed ecosystems. The impacts of floods, droughts, and heat waves
are etched into human history. Further, the warming events associated with El Nino illustrate
that changes in climate patterns adversely affect fish, marine mammals, and coastal and
ocean biodiversity. Coastal ecosystems--such as coral reefs, salt marshes, and mangrove
forests--are affected by sea-level rise, warming ocean temperatures, increased CO2
concentrations, and changes in storm frequency and intensity. Table 8-1 gives main
implications of climate change for natural ecosystems at the regional scale.

WGII TAR Chapters 5 & 6

8.15

Climate change is but one of many stresses on managed and unmanaged
ecosystems. Land-use change, resource demands, deposition of nutrients and pollutants,
harvesting, grazing, habitat fragmentation and loss, and invasive species are major stressors
on ecosystems. They can lead to species extinction, resulting in losses of biodiversity.
Therefore, climate change constitutes an additional stress and could change or endanger
ecosystems and the many services they provide. As a result, the impact of climate change
will be influenced by management of natural resources, adaptation, and interaction with
other pressures. Figure 8-2 exemplifies the manner in which climate change interacts with
other factors in food supply and demand.

WGII TAR Chapters 5 & 6,
& WGIII TAR Sections 4.1-2

8.16

Climate change can influence the distribution and migration of species in
unmanaged ecosystems. Populations of many species are already threatened with
extinction and are expected to be placed at greater risk by the stresses of changing climate,
rendering portions of their current habitat unsuitable. Vegetation distribution models since
the SAR suggest that a mass ecosystem or biome movement is most unlikely to occur
because differerent species have different climate tolerance and different migration abilities,
and are affected differently by the arrival of new species. Lastly, in a related sense, climate
change can enhance the spreading of pests and diseases, thereby affecting both natural
ecosystems, crops, and livestock (e.g., changes in temperature and humidity thresholds
allow pests and diseases to move to new areas).

WGII TAR Chapter 5

8.17

Carbon storage capacities of managed and unmanaged ecosystems,
particularly forests, influence impacts and feedbacks with climate change.
For example, forests, agricultural lands, and other terrestrial ecosystems offer a significant
carbon mitigation potential. Although not necessarily permanent, conservation and
sequestration may allow time for other options to be further developed and implemented.
Terrestrial ecosystem degradation may be exacerbated by climate change, affecting the
storage of carbon, and adding to the stresses resulting from the current deforestation
practices. It should be noted that, if appropriate management practices are not carried out,
CO2 emissions in the future could be higher. For example, abandoning fire management in
forests or reverting from direct seeding to intensive tillage in agriculture may result in
rapid loss of part, at least, of the accumulated carbon.

WGIII TAR Section 4.3 &
SRLULUCF SPM

Land Degradation and Desertification and Climate Change
8.18

Projected levels of climate change would exacerbate the continuation of land
degradation and desertification that has occurred over the past few centuries
in many areas. Land-use conversion and the intensive use of land, particularly in the world's
arid and semi-arid regions, has resulted in decreased soil fertility and increased land
degradation and desertification. The changes have been large enough to be apparent from
satellite images. Land degradation already affects more than 900 million people in 100
countries, and one quarter of the world soil resources, most of them in the developing countries.
The annual recorded losses of millions of hectares significantly undermine economies and
create some irreversible situations. The TAR projections using the SRES scenarios indicate
increased droughts, higher intensity of rainfall, more irregular rainfall patterns, and more
frequent tropical summer drought in the mid-latitude continental interiors. The systems that

WGI TAR Sections 2.7.3.3,
9.3, & 10.3, WGII TAR
Section 5.5, & WGII TAR
Table SPM-1

127

Climate Change 2001

Table 8-1

Examples for observed and projected regional implications of climate change on natural ecosystems, biodiversity, and food
supply.

Reference Section
in WGII TAR

Region

Impacts

Africa

Irreversible losses of biodiversity could be accelerated with climate change.
TS 5.1.3 &
Significant extinctions of plant and animal species are projected and would impact rural livelihoods, Section 10.2.3.2
tourism, and genetic resources (medium confidence).

Asia

Decreases in agricultural productivity and aquaculture due to thermal and water stress, sea-level
TS 5.2.1-2 &
rise, floods and droughts, and tropical cyclones would diminish food security in many countries of Sections 11.2.1-2
arid, tropical, and temperate Asia; agriculture would expand and increase in productivity in northern
areas (medium confidence).
Climate change would exacerbate threat to biodiversity due to land-use and land-cover change and
population pressure (medium confidence). Sea-level rise would put ecological security at risk
including mangroves and coral reefs (high confidence).

Australia and
New Zealand

A warming of 1C would threaten the survival of species currently near the upper limit of their
temperature range, notably in marginal alpine regions.
Some species with restricted climatic niches and that are unable to migrate due to fragmentation of
the landscape soil differences or topography could become endangered or extinct (high confidence).
Australian ecosystems that are particularly vulnerable to climate change include coral reefs, arid
and semi-arid habitats in southwest and inland Australia, and Australian alpine systems.
Freshwater wetlands in coastal zones in both Australia and New Zealand are vulnerable, and some
New Zealand ecosystems are vulnerable to accelerated invasion by weeds.

TS 5.3.2 &
Sections 12.4.2,
12.4.4-5, &
12.4.7

Europe

Natural ecosystems will change due to increasing temperature and atmospheric concentration of
CO2. Diversity in nature reserves is under threat of rapid change. Loss of important habitats
(wetlands, tundra, and isolated habitats) would threaten some species, including rare/endemic
species and migratory birds.
There will be some broadly positive effects on agriculture in northern Europe (medium
confidence); productivity will decrease in southern and eastern Europe (medium confidence).

TS 5.4.2-3 &
Sections 13.2.1.4,
13.2.2.1,
13.2.2.3-5, &
13.2.3.1

Latin
America

It is well-established that Latin America accounts for one of the Earth's largest concentrations of
biodiversity and the impacts of climate change can be expected to increase the risk of biodiversity
loss (high confidence).
Yields of important crops are projected to decrease in many locations even when the effects of
CO2 are taken into account; subsistence farming in some regions could be threatened (high
confidence).

TS 5.5.2 & 5.5.4,
& Sections
14.2.1-2

North
America

There is strong evidence that climate change can lead to the loss of specific ecosystem types (e.g., TS 5.6.4-5 &
high alpine areas and specific coastal (salt marshes and inland prairie "potholes") wetlands) (high
Sections 15.2.2-3
confidence).
Some crops would benefit from modest warming accompanied by increasing CO2, but effect
would vary among crops and regions (high confidence), including declines due to drought in some
areas of Canada's Prairies and the U.S. Great Plains, potential increased food production in areas of
Canada north of current production areas, and increased warm temperate mixed forest production
(medium confidence). However, benefits for crops would decline at an increasing rate and possibly
become a net loss with further warming (medium confidence).
Unique natural ecosystems such as prairie wetlands, alpine tundra, and coldwater ecosystems will
be at risk and effective adaptation is unlikely (medium confidence).

Arctic

The Arctic is extremely vulnerable to climate change, and major physical, ecological, and
economic impacts are expected to appear rapidly.

Antarctic

In the Antarctic projected climate change will generate impacts that will be realized slowly (high
TS 5.7 &
confidence).
Sections 16.2.3 &
Warmer temperatures and reduced ice extent are likely to produce long-term changes in the physical 16.2.4.2
oceanography and ecology of the Southern Ocean, with intensified biological activity and
increased growth rate of fish.

Small
Islands

Projected future climate change and sea-level rise will affect shifts in species composition and
TS 5.8 &
competition. It is estimated that one out of every three (30%) known threatened plants are island
Sections 17.2.4-5
endemics, while 23% of bird species are threatened. Coral reefs, mangroves, and seagrass beds that & 17.2.8.2
often rely on stable environmental conditions will be adversely affected by rising air and sea
temperatures and sea-level rise (medium confidence).
Declines in coastal ecosystems would negatively impact reef fish and threaten reef fisheries
(medium confidence).

likely would be impacted include those with scarce water resources, rangelands, and land
subsidence (see Table 8-2).

128

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

TS 5.7 &
Sections 16.2.7-8

Synthesis Report

Question 8

Climate change and food

Unsustainable
forestry

Climate
Change
Nitrogen
fertilization

Hydrologic and
CO2 changes

ten

Ex

Food supply
and demand

on

ati

ic
sif

Loss of crops
genetic diversity

Loss and fragmentation
of habitats

Biodiversity
loss

Salinization
and erosion

Fertility
loss

Land degradation

Figure 8-2:This figure shows linkages between climate change
and other environmental factors in food supply and demand.
Increasing food demand by a growing world population calls for
larger food production. This, in turn, brings a series of implications
in the use of land, such as converting wildlands to croplands
(extensification), and using chemical fertilizers and/or using irrigation
to increase yield (intensification) or enabling cultivation in otherwise
non-usable land. Expanding the land under cultivation results in
loss of biodiversity, as ecosystems are converted to fields growing
only a few species (usually exotics). Change of forests to agriculture
brings a net loss of carbon to the atmosphere, as forests are
replaced by grassland or cropland. This clearing also increases
flooding probability, as the agricultural systems retain less
precipitation than forests. Intensification of crop production can
involve a variety of chemical treatments, most of them being nitrogen
fertilizers bringing the side effect of release of nitrogen gas
compounds (some of which are strong greenhouse gases) to
the atmosphere and nitrogen runoff into watersheds, with many
environmental and health implications. The expansion of irrigation
affects the supply of freshwater for other uses, leading to
shortages and conflicts over water-use rights. Meeting the needs
for increased agricultural production has the potential to increase
global rates of biodiversity loss, climate change, and desertification.
There are interrelations, particularly to water, that underly all
these issues, but for simplicity are not shown in the figure.

129

Climate Change 2001

Table 8-2

Synthesis Report

Examples of regional impacts of climate change on water resources, land degradation, and desertification.

Region

Projections

Reference Section
in WGII TAR

Africa

Changes in rainfall and intensified land use would exacerbate the desertification processes.
Desertification would be exacerbated by reduction in the average annual rainfall, runoff, and soil
moisture in countries of west African Sahel, and northern and southern Africa (medium confidence).
Increases in droughts and other extreme events would add to stresses on water resources, food
security, and human health, and would constrain development in the region (high confidence).

TS 5.1.6, Chapter
10 ES, Sections
10.2.1 & 10.2.6,
& Table SPM-2

Asia

Water shortage--already a limiting factor for ecosystems, food and fiber production, human
settlements, and human health--may be exacerbated by climate change. Runoff and water
availability may decrease in arid and semi-arid Asia but increase in northern Asia (medium
confidence). Reduced soil moisture in summer would exacerbate land degradation and
desertification in arid and semi-arid regions.

TS 5.2.3 &
Sections 11.1.1 &
11.2.3

Australia and
New Zealand

Interannual variability due to ENSO leads to major floods and droughts in Australia and New
Zealand. Such variations are expected to continue under enhanced greenhouse gas conditions, but
possibly with greater hydrological extremes.
Water is likely to be a key issue (high confidence) due to projected drying trends over much of the
region and change to a more El Nino-like event state. Water quality would be affected, and more
intense rainfall events would increase fast runoff, soil erosion, and sediment loading.
Eutrophication is a major water quality problem in Australia.

TS 5.3 &
Sections 12.1.5.3
& 12.3

Europe

Summer runoff, water availability, and soil moisture are likely to decrease in southern Europe, and
would widen the gap between the north and south (high confidence). Flood hazards will increase
across much of Europe (medium to high confidence); risk would be substantial for coastal areas
where flooding will increase erosion and result in loss of wetlands.
Half of alpine glaciers and large permafrost areas could disappear by the end of the 21st century
(medium confidence).

TS 5.4.1, Chapter
13 ES, & Section
13.2.1

Latin
America

Some studies based on model experiments suggest that under climate change the hydrological
cycle would be more intense, with changes in the distribution of extreme rainfall, wet spells, and
dry spells. Frequent severe drought in Mexico during the last decade coincides with some of these
model findings. El Nino is related to dry conditions in northeastern Brazil, northern Amazons, and
the Peruvian-Bolivian altiplano. Southern Brazil and northwestern Peru exhibit anomalous wet
conditions during these periods.
Loss and retreat of glaciers would adversely impact runoff and water supply in areas where
snowmelt is an important water resource (high confidence).

TS 5.5.1, Chapter
14 ES, & Section
14.2.4

North
America

Snowmelt-dominated watersheds in western North America will experience earlier spring peak
flows (high confidence) and reduction in summer flow (medium confidence); adaptive responses
may offset some, but not all, of the impacts on water resources and aquatic ecosystems (medium
confidence).

TS 5.6.2, Section
15.2.1, & Table
SPM-2

Small
Islands

Islands with very limited water supplies are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change on
the water balance (high confidence).

TS 5.8.4, Section
17.2.6, & Table
SPM-2

Freshwater and Climate Change
8.19

130

All three classes of freshwater problems--having too little, too much, and too
dirty water--may be exacerbated by climate change. Freshwater is essential for
human health, food production, and sanitation, as well as for manufacturing and other industrial
uses and sustaining ecosystems. There are several indicators of water resources stress. When
withdrawals are greater than 20% of the total renewable resources, water stress often is a
limiting factor on development. Withdrawals of 40% or more represent high stress. Similarly,
water stress may be a problem if a country or region has less than 1,700 m3 yr-1 of water per
capita. In the year 1990, approximately one-third of the world's population lived in countries
using more than 20% of their water resources, and by the year 2025 about 60% of a larger
total would be living in such a stressed country, only because of population growth. Higher
temperatures could increase such stress conditions. However, adaptation through appropriate
water management practices can reduce the adverse impacts. While climate change is just
one of the stresses on water resources in this increasingly populated world, it is clear that it
is an important one (see Table 8-2). The TAR projections using the SRES scenarios of future

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGII TAR Sections 4.1,
4.4.3, 4.5.2, & 4.6.2

Synthesis Report

Question 8

climate indicate a tendency for increased flood and drought risks for many areas under most
scenarios. Decreases of water availability in parts of a warmer world are projected in areas
like southern Africa and countries around the Mediterranean. Because of sea-level rise,
many coastal systems will experience saltwater intrusion into fresh groundwater and
encroachment of tidal water into estuaries and river systems, with consequential effects on
freshwater availability.
8.20

Water managers in some countries are beginning to consider climate change
explicitly, although methodologies for doing so are not yet well defined. By its
nature, water management is based around minimization of risks and adaptation to changing
circumstances, now also changing climate. There has been a gradual shift from "supplyside" approaches (i.e., providing water to satisfy demands by increased capacity reservoirs
or structural flood defenses) towards "demand-side" approaches (i.e., trimming demands
adequately to match water availability, using water more efficiently, and non-structural
means of preparedness to floods and droughts).

8.21

Interactions between climate change and other environmental
problems offer opportunities to capture synergies in developing
response options, enhancing benefits, and reducing costs (see
Figure 1-1).

8.22

By capturing synergies, some greenhouse gas mitigation actions may yield
extensive ancillary benefits for several other environmental problems, but also
trade-offs may occur. Examples include, inter alia, reduction of negative environmental
impacts such as air pollution and acid deposition; protecting forests, soils, and watersheds;
reducing distortionary subsidies and taxes; and inducing more efficient technological change
and diffusion, contributing to wider goals of sustainable development. However, dependent
on the way climate change or other environmental problems are addressed, and the degree
to which interlinking issues are taken into account, significant trade-offs may occur and
unanticipated costs may be incurred. For example, policy options to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions from the energy and land-use sectors can have both positive and negative
effects on other environmental problems:
* In the energy sector, greenhouse gas emissions as well as local and regional pollutants
could be reduced through more efficient and environmentally sound use of energy and
increasing the share of lower carbon emitting fossil fuels, advanced fossil-fuel
technologies (e.g., highly efficient combined cycle gas turbines, fuel cells, and combined
heat and power), and renewable energy technologies (e.g., increased use of environmentally
sound biofuels, hydropower, solar, wind- and wave-power). Increased use of biomass
as a substitute for fossil fuel could have positive or negative impacts on soils, biodiversity,
and water availability depending on the land use it replaces and the management regime.
* In the land-use sector, conservation of biological carbon pools not only prevents carbon
from being emitted into the atmosphere, it also can have a favorable effect on soil
productivity, prevent biodiversity loss, and reduce air pollution problems from biomass
burning. Carbon sequestration by plantation forestry can enhance carbon sinks and
protect soils and watersheds, but--if developed improperly--may have negative effects
on biodiversity and water availability. For example, in some implementations, monoculture
plantations could decrease local biodiversity.

WGIII TAR Sections 3.6.4,
4.4, 8.2.4, & 9.2.2-5

8.23

Conversely, addressing environmental problems other than climate change
can have ancillary climate benefits, but the linkages between the various
problems may also lead to trade-offs. Examples include:
* There are likely to be substantial greenhouse gas benefits from policies aimed at reducing
air pollution. For example, increasing pollution is often associated with the rapidly
growing transportation sector in all regions, involving emissions of particulate matter
and precursors of ozone pollution. Addressing these emissions to reduce the impacts

WGIII TAR Sections 2.4,
9.2.8, & 10.3.2, & SRES

WGII TAR Section 4.2.4

131

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

on human health, agriculture, and forestry through increasing energy efficiency or
penetration of non-fossil-fuel energy can also reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
* Controlling sulfur emissions has positive impacts on human health and vegetation, but
sulfate aerosols partly offset the warming effect of greenhouse gases and therefore
control of sulfur emissions can amplify possible climate change. If sulfur emissions are
controlled through desulfurization of flue gases at power plants, an energy penalty
results, with associated increase of greenhouse gas emissions.

132

8.24

Adopting environmentally sound technologies and practices offer particular
opportunities for economically, environmentally, and socially sound development
while avoiding greenhouse gas-intensive activities. For example, the application
of supply- and demand-side energy-efficient technologies simultaneously reduces various
energy-related environmental impacts and can lower the pressure on energy investments,
reduce public investments, improve export competitiveness, and enlarge energy reserves.
The adoption of more sustainable agricultural practices (e.g., in Africa) illustrates the mutually
reinforcing effects of climate change mitigation, environmental protection, and long-term
economic benefits. The introduction or expansion of agroforestry and balanced fertilizer
agriculture can improve food security and at the same time reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
More decentralized development patterns based on a stronger role for small- and mediumsized cities can decrease the migration of rural population into urban centers, reduce needs
for transportation, and allow the use of environmentally sound technologies (bio-fuel, solar
energy, wind, and small-scale hydropower) to tap the large reserves of natural resources.

WGII TAR Section 7.5.4 &
WGIII TAR Section 10.3.2

8.25

Reducing vulnerability to climate change can often reduce vulnerability to
other environmental stresses and vice versa. Examples include, inter alia:
* Protecting threatened ecosystems: Removing societal stresses and managing resources
in a sustainable manner may help unique and threatened systems also to cope with the
additional stress posed by climate change. Accounting for potential climatic changes
and integration with socio-economic needs and development plans can make biodiversity
conservation strategies and climate change adaptation measures more effective.
* Land-use management: Addressing or avoiding land degradation also decreases
vulnerability to climate change, especially when response strategies consider the social
and economic factors defining the land-use practices together with the additional risks
imposed by climate change. In regions where deforestation is progressing and leading
to carbon loss and increased peak runoff, restoring vegetation by reforestation (and
when possible by afforestation) and revegetation can help to combat desertification.
* Freshwater management: Problems with availability, abundance, and pollution of
freshwater, which are often caused by demographic and development pressures, can be
exacerbated by climate change. Reducing vulnerability to water stress (e.g., by water
conservation, water-demand management, and more efficient water use) also reduces
vulnerability to additional stress by climate change.

WGII TAR Sections 4.1-2
& 7.5.4

8.26

Approaches that exploit synergies between environmental policies and key
national socio-economic objectives like growth and equity could help mitigate
and reduce vulnerability to climate change, as well as promote sustainable
development. Sustainable development is closely linked with the environmental, social,
and economic components defining the status of each community. The interconnections
among those elements of sustainable development are reflected in Figure 8-3, illustrating
that important issues such as climate change, sustainability, poverty, and equity can be
related to all three components. Just as climate policies can yield ancillary benefits that improve
well-being, non-climate socio-economic policies may bring climate benefits. Utilizing such
ancillary benefits would aid in making development more sustainable. Complex interactions
among environmental, social, and economic challenges exist, and therefore none of these
three types of problems can be resolved in isolation.

WGIII TAR Sections 1.3.4,
2.2.3, & 10.3.2, & DES GP

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 8

Key elements of sustainable
development and interconnections
Economic

n
tio
za
ali ts
ern ac
int mp
nd of i
na e
tio enc
lua id
Va Inc

Ba Inter
sic ge
ne ner
ed ati
s a on
nd al e
live qu
lih ity
oo
ds

Growth
Efficiency
Stability

Poverty
Equity
Sustainability
Climate change

Social

Empowerment
Inclusion and consultation
Governance

Intergenerational equity
Values and culture

Environmental
Biodiversity/resilience
Natural resources
Pollution

DES GP

Figure 8-3: The vertices of the triangle represent the three major
dimensions or domains of sustainable development: economic,
social, and environmental. The economic domain is geared mainly
towards improving human welfare, primarily through increases in the
consumption of goods and services. The environmental domain focuses
on protection of the integrity and resilience of ecological systems. The
social domain emphasizes the strengthening of human relationships
and achievement of individual and group aspirations. Examples of
linkages between the three domains are shown along the sides of the
triangle. Important issues such as climate change, poverty, equity, and
sustainability lie within the triangle and interact with all three domains.

8.27

Countries with limited economic resources, low levels of technology, poor
information systems, inadequate infrastructure, unstable and weak institutions,
and inequitable empowerment and access to resources are not only highly
vulnerable to climate change but also to other environmental problems, and
at the same time have limited capacity to adapt to these changing circumstances
and/or mitigate them. The capacity of these countries to adapt and mitigate can be
enhanced when climate policies are integrated with non-climate objectives of national policy
development and turned into broad transition strategies to achieve the long-term social and
technological changes required by both sustainable development and climate change
mitigation.

WGII TAR Chapter 18 &
WGIII TAR Sections 1.5.1,
2.4.4, 5.3, 10.3.2, & 10.3.4

8.28

A great deal of interaction exists among the environmental issues that multilateral
environmental agreements address, and synergies can be exploited in their
implementation. Global environmental problems are addressed in a range of individual
conventions and agreements--the Vienna Convention and its Montreal Protocol, the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United Nations Convention on
Biological Diversity, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and the
United Nations Forum on Forests--as well as a range of regional agreements, such as the
Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. Table 8-3 provides a list of
selected examples of such conventions and instruments. They may contain, inter alia, similar
requirements concerning common shared or coordinated governmental and civil institutions
to enact the general objectives--for example, formulation of strategies and action plans as
a framework for country-level implementation; collection of data and processing information
and new and strengthened capacities for both human resources and institutional structures;
and reporting obligations. Also they provide a framework within which synergies in scientific
assessment can be utilized (see Box 8-1).

WGIII TAR Section 10.3.2

133

Climate Change 2001

Table 8-3

Selected international environmental treaties.

Convention and Agreement

Place and Date of
Adoption

The Antarctic Treaty
- Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection

Washington, 1959
Madrid, 1991

Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat
- Protocol to Amend the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially as Waterfowl Habitat

Ramsar, 1971
Paris, 1982

International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships

London, 1973

Convention on International Trade on Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora

Washington, 1973

Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution from Land-based Sources

Paris, 1974

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals

Bonn, 1979

UN/ECE Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution
- Protocol on Long-Term Financing of the Cooperative Programme for Monitoring and Evaluation of the
Long-Range Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe (EMEP)
- Protocol on the Reduction of Sulfur Emissions or their Transboundary Fluxes by at least 30%
- Protocol Concerning the Control of Emissions of Nitrogen or their Transboundary Fluxes
- Protocol Concerning the Control of Emissions of Volatile Organic Compounds or their Transboundary Fluxes
- Protocol on Further Reduction of Sulfur Emission
- Protocol on Heavy Metals
- Protocol on Persistent Organic Pollutants
- Protocol to Abate Acidification, Eutrophication, and Ground-level Ozone

Geneva, 1979
Geneva, 1984

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea

Montego Bay, 1982

Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer
- Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer

Vienna, 1985
Montreal, 1987

Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal
- Amendment to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
their Disposal

Basel, 1989
Geneva, 1995

UN/ECE Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes

Helsinki, 1992

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
- Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

New York, 1992
Kyoto, 1997

Convention on Biological Diversity
- Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity

Rio de Janeiro, 1992
Montreal, 2000

United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa

Paris, 1994

Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants

Stockholm, 2001

United Nations Forum on Forestsa

New York, 2001

a

Helsinki, 1985
Sofia, 1988
Geneva, 1991
Oslo, 1994
Aarhus, 1998
Aarhus, 1998
Gothenburg, 1999

This reference is included in view of the importance of international efforts towards a treaty on the issue of forests and their environmental
value.

Box 8-1

Assessing climate change and stratospheric ozone depletion.

The Ozone Scientific Assessment Panel of the Montreal Protocol and the IPCC have had integrated
assessment activities regarding the state of understanding of the coupling of the stratospheric ozone
layer and the climate system. For the past several years, the Scientific Assessments of Ozone Depletion
have included the climate relevance of ozone-depleting gases. Further these assessments have included
how current and future climate change and greenhouse gas abundances can influence ozone layer recovery.
The IPCC has assessed the climate-cooling tendency due to ozone layer depletion. In addition, joint
activities have been undertaken such as the assessment of the climate and ozone-layer impacts of
aviation and how the mitigative needs of the Montreal Protocol for substitutes for ozone-depleting
gases (notably hydrofluorocarbons) could be impacted by potential decisions about the global warming
properties of these gases. These assessments provide information on how decisions and actions regarding
one issue would influence the other, and they foster effective dialog between the policy frameworks.

134

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

WGI TAR Sections 4.2,
5.5, 6.13, & 7.2.4, WGIII
TAR Chapter 3 Appendix,
& SRAGA Section 4.2

Question 9
What are the most robust findings and key uncertainties regarding
attribution of climate change and regarding model projections of:
* Future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols?
* Future concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols?
* Future changes in regional and global climate?
* Regional and global impacts of climate change?
* Costs and benefits of mitigation and adaptation options?

Q9

Climate Change 2001

Introduction

136

9.1

The understanding of climate change, its impacts, and the options to mitigate
and adapt is developed through multi- and interdisciplinary research and
monitoring in an integrated assessment framework. As understanding deepens,
some findings become more robust and some uncertainties emerge as critical for informed
policy formulation. Some uncertainties arise from a lack of data and a lack of understanding
of key processes and from disagreement about what is known or even knowable. Other
uncertainties are associated with predicting social and personal behavior in response to
information and events. The uncertainties tend to escalate with the complexity of the problem,
as additional elements are introduced to include a more comprehensive range of physical,
technical, social, and political impacts and policy responses. The climate responds to human
influence without deliberation or choice; but human society can respond to climate change
deliberately, making choices between different options. An objective of the TAR and other
IPCC reports is to explore, assess, quantify, and, if possible, reduce these uncertainties.

9.2

In this report, a robust finding for climate change is defined as one that holds
under a variety of approaches, methods, models, and assumptions and one
that is expected to be relatively unaffected by uncertainties. A robust finding
can be expected to fall into the categories of well-established (high level of agreement and
high amount of evidence) and established but incomplete (high level of agreement, but
incomplete evidence) in the literature. Robustness is different from likelihood: A finding
that an outcome is "exceptionally unlikely" may be just as robust as the finding that it is
"virtually certain." A major development in the TAR is that of the multiple alternative
pathways for emissions and concentrations of greenhouse gases as represented by the SRES.
Robust findings are those that are maintained under a wide range of these possible worlds.

9.3

Key uncertainties in this context are those which, if reduced, may lead to new
and robust findings in relation to the questions of this report. These findings
may, in turn, lead to better or more of the information that underpins policy making. The
uncertainties can never be fully resolved, but often they can be bounded by more evidence
and understanding, particularly in the search for consistent outcomes or robust conclusions.

9.4

Robust findings and key uncertainties can be brought together
in the context of an integrated assessment framework.

9.5

The integrated assessment framework described in this report is used to bring
together the robust findings and key uncertainties in the model projections.
Such a framework can encompass all the disciplines involved in understanding the climate,
the biosphere, and human society. It emphasizes the linkages between the systems described
in the different Working Group reports of the TAR as well as considers linkages between
climate change and other environmental issues, and helps to identify gaps in knowledge. It
suggests how key uncertainties can affect the whole picture. Figure 1-1 shows how adaptation
and mitigation can be integrated into the assessment. The human and natural systems will
have to adapt to climate change, and development will be affected. The adaptation will be
both autonomous and via government initiatives, and adaptation actions will reduce (but cannot
entirely avoid) some of the impacts of climate change on these systems and on development.
Adaptation actions provide benefits but also entail costs. Mitigation is unlike adaptation in
that it reduces emissions at the start of the cycle, it reduces concentrations (compared to
what would otherwise occur), and it reduces climate change and the risks and uncertainties
associated with climate change. It further reduces the need for adaptation, the impacts of
climate change, and effects on socio-economic development. It is also different in that mitigation
aims to address the impacts on the climate system, whereas adaptation is primarily oriented
to address localized impacts of climate change. The primary benefit of mitigation is avoided
climate change, but it also has costs. In addition, mitigation gives rise to ancillary benefits

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Synthesis Report

Question 9

(e.g., reduced air pollution leading to improvements in human health). A fully integrated approach
to climate change assessment would consider the whole cycle shown in Figure 1-1 dynamically
with all the feedbacks but this could not be accomplished in the TAR.
9.6

Many of the robust findings as listed in Table SPM-3 are concerned with the existence of
a climate response to human activities and the sign of the response. Many of the key
uncertainties are concerned with the quantification of the magnitude and/or the timing of
the response and the potential effects of improving methods and relaxing assumptions.

Attribution of Climate Change
9.7

There is now stronger evidence for a human influence on the global
climate.

9.8

An increasing body of observations gives a collective picture of a warming
world and modeling studies indicate that most of the observed warming at
the Earth's surface over the last 50 years is likely to have been due to human
activities. Globally, the 1990s were very likely to have been the warmest decade in the
instrumental record (i.e., since the year 1861). For the Northern Hemisphere, the magnitude
of the warming in the last 100 years is likely to be the largest of any century during the past
1,000 years. Observations, together with model simulations, provide stronger evidence that
most of the warming observed over the last 50 years is attributable to the increase in greenhouse
gas concentrations. The observations also provide increased confidence in the ability of models
to project future climate change. Better quantification of the human influence depends on
reducing the key uncertainties relating to the magnitude and character of natural variability
and the magnitude of climate forcings due to natural factors and anthropogenic aerosols
(particularly indirect effects) and the relating of regional trends to anthropogenic climate change.

Q2.7 & Q2.10-11

Future Emissions and Concentrations of Greenhouse Gases and
Aerosols
9.9

Human activities increase the atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases.

9.10

Since the year 1750 (i.e., the beginning of the Industrial Revolution), the
atmospheric concentration of CO2 (the largest contributor to anthropogenic
radiative forcing) has increased by 31% due to human activities, and all SRES
scenarios project substantial increases in the future (Figure 9-1a). Other
greenhouse gases have also increased in concentrations since the year 1750 (e.g., CH4 by
150%, N2O by 17%). The present CO2 concentration has not been exceeded during the
past 420,000 years (the span measurable in ice cores) and likely not during the past 20
million years. The rate of increase is unprecedented relative to any sustained global changes
over at least the last 20,000 years. In projections of greenhouse gas concentrations based
on the set of SRES scenarios (see Box 3-1), CO2 concentrations continue to grow to the
year 2100. Most SRES scenarios show reductions in SO2 emissions (precursor for sulfate
aerosols) by the year 2100 compared with the year 2000. Some greenhouse gases (e.g.,
CO2, N2O, perfluorocarbons) have long lifetimes (a century or more) for their residence in
the atmosphere, while the lifetime of aerosols is measured in days. Key uncertainties are
inherent in the assumptions that underlie the wide range of future emissions in the SRES
scenarios and therefore the quantification of future concentrations. These uncertainties
relate to population growth, technological progress, economic growth, and governance
structures, which are particularly difficult to quantify. Further, inadequate emission scenarios
have been available of lower atmosphere ozone and aerosol precursors. Smaller uncertainties
arise from lack of understanding of all the factors inherent in modeling the carbon cycle
and including the effects of climate feedbacks. Accounting for all these uncertainties leads

Q2.4, Q3.3, Q3.5, & Q5.3

137

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Past and future CO2 atmospheric concentrations
Direct
measurements
Ice core data

ppm

Projections

ppm
1,000

1,000
900

900

800

800

700

700

600

600

500

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI

0
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

2100

A2
B1
B2
IS92a

0

Figure 9-1a: Observations of atmospheric CO2 concentration over the years 1000 to 2000 from ice core
WGI TAR SPM Figures 2a
& 5b
data supplemented with data from direct atmospheric measurements over the past few decades. Over
the period 2000 to 2100, projections are shown of CO2 concentrations based on the six illustrative SRES scenarios and IS92a (for comparison with
the SAR).

to a range of CO2 concentrations in the year 2100 between about 490 and 1,260 ppm
(compared to the pre-industrial concentration of about 280 ppm and of about 368 ppm in
the year 2000).
9.11

Fossil-fuel CO2 emissions are virtually certain to remain the dominant influence
on the trends in CO2 concentrations over the 21st century. This is implied by the
range of SRES scenarios in which projected fossil-fuel emissions exceed the foreseeable
biospheric sources and sinks for CO2. It is estimated that, even if all the carbon so far released
by land-use changes could be restored to the terrestrial biosphere (e.g., by reforestation),
CO2 concentration would be reduced by 40 to 70 ppm. There are key uncertainties in the
influence of changing land use and biospheric feedbacks on the uptake, storage, and release
of carbon that in turn could influence CO2 concentrations.

Future Changes in Regional and Global Climate
9.12

138

The climate has changed during the 20th century; larger changes
are projected for the 21st century.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Q4.11 & Q7.4

Synthesis Report

Question 9

9.13

Under all SRES scenarios, projections show the global average surface
temperature continuing to rise during the 21st century at rates of rise that
are very likely to be without precedent during the last 10,000 years, based on
paleoclimate data (Figure 9-1b). It is very likely that nearly all land areas will warm
more rapidly than the global average, particularly those at high northern latitudes in the
cold season. There are very likely to be more hot days; fewer cold days, cold waves, and
frost days; and a reduced diurnal temperature range.

Q3.7, Q3.11, & Q4.5

9.14

In a warmer world the hydrological cycle will become more intense. Global
average precipitation is projected to increase. More intense precipitation events (hence
flooding) are very likely over many areas. Increased summer drying and associated risk of
drought is likely over most mid-latitude continental interiors. Even with little or no change
in El Nino amplitude, an increase in temperatures globally is likely to lead to greater extremes
of drying and heavy rainfall, and increase the risk of droughts and floods that occur with El
Nino events in many different regions.

Q2.24, Q3.8, Q3.12, Q4.2,
& Q4.6

9.15

In a warmer world the sea level will rise, primarily due to thermal expansion
and loss of mass from glaciers and ice caps, the rise being continued for
hundreds of years even after stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations.
This is due to the long time scales on which the deep ocean adjusts to climate change. Ice
sheets will continue to react to climate change for thousands of years. Models project that
a local warming (annually averaged) of larger than 3C, sustained for many millennia,
would lead to virtually a complete melting of the Greenland ice sheet with a resulting sealevel rise of about 7 m.

Q3.9, Q3.14, Q4.15, & Q5.4

9.16

Key uncertainties that influence the quantification and the detail of future projections of
climate change are those associated with the SRES scenarios, and also those associated with
the modeling of climate change, in particular those that concern the understanding of key
feedback processes in the climate system, especially those involving clouds, water vapor,
and aerosols (including their indirect forcing). Allowing for these uncertainties leads to a range
of projections of surface temperature increase for the period 1990 to 2100 of 1.4 to 5.8C
(see Figure 9-1b) and of sea-level rise from 0.09 to 0.88 m. Another uncertainty concerns
the understanding of the probability distribution associated with temperature and sea-level
projections for the range of SRES scenarios. Key uncertainties also affect the detail of
regional climate change and its impacts because of the limited capabilities of the regional
models, and the global models driving them, and inconsistencies in results between different
models especially in some areas and in precipitation. A further key uncertainty concerns
the mechanisms, quantification, time scales, and likelihoods associated with large-scale
abrupt/non-linear changes (e.g., ocean thermohaline circulation).

Q3.6, Q3.9, & Q4.9-19

Regional and Global Impacts of Climate Change
9.17

Projected climate change will have beneficial and adverse effects
on both environmental and socio-economic systems, but the
larger the changes and the rate of change in climate, the more
the adverse effects predominate.

9.18

Regional changes in climate, particularly increases in temperature, have already
affected and will continue to affect a diverse set of physical and biological
systems in many parts of the world. Examples of observed changes include shrinkage
of glaciers, reductions in seasonal snow cover, thawing of permafrost, later freezing and earlier
break-up of ice on rivers and lakes, loss of Arctic sea ice, lengthening of mid- to high-latitude
growing seasons, poleward and altitudinal shifts of plant and animal ranges, changes in the
seasonal progression of some plants and animals, declines in some plant and animal populations,
and damage to coral reefs. These observed rates of change would be expected to increase

Q3.14 & Q3.18-21

139

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Variations of the Earths surface temperature: years 1000 to 2100
Departures in temperature in C (from the 1990 value)
Global
instrumental
observations

Observations, Northern Hemisphere, proxy data

Several models

Projections

all SRES envelope

6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Bars show the
range in year 2100
produced by
several models

0.5
0.0

Scenarios
A1B
A1T

-0.5

A1FI

-1.0

A2
B1
B2

1000

1100

1200

1300

1400

1500

1600

1700

1800

1900

2000

2100

IS92a

Figure 9-1b: Variations of the Earth's surface temperature: years 1000 to 2100. Over the period 1000 to
WGI TAR SPM Figures 1b
& 5d
1860, observations are shown of variations in average surface temperature of the Northern Hemisphere (corresponding
data from the Southern Hemisphere not available) constructed from proxy data (tree rings, corals, ice cores, and historical records). The line
shows the 50-year average, and the grey region the 95% confidence limit in the annual data. From the years 1860 to 2000, observations are
shown of variations of global and annual averaged surface temperature from the instrumental record. The line shows the decadal average. Over
the period 2000 to 2100, projections are shown of globally averaged surface temperature for the six illustrative SRES scenarios and IS92a as
estimated by a model with average climate sensitivity. The grey region "several models all SRES envelope" shows the range of results from the
full range of 35 SRES scenarios in addition to those from a range of models with different climate sensitivities.

in the future represented by any of the SRES scenarios, for which the warming trends for
the 21st century are two to ten times those observed for the 20th century. Many physical
systems are vulnerable to climate change: For example, the impact of coastal storm surges
will be exacerbated by sea-level rise, and glaciers and permafrost will continue to retreat.
In some mid- to high latitudes, plant productivity (trees and some agricultural crops) would

140

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 9

increase with small increases in temperature. Plant productivity would decrease in most regions
of the world for warming beyond a few C. In most tropical and subtropical regions, yields
are projected to decrease for almost any increase in temperature.
9.19

Ecosystems and species are vulnerable to climate change and other stresses
(as illustrated by observed impacts of recent regional temperature changes)
and some will be irreversibly damaged or lost. Natural systems at risk include coral
reefs and atolls, mangroves, boreal and tropical forests, polar and alpine ecosystems, prairie
wetlands, and remnant native grasslands. While some species may increase in abundance
or range, climate change will increase existing risks of extinction of some more vulnerable
species and loss of biodiversity. It is well-established that the geographical extent of the
damage or loss, and the number of systems affected, will increase with the magnitude and
rate of climate change.

Q3.18

9.20

The adverse impacts of climate change are expected to fall disproportionately
upon developing countries and the poor persons within countries. Projected
changes in climate extremes could have major consequences especially on water and food
security and on health. The vulnerability of human societies and natural systems to climate
extremes is demonstrated by the damage, hardship, and death caused by events such as
droughts, floods, heat waves, avalanches, landslides, and windstorms, which have shown
an increasing trend during recent decades. While overall precipitation is projected to increase,
there are likely to be much larger changes in intensity and frequency, which will increase
the likelihood of extremes of drying and precipitation, and thus droughts and floods during
the 21st century. These increases combined with increased water stress (occurring already because
of increasing demand) will affect food security and health especially in many developing
countries. Conversely, the frequency and magnitude of extreme low-temperature events, such
as cold spells, is projected to decrease in the future, with both positive and negative impacts.

Q3.17, Q3.21-22, & Q3.33

9.21

Populations that inhabit small islands and low-lying coastal areas are at
particular risk of severe social and economic effects from sea-level rise and
storm surges. Tens of millions of people living in deltas, low-lying coastal areas, and on
small islands will face risk of displacement. Further negative impacts will be increased by
saltwater intrusion and flooding due to storm surges and loss of coastal wetlands and slowing
down of river discharges.

Q3.23-24

9.22

Key uncertainties in the identification and quantification of impacts arise from the lack of
reliable local or regional detail in climate change, especially in the projection of extremes,
inadequate accounting in impacts assessments for the effects of changes in extremes and
disasters, limited knowledge of some non-linear processes and feedbacks, uncertainties in
the costing of the damage due to climate impacts, lack of both relevant data and understanding
of key processes in different regions, and uncertainties in assessing and predicting the
response of ecological and social (e.g., impact of vector- and water-borne diseases), and
economic systems to the combined effect of climate change and other stresses such as
land-use change, local pollution, etc.

Q3.13, Q4.10, & Q4.18-19

Costs and Benefits of Adaptation and Mitigation Options
9.23

Adaptation is a necessity; its cost can be reduced by anticipation,
analysis, and planning.

9.24

Adaptation is no longer an option, it is a necessity, given that climate changes
and related impacts are already occurring. Anticipatory and reactive
adaptation, which will vary with location and sector, has the potential to reduce
adverse impacts of climate change, to enhance beneficial impacts, and to
produce many immediate ancillary benefits, but will not prevent all damages.

Q3.26-28 & Q3.33

141

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

However, its potential is much more limited for natural systems than for human systems. The
capacity of different regions to adapt to climate change depends highly upon their current
and future states of socio-economic development and their exposure to climate stress.
Therefore the potential for adaptation is more limited for developing countries, which are
projected to be the most adversely affected. Adaptation appears to be easier if the climate
changes are modest and/or gradual rather than large and/or abrupt. If climate changes more
rapidly than expected in any region, especially with respect to climate extremes, then the
potential of adaptation to diminish vulnerability of human systems will be lessened.

142

9.25

The costs of adaptation can be reduced by anticipation and planned action,
and many costs may be relatively small, especially when adaptation policies
and measures contribute to other goals of sustainable development.

Q3.31 & Q3.36-37

9.26

Key uncertainties regarding adaptations relate to the inadequate representation by models
of local changes, lack of foresight, inadequate knowledge of benefits and costs, possible side
effects including acceptability and speed of implementation, various barriers to adaptation,
and more limited opportunities and capacities for adaptation in developing countries.

Q3.27

9.27

The primary economic benefits of mitigation are the avoided costs
associated with the adverse impacts of climate change.

9.28

Greenhouse gas emission reduction (mitigation) action would lessen the
pressures on natural and human systems from climate change. Comprehensive,
quantitative estimates of global primary benefits of mitigating climate change do not exist.
For mean temperature increases over a few C relative to the year 1990, impacts are
predominantly adverse, so net primary benefits of mitigation are positive. A key uncertainty
is the net balance of adverse and beneficial impacts of climate change for temperature
increases less than about a few C. These averages conceal wide regional variations.

9.29

Mitigation generates costs and ancillary benefits.

9.30

Major reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions would be necessary
to achieve stabilization of their concentrations. For example, for the most important
anthropogenic greenhouse gas, carbon cycle models indicate that stabilization of atmospheric
CO2 concentrations at 450, 650, or 1,000 ppm would require global anthropogenic CO2
emissions to drop below year 1990 levels within a few decades, about a century, or about
2 centuries, respectively, and continue to decrease steadily thereafter. Emissions would
peak in about 1 to 2 decades (450 ppm) and roughly a century (1,000 ppm) from the present.
Eventually stabilization would require CO2 emissions to decline to a very small fraction of
current global emissions. The key uncertainties here relate to the possibilities of climate
change feedbacks and development pathways and how these affect the timing of emissions
reductions.

Q6.4

9.31

Mitigation costs and benefits vary widely across sectors, countries, and
development paths. In general, it is easier to identify sectors--such as coal, possibly oil
and gas, and some energy-intensive industries dependent on energy produced from these
fossil fuels--that are very likely to suffer an economic disadvantage from mitigation. Their
economic losses are more immediate, more concentrated, and more certain. The sectors
that are likely to benefit include renewable energy, services, and new industries whose
development is stimulated by demand for low-emission fuels and production techniques.
Different countries and development paths have widely different energy structures, so they
too have different costs and benefits from mitigation. Carbon taxes can have negative income
effects on low-income groups unless the tax revenues are used directly or indirectly to
compensate such effects.

Q7.14, Q7.17, & Q7.34

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Q6.10

Synthesis Report

Question 9

9.32

Emission constraints in Annex I countries have well established, albeit varied,
"spill-over" effects on non-Annex I countries. Analyses of the effects of emissions
constraints on Annex I countries report reductions below what would otherwise occur in
both projected GDP and in projected oil revenues for oil-exporting non-Annex I countries.

Q7.19

9.33

Lower emissions scenarios require different patterns of energy resource
development and an increase in energy R&D to assist accelerating the
development and deployment of advanced environmentally sound energy
technologies. Emissions of CO2 due to fossil-fuel burning are virtually certain to be to the
dominant influence on the trend on the atmospheric CO2 concentration during the 21st century.
Resource data assessed in the TAR may imply a change in the energy mix and the introduction
of new sources of energy during the 21st century. Fossil-fuel resources will not limit carbon
emissions during the 21st century. The carbon in proven conventional oil and gas reserves is
much less, however, than the cumulative carbon emissions associated with stabilization of CO2
at levels of 450 ppm or higher.25 These resource data may imply a change in the energy mix
and the introduction of new sources of energy during the 21st century. The choice of energy mix
and associated technologies and investments--either more in the direction of exploitation of
unconventional oil and gas resources, or in the direction of non-fossil energy sources, or fossil
energy technology with carbon capture and storage--will determine whether, and if so, at what
level and cost, greenhouse concentrations can be stabilized. Key uncertainties are the future relative
prices of energy and carbon-based fuels, and the relative technical and economic attractiveness
of non-fossil-fuel energy alternatives compared with unconventional oil and gas resources.

Q7.27

9.34

Significant progress in energy-saving and low-carbon technologies has been
made since 1995, and the progress has been faster than anticipated in the
SAR. Net emission reductions could be achieved through, inter alia, improved techniques
in production and use of energy, shifts to low- or no-carbon technologies, CO2 removal and
storage, improved land-use and forestry practices, and movement to more sustainable
lifestyles. Significant progress is taking place in the development of wind turbines, solar
energy, hybrid engine cars, fuel cells, and underground CO2 storage. Key uncertainties are
(a) the likelihood of technological breakthroughs leading to substantial reductions in costs
and rapid take-up of low-carbon processes and products, and (b) the future scale of private
and public R&D expenditures on these technologies.

Q7.3

9.35

Studies examined in the TAR suggest substantial technological and other
opportunities for lowering mitigation costs. National mitigation responses
to climate change can be more effective if deployed as a portfolio of policy
instruments to limit or reduce net greenhouse gas emissions. The costs of
mitigation are strongly affected by development paths, with those paths involving substantial
increases in greenhouse gas emissions requiring more mitigation to reach a stabilization target,
and hence higher costs. These costs can be substantially reduced or even turned into net
benefits with a portfolio of policy instruments (including those that help to overcome barriers)
to the extent that policies can exploit "no-regrets" opportunities in the following areas:
* Technological options: Technological options may achieve global emissions reductions
of 1.9 to 2.6 Gt Ceq yr-1 by year 2010 and 3.6 to 5.0 Gt Ceq yr-1 by year 2020. Half of these
reductions may be realized with one component of their economic cost (net capital, operating,
and maintenance costs) with direct benefits exceeding direct costs, and the other half
with that component of their economic cost ranging from US$0 to US$100 per t Ceq.26
Depending on the emissions scenario, global emissions could be reduced below year
2000 levels over the 2010 to 2020 time frame. Key uncertainties are the identification,

Q7.6-7, Q7.14-15, Q7.20,
& Q7.23, & Q7 Box 7-1

25

The reference to a particular concentration level does not imply an agreed-upon desirability of stabilization at
this level.
26
These cost estimates in 1998 prices are derived using discount rates in the range of 5 to 12%, consistent with
public-sector discount rates. Private internal rates of return vary greatly and are often significantly higher.

143

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

extent, and nature of any barriers that impede adoption of promising low-emission
technologies, and the estimation of the costs of overcoming the barriers.
* Ancillary benefits: Depending on factors (such as location of the greenhouse gas emissions,
the prevailing local climate, and the population density, composition, and health) the
magnitude of the ancillary benefits of mitigation may be comparable to the costs of the
mitigating policies and measures. Key uncertainties are the magnitude and location of
these benefits involving the scientific assessment and valuation of health risks of air
pollution, particularly those involving fine aerosols and particles.
* Double dividends: Instruments (such as taxes or auctioned permits) provide revenues
to the government. If used to finance reductions in existing distortionary taxes ("revenue
recycling"), these revenues reduce the economic cost of achieving greenhouse gas reductions.
The magnitude of this offset depends on the existing tax structure, type of tax cuts,
labor market conditions, and method of recycling. Under some circumstances, it is possible
that the economic benefits may exceed the costs of mitigation. Key uncertainties regarding
the overall net costs of mitigation vary between countries, depending on the existing
tax structure, the extent of the distortion, and the type of tax cuts that are acceptable.
9.36

Modeling studies show that emissions trading reduces costs of mitigation
for those participating in the trading. Global modeling studies, with results depending
strongly upon assumptions, project that costs of mitigation based on Kyoto targets are
likely to be reduced by full carbon-permit trading within the Annex B27 group of countries.
Annex I OECD28 countries may expect aggregate costs to be reduced by about half through
full permit trading. Annex I economies in transition are projected to be unaffected or to
gain several percent increase in GDP. Oil-exporting, non-Annex I countries may also expect
similar reductions in costs under such trading. The aggregate effects of trading are expected
to be positive for other non-Annex I countries. Those countries that may expect a loss or
gain without Annex I trading may expect a smaller change with trading. A key uncertainty
is the extent of the underlying costs, which vary widely across countries, and how these
cost estimates will be changed (a) when methods are improved and (b) when some of the
assumptions of the models are relaxed. Such assumptions are concerned with:
* Allowance for exemptions in the emission-permit trading in concert with other policies
and measures
* Consideration of various market imperfections
* Allowance for induced technical change
* Inclusion of ancillary benefits
* Opportunities for double dividends
* Inclusion of policies for non-CO2 greenhouse gases and non-energy sources of all
greenhouse gases (e.g., CH4 from agriculture)
* Offsets from sinks.

Q7.18-19

9.37

Although model projections indicate that long-term global growth paths of
GDP are not significantly affected by mitigation actions towards stabilization,
these do not show the larger variations that occur over some shorter time
periods, sectors, or regions.

Q7.25

9.38

Unexpected public policies ("quick fixes") with sudden short-term effects may
cost economies much more than expected policies with gradual effects. A
key uncertainty in the magnitude of the costs lies in the existence of well-designed
contingency plans in the event of policy shifts (e.g., as a result of a sudden shift in public

Q7.24 & Q7.31

27

Annex B countries: Group of countries included in Annex B of the Kyoto Protocol that have agreed to a target for their
greenhouse gas emissions, including all the Annex I countries (as amended in 1998) but Turkey and Belarus.
28
Annex I countries: Group of countries included in Annex I to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, including all developed countries in the the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
and those with economies in transition.

144

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Question 9

perception of the climate change). Other key uncertainties for costs lie in the possibilities
of the rapid short-term effects including, or leading to, abrupt reductions in costs of lowcarbon processes and products, shifts towards low-emission technologies, and/or changes
towards more sustainable lifestyles.
9.39

Near-term action in mitigation and adaptation would reduce risks. Because of
the long time lags associated both with the climate system (e.g., ~100 years for atmospheric
CO2) and with human response, near-term action in mitigation and adaptation would reduce
risks. Inertia in the interacting climate, ecological, and socio-economic systems is a major
reason why anticipatory adaptation and mitigation actions are beneficial.

Q5.19 & Q5.24

9.40

Adaptation can complement mitigation in a cost-effective strategy to reduce
climate change risks; together they can contribute to sustainable development
objectives. Some future paths that focus on the social, economic, and environmental
elements of sustainable development may result in lower greenhouse gas emissions than
other paths, so that the level of additional policies and measures required for a particular
level of stabilization and any associated costs can also be lower. A key uncertainty is the
lack of appropriate knowledge on the interactions between climate change and other
environmental issues and the related socio-economic implications. A related issue is the
pace of change in integrating the main global conventions and protocols associated with
climate change (e.g., those involving world trade, transboundary pollution, biodiversity,
desertification, stratospheric ozone depletion, health, and food security). It is also uncertain
at which rate individual countries will integrate sustainable development concepts into
policy-making processes.

Q1.9 & Q8.21-28

9.41

Development paths that meet sustainable development objectives may result
in lower levels of greenhouse gas emissions. Key choices about future development
paths and the future of the climate are being made now in both developed and developing
countries. Information is available to help decision makers evaluate benefits and costs
from adaptation and mitigation over a range of options and sustainable development
pathways. Anticipated adaptation could be much less costly than reactive adaptation.
Mitigation of climate change can reduce and postpone the impacts, lowering the damages
and giving human societies as well as animals and plants more time to adapt.

Q5.22, Q7.25, & Q8.26

Further Work
9.42

Significant progress has been made in the TAR in many aspects of the
knowledge required to understand climate change and the human response
to it. However, there remain important areas where further work is required, in particular:
* The detection and attribution of climate change
* The understanding and prediction of regional changes in climate and climate extremes
* The quantification of climate change impacts at the global, regional, and local levels
* The analysis of adaptation and mitigation activities
* The integration of all aspects of the climate change issue into strategies for sustainable
development
* Comprehensive and integrated investigations to support the judgment as to what
constitutes "dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system."

WGI TAR SPM, WGII TAR
SPM, & WGIII TAR SPM

145

Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report

Working Group Summaries

Working Group Summaries for Policymakers and Technical Summaries
Working Group I: The Scientific Basis
Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
Working Group III: Mitigation

Climate Change 2001:
The Scientific Basis

Working Group I Summaries

Summary for Policymakers
A Report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Technical Summary of the Working Group I Report
A Report accepted by Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change but not approved in detail

Part of the Working Group I contribution to the Third Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Contents

Summary for Policymakers
Source Information: Summary for Policymakers

Technical Summary
A. Introduction
A.1. The IPCC and its Working Groups
A.2. The First and Second Assessment Reports of
Working Group I
A.3. The Third Assessment Report: This Technical
Summary

151

D. The Simulation of the Climate System and
its Changes
D.1. Climate Processes and Feedbacks
D.2. The Coupled Systems

194
195

164

167
168
168
168
169

B. The Observed Changes in the Climate
System
171
B.1. Observed Changes in Temperature
171
B.2. Observed Changes in Precipitation and
Atmospheric Moisture
174
B.3. Observed Changes in Snow Cover and Landand Sea-Ice Extent
175
B.4. Observed Changes in Sea Level
175
B.5. Observed Changes in Atmospheric and
175
Oceanic Circulation Patterns
B.6. Observed Changes in Climate Variability and
Extreme Weather and Climate Events
176
B.7. The Collective Picture: A Warming World and
177
Other Changes in the Climate System
C. The Forcing Agents That Cause Climate
Change
C.1. Observed Changes in Globally Well-Mixed
Greenhouse Gas Concentrations and Radiative Forcing
C.2. Observed Changes in Other Radiatively
Important Gases
C.3. Observed and Modelled Changes in Aerosols
C.4. Observed Changes in Other Anthropogenic
Forcing Agents Land-use (albedo) change
C.5. Observed and Modelled Changes in Solar and
Volcanic Activity
C.6. Global Warming Potentials

D.3. Regionalisation Techniques
D.4. Overall Assessment of Abilities

179
180
185
186
187
187
188

188
188
193

E. The Identification of a Human Influence on
Climate Change
E.1. The Meaning of Detection and Attribution
E.2. A Longer and More Closely Scrutinised
Observational Record
E.3. New Model Estimates of Internal Variability
E.4. New Estimates of Responses to Natural
Forcing
E.5. Sensitivity to Estimates of Climate Change
Signals
E.6. A Wider Range of Detection Techniques
E.7. Remaining Uncertainties in Detection and
Attribution
E.8. Synopsis
F. The Projections of the Earth's Future
Climate
F.1. The IPCC Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios (SRES)
F.2. Projections of Future Changes in Greenhouse
Gases and Aerosols
F.3. Projections of Future Changes in Temperature
F.4. Projections of Future Changes in Precipitation
F.5. Projections of Future Changes in Extreme
Events
F.6. Projections of Future Changes in Thermohaline
Circulation
F.7. Projections of Future Changes in Modes of
Natural Variability
F.8. Projections of Future Changes in Land Ice
(Glaciers, Ice Caps and Ice Sheets), Sea Ice and
Snow Cover
F.9. Projections of Future Changes in Sea Level
F.10. Projections of Future Changes in Response to
CO2 Concentration Stabilisation Profiles
G. Advancing Understanding
G.1. Data
G.2. Climate Processes and Modelling
G.3. Human Aspects
G.4. International Framework
Source Information: Technical Summary

196
196
196
197
197
197
199
199
201

201
201
202
205
206
208
209
210

211
211
213
214
215
215
215
215
216

Climate Change 2001:
The Scientific Basis

Summary for Policymakers

A Report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Based on a draft prepared by:
Daniel L. Albritton, Myles R. Allen, Alfons P. M. Baede, John A. Church, Ulrich Cubasch, Dai Xiaosu, Ding Yihui, Dieter H.
Ehhalt, Christopher K. Folland, Filippo Giorgi, Jonathan M. Gregory, David J. Griggs, Jim M. Haywood, Bruce Hewitson, John
T. Houghton, Joanna I. House, Michael Hulme, Ivar Isaksen, Victor J. Jaramillo, Achuthan Jayaraman, Catherine A. Johnson,
Fortunat Joos, Sylvie Joussaume, Thomas Karl, David J. Karoly, Haroon S. Kheshgi, Corrine Le Quere, Kathy Maskell, Luis J.
Mata, Bryant J. McAvaney, Mack McFarland, Linda O. Mearns, Gerald A. Meehl, L. Gylvan Meira-Filho, Valentin P. Meleshko,
John F. B. Mitchell, Berrien Moore, Richard K. Mugara, Maria Noguer, Buruhani S. Nyenzi, Michael Oppenheimer, Joyce E.
Penner, Steven Pollonais, Michael Prather, I. Colin Prentice, Venkatchala Ramaswamy, Armando Ramirez-Rojas, Sarah C. B.
Raper, M. Jim Salinger, Robert J. Scholes, Susan Solomon, Thomas F. Stocker, John M. R. Stone, Ronald J. Stouffer, Kevin E.
Trenberth, Ming-Xing Wang, Robert T. Watson, Kok S. Yap, John Zillman
with contributions from many authors and reviewers.

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Introduction

account various adjustments, including urban heat island
effects. The record shows a great deal of variability; for
example, most of the warming occurred during the 20th
century, during two periods, 1910 to 1945 and 1976 to 2000.
* Globally, it is very likely7 that the 1990s was the warmest
decade and 1998 the warmest year in the instrumental
record, since 1861 (see Figure 1a).
* New analyses of proxy data for the Northern Hemisphere
indicate that the increase in temperature in the 20th century
is likely7 to have been the largest of any century during the
past 1,000 years. It is also likely7 that, in the Northern
Hemisphere, the 1990s was the warmest decade and 1998
the warmest year (Figure 1b). Because less data are
available, less is known about annual averages prior to
1,000 years before present and for conditions prevailing
in most of the Southern Hemisphere prior to 1861.
* On average, between 1950 and 1993, night-time daily
minimum air temperatures over land increased by about
0.2C per decade. This is about twice the rate of increase
in daytime daily maximum air temperatures (0.1C per
decade). This has lengthened the freeze-free season in many
mid- and high latitude regions. The increase in sea surface
temperature over this period is about half that of the mean
land surface air temperature.

The Third Assessment Report of Working Group I of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) builds
upon past assessments and incorporates new results from the
past five years of research on climate change1. Many hundreds
of scientists2 from many countries participated in its preparation
and review.
This Summary for Policymakers (SPM), which was approved
by IPCC member governments in Shanghai in January 20013,
describes the current state of understanding of the climate
system and provides estimates of its projected future evolution
and their uncertainties. Further details can be found in the
underlying report, and the appended Source Information
provides cross references to the report's chapters.

An increasing body of observations gives
a collective picture of a warming world
and other changes in the climate system.
Since the release of the Second Assessment Report (SAR4),
additional data from new studies of current and palaeoclimates,
improved analysis of data sets, more rigorous evaluation of
their quality, and comparisons among data from different
sources have led to greater understanding of climate change.

Temperatures have risen during the past four
decades in the lowest 8 kilometres of the
atmosphere.

The global average surface temperature has
*
increased
over the 20th century by about 0.6C.

* Since the late 1950s (the period of adequate observations
from weather balloons), the overall global temperature
increases in the lowest 8 kilometres of the atmosphere and
in surface temperature have been similar at 0.1C per decade.
* Since the start of the satellite record in 1979, both satellite
and weather balloon measurements show that the global
average temperature of the lowest 8 kilometres of the
atmosphere has changed by +0.05  0.10C per decade,
but the global average surface temperature has increased
significantly by +0.15  0.05C per decade. The difference
in the warming rates is statistically significant. This difference
occurs primarily over the tropical and sub-tropical regions.
* The lowest 8 kilometres of the atmosphere and the surface
are influenced differently by factors such as stratospheric
ozone depletion, atmospheric aerosols, and the El Nino
phenomenon. Hence, it is physically plausible to expect
that over a short time period (e.g., 20 years) there may be
differences in temperature trends. In addition, spatial

* The global average surface temperature (the average of near
surface air temperature over land, and sea surface temperature)
has increased since 1861. Over the 20th century the
increase has been 0.6  0.2C5, 6 (Figure 1a). This value is
about 0.15C larger than that estimated by the SAR for the
period up to 1994, owing to the relatively high temperatures
of the additional years (1995 to 2000) and improved
methods of processing the data. These numbers take into

1

Climate change in IPCC usage refers to any change in climate over
time, whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity.
This usage differs from that in the Framework Convention on Climate
Change, where climate change refers to a change of climate that is
attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the
composition of the global atmosphere and that is in addition to natural
climate variability observed over comparable time periods.
2
In total 122 Co-ordinating Lead Authors and Lead Authors, 515
Contributing Authors, 21 Review Editors and 420 Expert Reviewers.
3
Delegations of 99 IPCC member countries participated in the Eighth
Session of Working Group I in Shanghai on 17 to 20 January 2001.
4
The IPCC Second Assessment Report is referred to in this Summary
for Policymakers as the SAR.
5
Generally temperature trends are rounded to the nearest 0.05C per
unit time, the periods often being limited by data availability.
6
In general, a 5% statistical significance level is used, and a 95%
confidence level.

152

IPCC Third Assessment Report

7

In this Summary for Policymakers and in the Technical Summary, the
following words have been used where appropriate to indicate judgmental
estimates of confidence: virtually certain (greater than 99% chance that
a result is true); very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance);
medium likelihood (33-66% chance); unlikely (10-33% chance); very
unlikely (1-10% chance); exceptionally unlikely (less than 1% chance).
The reader is referred to individual chapters for more details.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Summary for Policymakers

Variations of the Earth's surface temperature for:
(a) the past 140 years

Departures in temperature (C)
from the 1961 to 1990 average

0.8
GLOBAL
0.4

0.0

-0.4
Data from thermometers.

-0.8
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

(b) the past 1,000 years
NORTHERN HEMISPHERE

Departures in temperature (C)
from the 1961 to 1990 average

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

1000

Data from thermometers (red) and from tree rings,
corals, ice cores and historical records (blue).

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Year
Figure 1: Variations of the Earth's surface temperature over the last 140 years and the last millennium. (a) The Earth's surface
temperature is shown year by year (red bars) and approximately decade by decade (black line, a filtered annual curve suppressing fluctuations
below near decadal time-scales). There are uncertainties in the annual data (thin black whisker bars represent the 95% confidence range)
due to data gaps, random instrumental errors and uncertainties, uncertainties in bias corrections in the ocean surface temperature data and
also in adjustments for urbanisation over the land. Over both the last 140 years and 100 years, the best estimate is that the global average
surface temperature has increased by 0.6  0.2C. (b) Additionally, the year by year (blue curve) and 50 year average (black curve) variations
of the average surface temperature of the Northern Hemisphere for the past 1000 years have been reconstructed from "proxy" data calibrated
against thermometer data (see list of the main proxy data in the diagram). The 95% confidence range in the annual data is represented by
the grey region. These uncertainties increase in more distant times and are always much larger than in the instrumental record due to the use
of relatively sparse proxy data. Nevertheless the rate and duration of warming of the 20th century has been much greater than in any of the
previous nine centuries. Similarly, it is likely7 that the 1990s have been the warmest decade and 1998 the warmest year of the millennium.
[Based upon (a) Chapter 2, Figure 2.7c and (b) Chapter 2, Figure 2.20]

153

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

sampling techniques can also explain some of the differences
in trends, but these differences are not fully resolved.
*
Snow cover and ice extent have decreased.
* Satellite data show that there are very likely7 to have been
decreases of about 10% in the extent of snow cover since
the late 1960s, and ground-based observations show that
there is very likely7 to have been a reduction of about two
weeks in the annual duration of lake and river ice cover in
the mid- and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere,
over the 20th century.
* There has been a widespread retreat of mountain glaciers
in non-polar regions during the 20th century.
* Northern Hemisphere spring and summer sea-ice extent
has decreased by about 10 to 15% since the 1950s. It is
likely7 that there has been about a 40% decline in Arctic
sea-ice thickness during late summer to early autumn in
recent decades and a considerably slower decline in winter
sea-ice thickness.
Global average sea level has risen and ocean heat
content has increased.

*

*

*

Some important aspects of climate appear not to
have changed.

* Tide gauge data show that global average sea level rose
between 0.1 and 0.2 metres during the 20th century.
* Global ocean heat content has increased since the late
1950s, the period for which adequate observations of subsurface ocean temperatures have been available.

* A few areas of the globe have not warmed in recent decades,
mainly over some parts of the Southern Hemisphere oceans
and parts of Antarctica.
* No significant trends of Antarctic sea-ice extent are apparent
since 1978, the period of reliable satellite measurements.
* Changes globally in tropical and extra-tropical storm
intensity and frequency are dominated by inter-decadal to
multi-decadal variations, with no significant trends evident
over the 20th century. Conflicting analyses make it difficult
to draw definitive conclusions about changes in storm
activity, especially in the extra-tropics.
* No systematic changes in the frequency of tornadoes, thunder
days, or hail events are evident in the limited areas analysed.

Changes have also occurred in other important
aspects of climate.
* It is very likely7 that precipitation has increased by 0.5 to
1% per decade in the 20th century over most mid- and
high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere continents, and
it is likely7 that rainfall has increased by 0.2 to 0.3% per
decade over the tropical (10N to 10S) land areas. Increases
in the tropics are not evident over the past few decades. It is
also likely7 that rainfall has decreased over much of the
Northern Hemisphere sub-tropical (10N to 30N) land areas
during the 20th century by about 0.3% per decade. In contrast
to the Northern Hemisphere, no comparable systematic
changes have been detected in broad latitudinal averages
over the Southern Hemisphere. There are insufficient data
to establish trends in precipitation over the oceans.
* In the mid- and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere
over the latter half of the 20th century, it is likely7 that
there has been a 2 to 4% increase in the frequency of heavy
precipitation events. Increases in heavy precipitation events
can arise from a number of causes, e.g., changes in
atmospheric moisture, thunderstorm activity and largescale storm activity.
* It is likely7 that there has been a 2% increase in cloud cover
over mid- to high latitude land areas during the 20th century.

154

IPCC Third Assessment Report

In most areas the trends relate well to the observed decrease
in daily temperature range.
Since 1950 it is very likely7 that there has been a reduction
in the frequency of extreme low temperatures, with a smaller
increase in the frequency of extreme high temperatures.
Warm episodes of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) phenomenon (which consistently affects regional
variations of precipitation and temperature over much of
the tropics, sub-tropics and some mid-latitude areas) have
been more frequent, persistent and intense since the mid1970s, compared with the previous 100 years.
Over the 20th century (1900 to 1995), there were relatively
small increases in global land areas experiencing severe
drought or severe wetness. In many regions, these changes
are dominated by inter-decadal and multi-decadal climate
variability, such as the shift in ENSO towards more warm
events.
In some regions, such as parts of Asia and Africa, the
frequency and intensity of droughts have been observed
to increase in recent decades.

Emissions of greenhouse gases and
aerosols due to human activities continue
to alter the atmosphere in ways that are
expected to affect the climate.
Changes in climate occur as a result of both internal variability
within the climate system and external factors (both natural
and anthropogenic). The influence of external factors on
climate can be broadly compared using the concept of radiative
forcing8. A positive radiative forcing, such as that produced
by increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases, tends to
warm the surface. A negative radiative forcing, which can arise
8

Radiative forcing is a measure of the influence a factor has in altering the
balance of incoming and outgoing energy in the Earth-atmosphere system,
and is an index of the importance of the factor as a potential climate
change mechanism. It is expressed in Watts per square metre (Wm-2).

The Scientific Basis

WGI Summary for Policymakers

Concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases
and their radiative forcing have continued to
increase as a result of human activities.

from an increase in some types of aerosols (microscopic airborne
particles) tends to cool the surface. Natural factors, such as
changes in solar output or explosive volcanic activity, can also
cause radiative forcing. Characterisation of these climate
forcing agents and their changes over time (see Figure 2) is
required to understand past climate changes in the context of
natural variations and to project what climate changes could
lie ahead. Figure 3 shows current estimates of the radiative
forcing due to increased concentrations of atmospheric
constituents and other mechanisms.

* The atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) has
increased by 31% since 1750. The present CO2 concentration
has not been exceeded during the past 420,000 years and
likely7 not during the past 20 million years. The current
rate of increase is unprecedented during at least the past
20,000 years.

Indicators of the human influence on the atmosphere
during the Industrial Era
(a) Global atmospheric concentrations of three well mixed
greenhouse gases

CO2 (ppm)

1.5

Carbon dioxide

360
340

1.0

320
0.5

300
280

0.0

0.5
0.4

1500

0.3

1250

0.2
1000

0.1

750

N2O (ppb)

310

0.0

Radiative forcing (Wm-2)

Methane

1750
CH4 (ppb)

Atmospheric concentration

260

0.15

Nitrous oxide

0.10
290

0.05
0.0

270
250
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Year

Figure 2: Long records of past changes in atmospheric
composition provide the context for the influence of
anthropogenic emissions. (a) shows changes in the
atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) over the past
1000 years. The ice core and firn data for several sites in
Antarctica and Greenland (shown by different symbols)
are supplemented with the data from direct atmospheric
samples over the past few decades (shown by the line
for CO2 and incorporated in the curve representing the
global average of CH4). The estimated positive radiative
forcing of the climate system from these gases is
indicated on the right-hand scale. Since these gases have
atmospheric lifetimes of a decade or more, they are well
mixed, and their concentrations reflect emissions from
sources throughout the globe. All three records show
effects of the large and increasing growth in anthropogenic
emissions during the Industrial Era.
(b) illustrates the influence of industrial emissions on
atmospheric sulphate concentrations, which produce
negative radiative forcing. Shown is the time history of
the concentrations of sulphate, not in the atmosphere
but in ice cores in Greenland (shown by lines; from which
the episodic effects of volcanic eruptions have been
removed). Such data indicate the local deposition of
sulphate aerosols at the site, reflecting sulphur dioxide
(SO 2 ) emissions at mid-latitudes in the Northern
Hemisphere. This record, albeit more regional than that
of the globally-mixed greenhouse gases, demonstrates
the large growth in anthropogenic SO2 emissions during
the Industrial Era. The pluses denote the relevant regional
estimated SO2 emissions (right-hand scale). [Based upon
(a) Chapter 3, Figure 3.2b (CO2); Chapter 4, Figure 4.1a
and b ( CH4) and Chapter 4, Figure 4.2 (N2O) and (b)
Chapter 5, Figure 5.4a]

200

Sulphur
50

100
25

0
1600

0
1800
Year

SO2 emissions (Millions of
tonnes sulphur per year)

Sulphate concentration

(mg SO42- per tonne of ice)

(b) Sulphate aerosols deposited in Greenland ice

2000

155

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

The global mean radiative forcing of the climate system
for the year 2000, relative to 1750

2

Halocarbons
N2O

Aerosols

Warming

CH4
1

CO2

Black
carbon from
fossil
fuel
burning

Tropospheric
ozone

Mineral
Dust

Aviation-induced

Solar

Contrails Cirrus
0

Cooling

Radiative forcing (Watts per square metre)

3

Stratospheric
ozone
-1

Organic
carbon Biomass
burning
Sulphate from
fossil
fuel
burning

Landuse
(albedo)
only

Aerosol
indirect
effect

-2
High Medium Medium Low

Very
Low

Very
Low

Very Very
Low Low

Very
Low

Very
Low

Very Very
Low Low

Level of Scientific Understanding
Figure 3: Many external factors force climate change. These radiative forcings arise from changes in the atmospheric composition, alteration
of surface reflectance by land use, and variation in the output of the sun. Except for solar variation, some form of human activity is linked to
each. The rectangular bars represent estimates of the contributions of these forcings - some of which yield warming, and some cooling. Forcing
due to episodic volcanic events, which lead to a negative forcing lasting only for a few years, is not shown. The indirect effect of aerosols shown
is their effect on the size and number of cloud droplets. A second indirect effect of aerosols on clouds, namely their effect on cloud lifetime, which
would also lead to a negative forcing, is not shown. Effects of aviation on greenhouse gases are included in the individual bars. The vertical
line about the rectangular bars indicates a range of estimates, guided by the spread in the published values of the forcings and physical
understanding. Some of the forcings possess a much greater degree of certainty than others. A vertical line without a rectangular bar
denotes a forcing for which no best estimate can be given owing to large uncertainties. The overall level of scientific understanding for each
forcing varies considerably, as noted. Some of the radiative forcing agents are well mixed over the globe, such as CO2, thereby perturbing the
global heat balance. Others represent perturbations with stronger regional signatures because of their spatial distribution, such as aerosols.
For this and other reasons, a simple sum of the positive and negative bars cannot be expected to yield the net effect on the climate system.
The simulations of this assessment report (for example, Figure 5) indicate that the estimated net effect of these perturbations is to have
warmed the global climate since 1750. [Based upon Chapter 6, Figure 6.6]

* About three-quarters of the anthropogenic emissions of
CO2 to the atmosphere during the past 20 years is due to
fossil fuel burning. The rest is predominantly due to landuse change, especially deforestation.
* Currently the ocean and the land together are taking up
about half of the anthropogenic CO2 emissions. On land,
the uptake of anthropogenic CO2 very likely7 exceeded
the release of CO2 by deforestation during the 1990s.
* The rate of increase of atmospheric CO2 concentration has
been about 1.5 ppm9 (0.4%) per year over the past two
decades. During the 1990s the year to year increase varied

156

IPCC Third Assessment Report

from 0.9 ppm (0.2%) to 2.8 ppm (0.8%). A large part of
this variability is due to the effect of climate variability
(e.g., El Nino events) on CO2 uptake and release by land
and oceans.
* The atmospheric concentration of methane (CH4) has
increased by 1060 ppb9 (151%) since 1750 and continues
9

ppm (parts per million) or ppb (parts per billion, 1 billion = 1,000
million) is the ratio of the number of greenhouse gas molecules to the
total number of molecules of dry air. For example: 300 ppm means
300 molecules of a greenhouse gas per million molecules of dry air.

The Scientific Basis

*

*

*

*

*

to increase. The present CH4 concentration has not been
exceeded during the past 420,000 years. The annual growth
in CH4 concentration slowed and became more variable in
the 1990s, compared with the 1980s. Slightly more than
half of current CH4 emissions are anthropogenic (e.g., use
of fossil fuels, cattle, rice agriculture and landfills). In
addition, carbon monoxide (CO) emissions have recently
been identified as a cause of increasing CH4 concentration.
The atmospheric concentration of nitrous oxide (N2O) has
increased by 46 ppb (17%) since 1750 and continues to
increase. The present N2O concentration has not been
exceeded during at least the past thousand years. About a
third of current N2O emissions are anthropogenic (e.g.,
agricultural soils, cattle feed lots and chemical industry).
Since 1995, the atmospheric concentrations of many of
those halocarbon gases that are both ozone-depleting and
greenhouse gases (e.g., CFCl3 and CF2Cl2), are either
increasing more slowly or decreasing, both in response to
reduced emissions under the regulations of the Montreal
Protocol and its Amendments. Their substitute compounds
(e.g., CHF2Cl and CF3CH2F) and some other synthetic
compounds (e.g., perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur
hexafluoride (SF6)) are also greenhouse gases, and their
concentrations are currently increasing.
The radiative forcing due to increases of the well-mixed
greenhouse gases from 1750 to 2000 is estimated to be
2.43 Wm-2: 1.46 Wm-2 from CO2; 0.48 Wm-2 from CH4;
0.34 Wm-2 from the halocarbons; and 0.15 Wm-2 from N2O.
(See Figure 3, where the uncertainties are also illustrated.)
The observed depletion of the stratospheric ozone (O3)
layer from 1979 to 2000 is estimated to have caused a
negative radiative forcing (-0.15 Wm-2). Assuming full
compliance with current halocarbon regulations, the
positive forcing of the halocarbons will be reduced as will
the magnitude of the negative forcing from stratospheric
ozone depletion as the ozone layer recovers over the 21st
century.
The total amount of O3 in the troposphere is estimated to
have increased by 36% since 1750, due primarily to
anthropogenic emissions of several O3-forming gases. This
corresponds to a positive radiative forcing of 0.35 Wm-2.
O3 forcing varies considerably by region and responds
much more quickly to changes in emissions than the longlived greenhouse gases, such as CO2.

Anthropogenic aerosols are short-lived and mostly
produce negative radiative forcing.
* The major sources of anthropogenic aerosols are fossil
fuel and biomass burning. These sources are also linked
to degradation of air quality and acid deposition.
* Since the SAR, significant progress has been achieved in
better characterising the direct radiative roles of different
types of aerosols. Direct radiative forcing is estimated to
be -0.4 Wm-2 for sulphate, -0.2 Wm-2 for biomass burning

WGI Summary for Policymakers

aerosols, -0.1 Wm-2 for fossil fuel organic carbon and +0.2
Wm-2 for fossil fuel black carbon aerosols. There is much
less confidence in the ability to quantify the total aerosol
direct effect, and its evolution over time, than that for the
gases listed above. Aerosols also vary considerably by
region and respond quickly to changes in emissions.
* In addition to their direct radiative forcing, aerosols have
an indirect radiative forcing through their effects on clouds.
There is now more evidence for this indirect effect, which
is negative, although of very uncertain magnitude.
Natural factors have made small contributions to
radiative forcing over the past century.
* The radiative forcing due to changes in solar irradiance
for the period since 1750 is estimated to be about +0.3
Wm-2, most of which occurred during the first half of the
20th century. Since the late 1970s, satellite instruments
have observed small oscillations due to the 11-year solar
cycle. Mechanisms for the amplification of solar effects
on climate have been proposed, but currently lack a
rigorous theoretical or observational basis.
* Stratospheric aerosols from explosive volcanic eruptions
lead to negative forcin g, which lasts a few years. Several
major eruptions occurred in the periods 1880 to 1920 and
1960 to 1991.
* The combined change in radiative forcing of the two major
natural factors (solar variation and volcanic aerosols) is
estimated to be negative for the past two, and possibly the
past four, decades.

Confidence in the ability of models to
project future climate has increased.
Complex physically-based climate models are required to
provide detailed estimates of feedbacks and of regional
features. Such models cannot yet simulate all aspects of climate
(e.g., they still cannot account fully for the observed trend in
the surface-troposphere temperature difference since 1979)
and there are particular uncertainties associated with clouds
and their interaction with radiation and aerosols. Nevertheless,
confidence in the ability of these models to provide useful
projections of future climate has improved due to their
demonstrated performance on a range of space and time-scales.
* Understanding of climate processes and their incorporation
in climate models have improved, including water vapour,
sea-ice dynamics, and ocean heat transport.
* Some recent models produce satisfactory simulations of
current climate without the need for non-physical
adjustments of heat and water fluxes at the oceanatmosphere interface used in earlier models.
* Simulations that include estimates of natural and
anthropogenic forcing reproduce the observed large-scale

157

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

changes in surface temperature over the 20th century
(Figure 4). However, contributions from some additional
processes and forcings may not have been included in the
models. Nevertheless, the large-scale consistency between
models and observations can be used to provide an
independent check on projected warming rates over the
next few decades under a given emissions scenario.
* Some aspects of model simulations of ENSO, monsoons
and the North Atlantic Oscillation, as well as selected
periods of past climate, have improved.

* Detection and attribution studies comparing model simulated
changes with the observed record can now take into account
uncertainty in the magnitude of modelled response to external
forcing, in particular that due to uncertainty in climate sensitivity.
* Most of these studies find that, over the last 50 years, the
estimated rate and magnitude of warming due to increasing
concentrations of greenhouse gases alone are comparable
with, or larger than, the observed warming. Furthermore, most
model estimates that take into account both greenhouse
gases and sulphate aerosols are consistent with observations
over this period.
* The best agreement between model simulations and
observations over the last 140 years has been found when
all the above anthropogenic and natural forcing factors
are combined, as shown in Figure 4c. These results show
that the forcings included are sufficient to explain the
observed changes, but do not exclude the possibility that
other forcings may also have contributed.

There is new and stronger evidence that
most of the warming observed over the
last 50 years is attributable to human
activities.
The SAR concluded: "The balance of evidence suggests a
discernible human influence on global climate". That report
also noted that the anthropogenic signal was still emerging
from the background of natural climate variability. Since the
SAR, progress has been made in reducing uncertainty,
particularly with respect to distinguishing and quantifying the
magnitude of responses to different external influences.
Although many of the sources of uncertainty identified in the
SAR still remain to some degree, new evidence and improved
understanding support an updated conclusion.
* There is a longer and more closely scrutinised temperature
record and new model estimates of variability. The
warming over the past 100 years is very unlikely7 to be
due to internal variability alone, as estimated by current
models. Reconstructions of climate data for the past 1,000
years (Figure 1b) also indicate that this warming was
unusual and is unlikely7 to be entirely natural in origin.
* There are new estimates of the climate response to natural
and anthropogenic forcing, and new detection techniques
have been applied. Detection and attribution studies
consistently find evidence for an anthropogenic signal in
the climate record of the last 35 to 50 years.
* Simulations of the response to natural forcings alone (i.e.,
the response to variability in solar irradiance and volcanic
eruptions) do not explain the warming in the second half
of the 20th century (see for example Figure 4a). However,
they indicate that natural forcings may have contributed
to the observed warming in the first half of the 20th century.
* The warming over the last 50 years due to anthropogenic
greenhouse gases can be identified despite uncertainties
in forcing due to anthropogenic sulphate aerosol and
natural factors (volcanoes and solar irradiance). The
anthropogenic sulphate aerosol forcing, while uncertain,
is negative over this period and therefore cannot explain
the warming. Changes in natural forcing during most of
this period are also estimated to be negative and are
unlikely7 to explain the warming.

158

IPCC Third Assessment Report

In the light of new evidence and taking into account the
remaining uncertainties, most of the observed warming over
the last 50 years is likely7 to have been due to the increase in
greenhouse gas concentrations.
Furthermore, it is very likely7 that the 20th century warming
has contributed significantly to the observed sea level rise,
through thermal expansion of sea water and widespread loss
of land ice. Within present uncertainties, observations and
models are both consistent with a lack of significant acceleration
of sea level rise during the 20th century.

Human influences will continue to change
atmospheric composition throughout the
21st century.
Models have been used to make projections of atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and hence
of future climate, based upon emissions scenarios from the
IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) (Figure
5). These scenarios were developed to update the IS92 series,
which were used in the SAR and are shown for comparison
here in some cases.
Greenhouse gases
* Emissions of CO2 due to fossil fuel burning are virtually
certain7 to be the dominant influence on the trends in
atmospheric CO2 concentration during the 21st century.
* As the CO2 concentration of the atmosphere increases, ocean
and land will take up a decreasing fraction of anthropogenic
CO2 emissions. The net effect of land and ocean climate
feedbacks as indicated by models is to further increase
projected atmospheric CO2 concentrations, by reducing
both the ocean and land uptake of CO2.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Summary for Policymakers

(a) Natural

(b) Anthropogenic

1.0

1.0

Temperature anomalies (C)

Temperature anomalies (C)

Simulated annual global mean surface temperatures

model
observations

0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
1850

model
observations

0.5
0.0

-0.5

1900

1950

-1.0
1850

2000

1900

Year

1950

2000

Year

Temperature anomalies (C)

(c) All forcings
1.0

model
observations

0.5

0.0

-0.5
-1.0
1850

1900

1950

2000

Year
Figure 4: Simulating the Earth's temperature variations, and comparing the results to measured changes, can provide insight into
the underlying causes of the major changes. A climate model can be used to simulate the temperature changes that occur both from
natural and anthropogenic causes. The simulations represented by the band in (a) were done with only natural forcings: solar variation and
volcanic activity. Those encompassed by the band in (b) were done with anthropogenic forcings: greenhouse gases and an estimate of
sulphate aerosols, and those encompassed by the band in (c) were done with both natural and anthropogenic forcings included. From (b), it
can be seen that inclusion of anthropogenic forcings provides a plausible explanation for a substantial part of the observed temperature
changes over the past century, but the best match with observations is obtained in (c) when both natural and anthropogenic factors are
included. These results show that the forcings included are sufficient to explain the observed changes, but do not exclude the possibility that
other forcings may also have contributed. The bands of model results presented here are for four runs from the same model. Similar results
to those in (b) are obtained with other models with anthropogenic forcing. [Based upon Chapter 12, Figure 12.7]

* By 2100, carbon cycle models project atmospheric CO2
concentrations of 540 to 970 ppm for the illustrative SRES
scenarios (90 to 250% above the concentration of 280 ppm
in the year 1750), Figure 5b. These projections include the
land and ocean climate feedbacks. Uncertainties, especially
about the magnitude of the climate feedback from the
terrestrial biosphere, cause a variation of about -10 to
+30% around each scenario. The total range is 490 to 1260
ppm (75 to 350% above the 1750 concentration).
* Changing land use could influence atmospheric CO2
concentration. Hypothetically, if all of the carbon released

by historical land-use changes could be restored to the
terrestrial biosphere over the course of the century (e.g., by
reforestation), CO2 concentration would be reduced by 40
to 70 ppm.
* Model calculations of the concentrations of the non-CO2
greenhouse gases by 2100 vary considerably across the SRES
illustrative scenarios, with CH4 changing by -190 to +1,970
ppb (present concentration 1,760 ppb), N2O changing by
+38 to +144 ppb (present concentration 316 ppb), total
tropospheric O3 changing by -12 to +62%, and a wide range
of changes in concentrations of HFCs, PFCs and SF6, all

159

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

The global climate of the 21st century

20

1200
1100
1000

15

10

900

SO2 Emissions (Millions of tonnes of sulphur per year)

25

(b) CO2 concentrations
1300

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

CO2 concentration (ppm)

CO2 emissions (Gt C/yr)

(a) CO2 emissions

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

150

100

800
700
600
500
400

5

300
2000

2020

2040 2060
Year

2080

2100

2000

2020

2040 2060
Year

2080

(d) Temperature change

4

50

2100

2000

2020

2040 2060
Year

2080

2100

All
IS92

1.0

Several models
all SRES
envelope

0.8

Model ensemble
all SRES
envelope
All
IS92

3

2

Sea level rise (metres)

Temperature change (C)

5

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

(e) Sea level rise

6
A1FI
A1B
A1T
A2
B1
B2
IS92a (TAR method)

(c) SO2 emissions

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2

All SRES envelope
including land-ice
uncertainty
Several models
all SRES
envelope

0.6

Model average
all SRES
envelope

0.4

0.2

1

Bars show the
range in 2100
produced by
several models

0
2000

2020

2040
Year

2060

2080

2100

0.0
2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Bars show the
range in 2100
produced by
several models

Year

Figure 5: The global climate of the 21st century will depend on natural changes and the response of the climate system to human
activities. Climate models project the response of many climate variables - such as increases in global surface temperature and sea level - to
various scenarios of greenhouse gas and other human-related emissions. (a) shows the CO2 emissions of the six illustrative SRES scenarios,
which are summarised in the box on page 18, along with IS92a for comparison purposes with the SAR. (b) shows projected CO2 concentrations.
(c) shows anthropogenic SO2 emissions. Emissions of other gases and other aerosols were included in the model but are not shown in the
figure. (d) and (e) show the projected temperature and sea level responses, respectively. The "several models all SRES envelope" in (d) and
(e) shows the temperature and sea level rise, respectively, for the simple model when tuned to a number of complex models with a range of
climate sensitivities. All SRES envelopes refer to the full range of 35 SRES scenarios. The "model average all SRES envelope" shows the
average from these models for the range of scenarios. Note that the warming and sea level rise from these emissions would continue well
beyond 2100. Also note that this range does not allow for uncertainty relating to ice dynamical changes in the West Antarctic ice sheet, nor
does it account for uncertainties in projecting non-sulphate aerosols and greenhouse gas concentrations. [Based upon (a) Chapter 3, Figure
3.12, (b) Chapter 3, Figure 3.12, (c) Chapter 5, Figure 5.13, (d) Chapter 9, Figure 9.14, (e) Chapter 11, Figure 11.12, Appendix II]

relative to the year 2000. In some scenarios, total tropospheric
O3 would become as important a radiative forcing agent
as CH4 and, over much of the Northern Hemisphere, would
threaten the attainment of current air quality targets.
* Reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and the gases that
control their concentration would be necessary to stabilise
radiative forcing. For example, for the most important
anthropogenic greenhouse gas, carbon cycle models indicate
that stabilisation of atmospheric CO2 concentrations at 450,
650 or 1,000 ppm would require global anthropogenic CO2
emissions to drop below 1990 levels, within a few decades,
about a century, or about two centuries, respectively, and
continue to decrease steadily thereafter. Eventually CO2

160

IPCC Third Assessment Report

emissions would need to decline to a very small fraction
of current emissions.
Aerosols
* The SRES scenarios include the possibility of either increases
or decreases in anthropogenic aerosols (e.g., sulphate
aerosols (Figure 5c), biomass aerosols, black and organic
carbon aerosols) depending on the extent of fossil fuel use
and policies to abate polluting emissions. In addition,
natural aerosols (e.g., sea salt, dust and emissions leading
to the production of sulphate and carbon aerosols) are
projected to increase as a result of changes in climate.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Summary for Policymakers

Radiative forcing over the 21st century

sensitivity. This approach suggests that anthropogenic
warming is likely7 to lie in the range of 0.1 to 0.2C per
decade over the next few decades under the IS92a scenario,
similar to the corresponding range of projections of the
simple model used in Figure 5d.
* Based on recent global model simulations, it is very likely7
that nearly all land areas will warm more rapidly than the
global average, particularly those at northern high latitudes
in the cold season. Most notable of these is the warming in
the northern regions of North America, and northern and
central Asia, which exceeds global mean warming in each
model by more than 40%. In contrast, the warming is less
than the global mean change in south and southeast Asia
in summer and in southern South America in winter.
* Recent trends for surface temperature to become more El
Nino-like in the tropical Pacific, with the eastern tropical
Pacific warming more than the western tropical Pacific,
with a corresponding eastward shift of precipitation, are
projected to continue in many models.

* For the SRES illustrative scenarios, relative to the year
2000, the global mean radiative forcing due to greenhouse
gases continues to increase through the 21st century, with
the fraction due to CO2 projected to increase from slightly
more than half to about three quarters. The change in the
direct plus indirect aerosol radiative forcing is projected to
be smaller in magnitude than that of CO2.

Global average temperature and sea level
are projected to rise under all IPCC SRES
scenarios.
In order to make projections of future climate, models incorporate
past, as well as future emissions of greenhouse gases and
aerosols. Hence, they include estimates of warming to date
and the commitment to future warming from past emissions.
Temperature
* The globally averaged surface temperature is projected to
increase by 1.4 to 5.8C (Figure 5d) over the period 1990
to 2100. These results are for the full range of 35 SRES
scenarios, based on a number of climate models10, 11.
* Temperature increases are projected to be greater than those
in the SAR, which were about 1.0 to 3.5C based on the
six IS92 scenarios. The higher projected temperatures and
the wider range are due primarily to the lower projected
sulphur dioxide emissions in the SRES scenarios relative
to the IS92 scenarios.
* The projected rate of warming is much larger than the
observed changes during the 20th century and is very likely7
to be without precedent during at least the last 10,000 years,
based on palaeoclimate data.
* By 2100, the range in the surface temperature response
across the group of climate models run with a given
scenario is comparable to the range obtained from a single
model run with the different SRES scenarios.
* On timescales of a few decades, the current observed rate
of warming can be used to constrain the projected response
to a given emissions scenario despite uncertainty in climate

Precipitation
* Based on global model simulations and for a wide range
of scenarios, global average water vapour concentration
and precipitation are projected to increase during the 21st
century. By the second half of the 21st century, it is likely7
that precipitation will have increased over northern midto high latitudes and Antarctica in winter. At low latitudes
there are both regional increases and decreases over land
areas. Larger year to year variations in precipitation are
very likely7 over most areas where an increase in mean
precipitation is projected.
Extreme Events
Table 1 depicts an assessment of confidence in observed changes
in extremes of weather and climate during the latter half of
the 20th century (left column) and in projected changes during
the 21st century (right column)a. This assessment relies on
observational and modelling studies, as well as the physical
plausibility of future projections across all commonly-used
scenarios and is based on expert judgement7.
* For some other extreme phenomena, many of which may
have important impacts on the environment and society,
there is currently insufficient information to assess recent
trends, and climate models currently lack the spatial detail
required to make confident projections. For example, very
small-scale phenomena, such as thunderstorms, tornadoes,
hail and lightning, are not simulated in climate models.

10

Complex physically based climate models are the main tool for projecting
future climate change. In order to explore the full range of scenarios,
these are complemented by simple climate models calibrated to yield
an equivalent response in temperature and sea level to complex climate
models. These projections are obtained using a simple climate model
whose climate sensitivity and ocean heat uptake are calibrated to each
of seven complex climate models. The climate sensitivity used in the
simple model ranges from 1.7 to 4.2C, which is comparable to the
commonly accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5C.
11
This range does not include uncertainties in the modelling of radiative
forcing, e.g. aerosol forcing uncertainties. A small carbon-cycle climate
feedback is included.

a

For more details see Chapter 2 (observations) and Chapter 9, 10
(projections).

161

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table 1: Estimates of confidence in observed and projected changes in extreme weather and climate events.a
Confidence in observed changes
(latter half of the 20th century)

Changes in Phenomenon

Likely7

Higher maximum temperatures and
more hot days over nearly all land
areas

Very likely7

Very likely7

Higher minimum temperatures,
fewer cold days and frost days over
nearly all land areas

Very likely7

Very likely7

Reduced diurnal temperatures
range over most land areas

Very likely7

Likely7, over many areas

Increase of heat index12 over land
areas

Very likely7, over most areas

Likely, over many Northern Hemisphere
mid- to high latitude land areas

More intense percipitation eventsb

Very likely7, over many areas

Likely7, in a few areas

Increased summer continental
drying and assosciated risk of
drought

Likely7, over most mid-latitude
continental interiors (lack of consistent
projections in other areas)

Not observed in the few analyses
available

Increase in tropical cyclone peak
wind intensitiesc

Likely7, over some areas

Insufficient data for assassement

Increase in tropical cyclone mean
and peak precipitation intensitiesc

Likely7, over some areas

a
b
c

For more details see Chapter 2 (observations) and Chapter 9, 10 (projections).
For other areas, there are either insufficient data or conflicting analyses.
Past and future changes in tropical cyclone location and frequency are uncertain.

El Nino
* Confidence in projections of changes in future frequency,
amplitude, and spatial pattern of El Nino events in the
tropical Pacific is tempered by some shortcomings in how
well El Nino is simulated in complex models. Current
projections show little change or a small increase in
amplitude for El Nino events over the next 100 years.
* Even with little or no change in El Nino amplitude, global
warming is likely7 to lead to greater extremes of drying and
heavy rainfall and increase the risk of droughts and floods
that occur with El Nino events in many different regions.
Monsoons
* It is likely7 that warming associated with increasing
greenhouse gas concentrations will cause an increase of
Asian summer monsoon precipitation variability. Changes
in monsoon mean duration and strength depend on the
details of the emission scenario. The confidence in such
projections is also limited by how well the climate models
simulate the detailed seasonal evolution of the monsoons.
12

162

Confidence in projected changes
(during the 21st century)

Heat index: A combination of temperature and humidity that measures
effects on human comfort.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Thermohaline circulation
* Most models show weakening of the ocean thermohaline
circulation which leads to a reduction of the heat transport
into high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. However,
even in models where the thermohaline circulation
weakens, there is still a warming over Europe due to
increased greenhouse gases. The current projections using
climate models do not exhibit a complete shut-down of
the thermohaline circulation by 2100. Beyond 2100, the
thermohaline circulation could completely, and possibly
irreversibly, shut-down in either hemisphere if the change
in radiative forcing is large enough and applied long
enough.
Snow and ice
* Northern Hemisphere snow cover and sea-ice extent are
projected to decrease further.
* Glaciers and ice caps are projected to continue their
widespread retreat during the 21st century.
* The Antarctic ice sheet is likely7 to gain mass because of
greater precipitation, while the Greenland ice sheet is
likely7 to lose mass because the increase in runoff will
exceed the precipitation increase.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Summary for Policymakers

* Concerns have been expressed about the stability of the
West Antarctic ice sheet because it is grounded below sea
level. However, loss of grounded ice leading to substantial
sea level rise from this source is now widely agreed to be
very unlikely7 during the 21st century, although its dynamics
are still inadequately understood, especially for projections
on longer time-scales.

* Current ice dynamic models suggest that the West Antarctic
ice sheet could contribute up to 3 metres to sea level rise
over the next 1000 years, but such results are strongly
dependent on model assumptions regarding climate change
scenarios, ice dynamics and other factors.

Sea level
* Global mean sea level is projected to rise by 0.09 to 0.88
metres between 1990 and 2100, for the full range of SRES
scenarios. This is due primarily to thermal expansion and
loss of mass from glaciers and ice caps (Figure 5e). The
range of sea level rise presented in the SAR was 0.13 to
0.94 metres based on the IS92 scenarios. Despite the higher
temperature change projections in this assessment, the sea
level projections are slightly lower, primarily due to the
use of improved models, which give a smaller contribution
from glaciers and ice sheets.

Anthropogenic climate change will persist
for many centuries.
* Emissions of long-lived greenhouse gases (i.e., CO2 ,N2O,
PFCs, SF6) have a lasting effect on atmospheric composition,
radiative forcing and climate. For example, several centuries
after CO2 emissions occur, about a quarter of the increase
in CO2 concentration caused by these emissions is still
present in the atmosphere.
* After greenhouse gas concentrations have stabilised, global
average surface temperatures would rise at a rate of only
a few tenths of a degree per century rather than several
degrees per century as projected for the 21st century
without stabilisation. The lower the level at which
concentrations are stabilised, the smaller the total
temperature change.
* Global mean surface temperature increases and rising sea
level from thermal expansion of the ocean are projected
to continue for hundreds of years after stabilisation of
greenhouse gas concentrations (even at present levels),
owing to the long timescales on which the deep ocean
adjusts to climate change.
* Ice sheets will continue to react to climate warming and
contribute to sea level rise for thousands of years after
climate has been stabilised. Climate models indicate that
the local warming over Greenland is likely7 to be one to
three times the global average. Ice sheet models project
that a local warming of larger than 3C, if sustained for
millennia, would lead to virtually a complete melting of
the Greenland ice sheet with a resulting sea level rise of
about 7 metres. A local warming of 5.5C, if sustained for
1000 years, would be likely7 to result in a contribution
from Greenland of about 3 metres to sea level rise.

Further action is required to address
remaining gaps in information and
understanding.
Further research is required to improve the ability to detect,
attribute and understand climate change, to reduce uncertainties
and to project future climate changes. In particular, there is a
need for additional systematic and sustained observations,
modelling and process studies. A serious concern is the decline
of observational networks. The following are high priority
areas for action.
* Systematic observations and reconstructions:
- Reverse the decline of observational networks in many
parts of the world.
- Sustain and expand the observational foundation for
climate studies by providing accurate, long-term,
consistent data including implementation of a strategy
for integrated global observations.
- Enhance the development of reconstructions of past
climate periods.
- Improve the observations of the spatial distribution of
greenhouse gases and aerosols.
* Modelling and process studies:
- Improve understanding of the mechanisms and factors
leading to changes in radiative forcing.
- Understand and characterise the important unresolved
processes and feedbacks, both physical and biogeochemical, in the climate system.
- Improve methods to quantify uncertainties of climate
projections and scenarios, including long-term ensemble
simulations using complex models.
- Improve the integrated hierarchy of global and regional
climate models with a focus on the simulation of climate
variability, regional climate changes and extreme events.
- Link more effectively models of the physical climate
and the biogeochemical system, and in turn improve
coupling with descriptions of human activities.
Cutting across these foci are crucial needs associated with
strengthening international co-operation and co-ordination in
order to better utilise scientific, computational and observational
resources. This should also promote the free exchange of data
among scientists. A special need is to increase the observational
and research capacities in many regions, particularly in
developing countries. Finally, as is the goal of this assessment,
there is a continuing imperative to communicate research
advances in terms that are relevant to decision making.

163

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

The Emissions Scenarios of the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)
A1. The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future
world of very rapid economic growth, global population that
peaks in mid-century and declines thereafter, and the rapid
introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major
underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity
building and increased cultural and social interactions, with
a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita
income. The A1 scenario family develops into three groups
that describe alternative directions of technological change
in the energy system. The three A1 groups are distinguished
by their technological emphasis: fossil intensive (A1FI), nonfossil energy sources (A1T), or a balance across all sources
(A1B) (where balanced is defined as not relying too heavily
on one particular energy source, on the assumption that similar
improvement rates apply to all energy supply and end use
technologies).
A2. The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very
heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance and
preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across regions
converge very slowly, which results in continuously increasing
population. Economic development is primarily regionally
oriented and per capita economic growth and technological
change more fragmented and slower than other storylines.
B1. The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a
convergent world with the same global population, that peaks

Source Information: Summary for
Policymakers
This appendix provides the cross-reference of the topics in
the Summary for Policymakers (page and bullet point topic)
to the sections of the chapters of the full report that contain
expanded information about the topic.
An increasing body of observations gives a
collective picture of a warming world and other
changes in the climate system.
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
152
The global average surface temperature has
increased over the 20th century by about 0.6C.
* Chapter 2.2.2 * Chapter 2.2.2 * Chapter 2.3
* Chapter 2.2.2
152-154 Temperatures have risen during the past four
decades in the lowest 8 kilometres of the atmosphere.
* Chapter 2.2.3 and 2.2.4 * Chapter 2.2.3 and 2.2.4
* Chapter 2.2.3, 2.2.4 and Chapter 12.3.2
154
Snow cover and ice extent have decreased.
All three bullet points: Chapter 2.2.5 and 2.2.6

164

IPCC Third Assessment Report

in mid-century and declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline,
but with rapid change in economic structures toward a service
and information economy, with reductions in material
intensity and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient
technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to
economic, social and environmental sustainability, including
improved equity, but without additional climate initiatives.
B2. The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world
in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social
and environmental sustainability. It is a world with continuously
increasing global population, at a rate lower than A2,
intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid
and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and
A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented towards
environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local
and regional levels.
An illustrative scenario was chosen for each of the six scenario
groups A1B, A1FI, A1T, A2, B1 and B2. All should be
considered equally sound.
The SRES scenarios do not include additional climate
initiatives, which means that no scenarios are included that
explicitly assume implementation of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change or the emissions
targets of the Kyoto Protocol.

SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
154
Global average sea level has risen and ocean heat
content has increased.
* Chapter 11.3.2 * Chapter 2.2.2 and Chapter 11.2.1
154
Changes have also occurred in other important
aspects of climate.
* Chapter 2.5.2 * Chapter 2.7.2 * Chapter 2.2.2
and 2.5.5 * Chapter 2.7.2 * Chapter 2.6.2 and 2.6.3
* Chapter 2.7.3 * Chapter 2.7.3
154
Some important aspects of climate appear not to
have changed.
* Chapter 2.2.2 * Chapter 2.2.5 * Chapter 2.7.3
* Chapter 2.7.3
Emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols due
to human activities continue to alter the atmosphere
in ways that are expected to affect the climate
system.
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
154-155 Chapeau: "Changes in climate occur ..."
Chapter 1, Chapter 3.1, Chapter 4.1, Chapter 5.1,
Chapter 6.1, 6.2, 6.9, 6.11 and 6.13

The Scientific Basis

SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
155-157 Concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases
and their radiative forcing have continued to
increase as a result of human activities.
Carbon dioxide: * Chapter 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3
and 3.5.1 * Chapter 3.5.1 * Chapter 3.2.2, 3.2.3,
3.5.1 and Table 3.1 * Chapter 3.5.1 and 3.5.2
Methane: * Chapter 4.2.1
Nitrous oxide: * Chapter 4.2.1
Halocarbons: * Chapter 4.2.2
Radiative forcing of well-mixed gases:
* Chapter 4.2.1 and Chapter 6.3
Stratospheric ozone: * Chapter 4.2.2 and
Chapter 6.4
Tropospheric ozone: * Chapter 4.2.4 and
Chapter 6.5
157
Anthropogenic aerosols are short-lived and mostly
produce negative radiative forcing.
* Chapter 5.2 and 5.5.4 * Chapter 5.1, 5.2 and
Chapter 6.7 * Chapter 5.3.2, 5.4.3 and Chapter 6.8
157
Natural factors have made small contributions
to radiative forcing over the past century.
* Chapter 6.11 and 6.15.1 * Chapter 6.9 and 6.15.1
* Chapter 6.15.1
Confidence in the ability of models to project
future climate has increased
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
157
Chapeau: "Complex physically-based ..." Chapter
8.3.2, 8.5.1, 8.6.1, 8.10.3 and Chapter 12.3.2
157-158 * Chapter 7.2.1, 7.5.2 and 7.6.1 * Chapter 8.4.2
* Chapter 8.6.3 and Chapter 12.3.2 * Chapter 8.5.5,
8.7.1 and 8.7.5
There is new and stronger evidence that most of
the warming observed over the last 50 years is
attributable to human activities
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
158
Chapeau: "The SAR concluded: The balance of
evidence suggests ..." Chapter 12.1.2 and 12.6
* Chapter 12.2.2, 12.4.3 and 12.6 * Chapter 12.4.1,
158
12.4.2, 12.4.3 and 12.6 * Chapter 12.2.3, 12.4.1,
12.4.2, 12.4.3 and 12.6 * Chapter 12.4.3 and 12.6
* Chapter 12.6 * Chapter 12.4.3 * Chapter 12.4.3
and 12.6
"In the light of new evidence and taking into
158
account the ..." Chapter 12.4 and 12.6
"Furthermore, it is very likely that the 20th century
158
warming has ..." Chapter 11.4

WGI Summary for Policymakers

Human influences will continue to change atmospheric
composition throughout the 21st century.
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
Chapeau: "Models have been used to make
158
projections ..." Chapter 4.4.5 and Appendix II
158-160 Greenhouse gases
* Chapter 3.7.3 and Appendix II * Chapter 3.7.1,
3.7.2, 3.7.3 and Appendix II * Chapter 3.7.3 and
Appendix II * Chapter 3.2.2 and Appendix II
* Chapter 4.4.5, 4.5, 4.6 and Appendix II
* Chapter 3.7.3
Aerosols
160
* Chapter 5.5.2, 5.5.3 and Appendix II
Radiative forcing over the 21st century
161
* Chapter 6.15.2 and Appendix II
Global average temperature and sea level are
projected to rise under all IPCC SRES scenarios.
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
Temperature
161
* Chapter 9.3.3 * Chapter 9.3.3 * Chapter 2.2.2,
2.3.2 and 2.4 * Chapter 9.3.3 and Chapter 10.3.2
* Chapter 8.6.1, Chapter 12.4.3, Chapter 13.5.1 and
13.5.2 * Chapter 10.3.2 and Box 10.1 * Chapter 9.3.2
Precipitation
161
* Chapter 9.3.1, 9.3.6, Chapter 10.3.2 and Box 10.1
Extreme events
161
* Table 1: Chapter 2.1, 2.2, 2.5, 2.7.2, 2.7.3, Chapter
9.3.6 and Chapter 10.3.2 * Chapter 2.7.3 and
Chapter 9.3.6
El Nino
162
* Chapter 9.3.5 * Chapter 9.3.5
Monsoons
162
* Chapter 9.3.5
Thermohaline circulation
162
* Chapter 9.3.4
162-163 Snow and ice
* Chapter 9.3.2 * Chapter 11.5.1 * Chapter 11.5.1
* Chapter 11.5.4
Sea level
163
* Chapter 11.5.1
Anthropogenic climate change will persist for
many centuries.
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
* Chapter 3.2.3, Chapter 4.4 and Chapter 6.15
163
* Chapter 9.3.3 and 9.3.4 * Chapter 11.5.4
* Chapter 11.5.4 * Chapter 11.5.4

165

Climate Change 2001

Further work is required to address remaining
gaps in information and understanding.
SPM Page Cross-Reference: SPM Topic * Chapter Section
163
All bullet points: Chapter 14, Executive Summary

166

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Climate Change 2001:
The Scientific Basis

Technical Summary

A Report Accepted by Working Group I of the IPCC but not Approved in Detail
"Acceptance" of IPCC Reports at a Session of the Working Group or Panel signifies that the material has not been subject to
line by line discussion and agreement, but nevertheless presents a comprehensive, objective and balanced view of the
subject matter.

Co-ordinating Lead Authors
D.L. Albritton (USA), L.G. Meira Filho (Brazil)
Lead Authors
U. Cubasch (Germany), X. Dai (China), Y. Ding (China), D.J. Griggs (UK), B. Hewitson (South Africa), J.T. Houghton (UK), I.
Isaksen (Norway), T. Karl (USA), M. McFarland (USA), V.P. Meleshko (Russia), J.F.B. Mitchell (UK), M. Noguer (UK), B.S.
Nyenzi (Tanzania), M. Oppenheimer (USA), J.E. Penner (USA), S. Pollonais (Trinidad and Tobago), T. Stocker (Switzerland),
K.E. Trenberth (USA)
Contributing Authors
M.R. Allen (UK), A.P.M. Baede (Netherlands), J.A. Church (Australia), D.H. Ehhalt (Germany), C.K. Folland (UK), F. Giorgi
(Italy), J.M. Gregory (UK), J.M. Haywood (UK), J.I. House (Germany), M. Hulme (UK), V.J. Jaramillo (Mexico), A. Jayaraman
(India), C.A. Johnson (UK), S. Joussaume (France), D.J. Karoly (Australia), H. Kheshgi (USA), C. Le Quere (France), L.J. Mata
(Germany), B.J. McAvaney (Australia), L.O. Mearns (USA), G.A. Meehl (USA), B. Moore III (USA), R.K. Mugara (Zambia), M.
Prather (USA), C. Prentice (Germany), V. Ramaswamy (USA), S.C.B. Raper (UK), M.J. Salinger (New Zealand), R. Scholes
(S. Africa), S. Solomon (USA), R. Stouffer (USA), M-X. Wang (China), R.T. Watson (USA), K-S. Yap (Malaysia)
Review Editors
F. Joos (Switzerland), A. Ramirez-Rojas (Venezuela), J.M.R. Stone (Canada), J. Zillman (Australia)

Climate Change 2001

A. Introduction

Synthesis Report

A.2. The First and Second Assessment Reports of
Working Group I

A.1. The IPCC and its Working Groups
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
established by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO)
and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in
1988. The aim was, and remains, to provide an assessment of
the understanding of all aspects of climate change1, including
how human activities can cause such changes and can be
impacted by them. It had become widely recognised that
human-influenced emissions of greenhouse gases have the
potential to alter the climate system (see Box 1), with possible
deleterious or beneficial effects. It was also recognised that
addressing such global issues required organisation on a global
scale, including assessment of the understanding of the issue
by the worldwide expert communities.
At its first session, the IPCC was organised into three Working
Groups. The current remits of the Working Groups are for
Working Group I to address the scientific aspects of the climate
system and climate change, Working Group II to address the
impacts of and adaptations to climate change, and Working
Group III to address the options for the mitigation of climate
change. The IPCC provided its first major assessment report
in 1990 and its second major assessment report in 1996.
The IPCC reports are (i) up-to-date descriptions of the knowns
and unknowns of the climate system and related factors, (ii)
based on the knowledge of the international expert communities,
(iii) produced by an open and peer-reviewed professional
process, and (iv) based upon scientific publications whose
findings are summarised in terms useful to decision makers.
While the assessed information is policy relevant, the IPCC
does not establish or advocate public policy.
The scope of the assessments of Working Group I includes
observations of the current changes and trends in the climate
system, a reconstruction of past changes and trends, an
understanding of the processes involved in those changes, and
the incorporation of this knowledge into models that can attribute
the causes of changes and that can provide simulation of natural
and human-induced future changes in the climate system.

1

168

Climate change in IPCC usage refers to any change in climate over
time, whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity.
This usage differs from that in the Framework Convention on Climate
Change, where climate change refers to a change of climate that is
attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the
composition of the global atmosphere and that is in addition to natural
climate variability observed over comparable time periods. For a definition
of scientific and technical terms: see the Glossary in Appendix I.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

In the First Assessment Report in 1990, Working Group I
broadly described the status of the understanding of the climate
system and climate change that had been gained over the preceding
decades of research. Several major points were emphasised.
The greenhouse effect is a natural feature of the planet, and its
fundamental physics is well understood. The atmospheric
abundances of greenhouse gases were increasing, due largely
to human activities. Continued future growth in greenhouse
gas emissions was predicted to lead to significant increases in
the average surface temperature of the planet, increases that
would exceed the natural variation of the past several millennia
and that could be reversed only slowly. The past century had,
at that time, seen a surface warming of nearly 0.5C, which
was broadly consistent with that predicted by climate models
for the greenhouse gas increases, but was also comparable to
what was then known about natural variation. Lastly, it was
pointed out that the current level of understanding at that time
and the existing capabilities of climate models limited the
prediction of changes in the climate of specific regions.
Based on the results of additional research and Special Reports
produced in the interim, IPCC Working Group I assessed the
new state of understanding in its Second Assessment Report
(SAR2) in 1996. The report underscored that greenhouse gas
abundances continued to increase in the atmosphere and that
very substantial cuts in emissions would be required for
stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere
(which is the ultimate goal of Article 2 of the Framework
Convention on Climate Change). Further, the general increase
in global temperature continued, with recent years being the
warmest since at least 1860. The ability of climate models to
simulate observed events and trends had improved, particularly
with the inclusion of sulphate aerosols and stratospheric ozone
as radiative forcing agents in climate models. Utilising this
simulative capability to compare to the observed patterns of
regional temperature changes, the report concluded that the
ability to quantify the human influence on global climate was
limited. The limitations arose because the expected signal was
still emerging from the noise of natural variability and because
of uncertainties in other key factors. Nevertheless, the report
also concluded that "the balance of evidence suggests a
discernible human influence on global climate". Lastly, based
on a range of scenarios of future greenhouse gas abundances,
a set of responses of the climate system was simulated.

2

The IPCC Second Assessment Report is referred to in this Technical
Summary as the SAR.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

What changes
have occurred?

How well are the past and present
climates understood?

What changes
could lie ahead?

Observations:

Simulations:

* temperatures
* precipitation
* snow / ice cover
* sea level
* circulation
* extremes

* natural variation
* forcing agents
* global climate
* regional climate
* high impact events
* stabilisation

Observations vis-a-vis Simulations

Timeline:

This Summary:

Palaeo & Instrumental
Periods

The Present

The Future

Sections B + C

Sections D + E

Sections F + G

Figure 1: Key questions about the climate system and its relation to humankind. This Technical Summary, which is based on the underlying
information in the chapters, is a status report on the answers, presented in the structure indicated.

A.3. The Third Assessment Report: This Technical
Summary
The third major assessment report of IPCC Working Group I
builds upon these past assessments and incorporates the results
of the past five years of climate research. This Technical
Summary is based on the underlying information of the
chapters, which is cross-referenced in the Source Notes in the
Appendix. This Summary aims to describe the major features
(see Figure 1) of the understanding of the climate system and
climate change at the outset of the 21st century. Specifically:
* What does the observational record show with regard to
past climate changes, both globally and regionally and both
on the average and in the extremes? (Section B)
* How quantitative is the understanding of the agents that cause
climate to change, including both those that are natural
(e.g., solar variation) and human-related (e.g., greenhouse
gases) phenomena? (Section C)
* What is the current ability to simulate the responses of the
climate system to these forcing agents? In particular, how
well are key physical and biogeochemical processes
described by present global climate models? (Section D)

* Based on today's observational data and today's climate
predictive capabilities, what does the comparison show
regarding a human influence on today's climate? (Section E)
* Further, using current predictive tools, what could the
possible climate future be? Namely, for a wide spectrum
of projections for several climate-forcing agents, what does
current understanding project for global temperatures,
regional patterns of precipitation, sea levels, and changes
in extremes? (Section F)
Finally, what are the most urgent research activities that need
to be addressed to improve our understanding of the climate
system and to reduce our uncertainty regarding future climate
change?
The Third Assessment Report of IPCC Working Group I is
the product of hundreds of scientists from the developed and
developing world who contributed to its preparation and
review. What follows is a summary of their understanding of
the climate system.

169

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Box 1: What drives changes in climate?
The Earth absorbs radiation from the Sun, mainly at the
surface. This energy is then redistributed by the atmospheric
and oceanic circulations and radiated back to space at longer
(infrared) wavelengths. For the annual mean and for the Earth
as a whole, the incoming solar radiation energy is balanced
approximately by the outgoing terrestrial radiation. Any factor
that alters the radiation received from the Sun or lost to space,
or that alters the redistribution of energy within the
atmosphere and between the atmosphere, land, and ocean,
can affect climate. A change in the net radiative energy
available to the global Earth-atmosphere system is termed
here, and in previous IPCC reports, a radiative forcing.
Positive radiative forcings tend to warm the Earth's surface
and lower atmosphere. Negative radiative forcings tend to
cool them.
Increases in the concentrations of greenhouse gases will reduce
the efficiency with which the Earth's surface radiates to space.
More of the outgoing terrestrial radiation from the surface is
absorbed by the atmosphere and re-emitted at higher altitudes
and lower temperatures. This results in a positive radiative
forcing that tends to warm the lower atmosphere and surface.
Because less heat escapes to space, this is the enhanced
greenhouse effect - an enhancement of an effect that has
operated in the Earth's atmosphere for billions of years due
to the presence of naturally occurring greenhouse gases: water
vapour, carbon dioxide, ozone, methane and nitrous oxide.
The amount of radiative forcing depends on the size of the
increase in concentration of each greenhouse gas, the radiative
properties of the gases involved, and the concentrations of
other greenhouse gases already present in the atmosphere.
Further, many greenhouse gases reside in the atmosphere for
centuries after being emitted, thereby introducing a long-term
commitment to positive radiative forcing.
Anthropogenic aerosols (microscopic airborne particles or
droplets) in the troposphere, such as those derived from fossil
fuel and biomass burning, can reflect solar radiation, which
leads to a cooling tendency in the climate system. Because it
can absorb solar radiation, black carbon (soot) aerosol tends
to warm the climate system. In addition, changes in aerosol
concentrations can alter cloud amount and cloud reflectivity
through their effect on cloud properties and lifetimes. In most
cases, tropospheric aerosols tend to produce a negative
radiative forcing and a cooler climate. They have a much
shorter lifetime (days to weeks) than most greenhouse gases

170

IPCC Third Assessment Report

(decades to centuries), and, as a result, their concentrations
respond much more quickly to changes in emissions.
Volcanic activity can inject large amounts of sulphurcontaining gases (primarily sulphur dioxide) into the
stratosphere, which are transformed into sulphate aerosols.
Individual eruptions can produce a large, but transitory,
negative radiative forcing, tending to cool the Earth's surface
and lower atmosphere over periods of a few years.
The Sun's output of energy varies by small amounts (0.1%)
over an 11-year cycle and, in addition, variations over longer
periods may occur. On time-scales of tens to thousands of
years, slow variations in the Earth's orbit, which are well
understood, have led to changes in the seasonal and latitudinal
distribution of solar radiation. These changes have played an
important part in controlling the variations of climate in the
distant past, such as the glacial and inter-glacial cycles.
When radiative forcing changes, the climate system responds
on various time-scales. The longest of these are due to the
large heat capacity of the deep ocean and dynamic adjustment
of the ice sheets. This means that the transient response to a
change (either positive or negative) may last for thousands
of years. Any changes in the radiative balance of the Earth,
including those due to an increase in greenhouse gases or in
aerosols, will alter the global hydrological cycle and
atmospheric and oceanic circulation, thereby affecting
weather patterns and regional temperatures and precipitation.
Any human-induced changes in climate will be embedded in
a background of natural climatic variations that occur on a
whole range of time- and space-scales. Climate variability
can occur as a result of natural changes in the forcing of the
climate system, for example variations in the strength of the
incoming solar radiation and changes in the concentrations
of aerosols arising from volcanic eruptions. Natural climate
variations can also occur in the absence of a change in external
forcing, as a result of complex interactions between components
of the climate system, such as the coupling between the
atmosphere and ocean. The El Nino-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) phenomenon is an example of such natural "internal"
variability on interannual time-scales. To distinguish
anthropogenic climate changes from natural variations, it is
necessary to identify the anthropogenic "signal" against the
background "noise" of natural climate variability.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

B. The Observed Changes in the Climate
System
Is the Earth's climate changing? The answer is unequivocally
"Yes". A suite of observations supports this conclusion and
provides insight about the rapidity of those changes. These
data are also the bedrock upon which to construct the answer
to the more difficult question: "Why is it changing?", which is
addressed in later Sections.

and atmospheric moisture, snow cover, extent of land and sea
ice, sea level, patterns in atmospheric and oceanic circulation,
extreme weather and climate events, and overall features of the
climate variability. The concluding part of this Section compares
the observed trends in these various climate indicators to see
if a collective picture emerges. The degree of this internal
consistency is a critical factor in assessing the level of
confidence in the current understanding of the climate system.
B.1. Observed Changes in Temperature

This Section provides an updated summary of the observations
that delineate how the climate system has changed in the past.
Many of the variables of the climate system have been
measured directly, i.e., the "instrumental record". For example,
widespread direct measurements of surface temperature began
around the middle of the 19th century. Near global observations
of other surface "weather" variables, such as precipitation and
winds, have been made for about a hundred years. Sea level
measurements have been made for over 100 years in some
places, but the network of tide gauges with long records
provides only limited global coverage. Upper air observations
have been made systematically only since the late 1940s. There
are also long records of surface oceanic observations made
from ships since the mid-19th century and by dedicated buoys
since about the late 1970s. Sub-surface oceanic temperature
measurements with near global coverage are now available
from the late 1940s. Since the late 1970s, other data from
Earth-observation satellites have been used to provide a wide
range of global observations of various components of the
climate system. In addition, a growing set of palaeoclimatic
data, e.g., from trees, corals, sediments, and ice, are giving
information about the Earth's climate of centuries and millennia
before the present.
This Section places particular emphasis on current knowledge
of past changes in key climate variables: temperature, precipitation

Temperatures in the instrumental record for land and
oceans
The global average surface temperature has increased by 0.6
 0.2C3 since the late 19th century. It is very likely that the
1990s was the warmest decade and 1998 the warmest year in
the instrumental record since 1861 (see Figure 2). The main
cause of the increased estimate of global warming of 0.15C
since the SAR is related to the record warmth of the additional
six years (1995 to 2000) of data. A secondary reason is related
to improved methods of estimating change. The current,
slightly larger uncertainty range (0.2C, 95% confidence
interval) is also more objectively based. Further, the scientific
basis for confidence in the estimates of the increase in global
temperature since the late 19th century has been strengthened
since the SAR. This is due to the improvements derived from
several new studies. These include an independent test of the
corrections used for time-dependent biases in the sea surface
temperature data and new analyses of the effect of urban "heat
island" influences on global land-temperature trends. As
indicated in Figure 2, most of the increase in global temperature

3

Generally, temperature trends are rounded to the nearest 0.05C per
unit of time, the periods often being limited by data availability.

Figure 2: Combined annual
land-surface air and sea surface
temperature anomalies (C)
1861 to 2000, relative to 1961
to 1990. Two standard error
uncertainties are shown as
bars on the annual number.
[Based on Figure 2.7c]

Departures in temperature (C)
from the 1961 to 1990 average

0.8
GLOBAL
0.4

0.0

-0.4
Data from thermometers.

-0.8
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

171

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

(a) Annual temperature trends, 1901 to 2000

(b) Annual temperature trends, 1910 to 1945

(c) Annual temperature trends, 1946 to 1975

(d) Annual temperature trends, 1976 to 2000

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2
0
0.2
Trend (C/decade)

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 3: Annual temperature trends for the periods 1901 to 2000, 1910 to 1945, 1946 to 1975 and 1976 to 2000 respectively. Trends are
represented by the area of the circle with red representing increases, blue representing decreases, and green little or no change. Trends
were calculated from annually averaged gridded anomalies with the requirement that the calculation of annual anomalies include a minimum
of 10 months of data. For the period 1901 to 2000, trends were calculated only for those grid boxes containing annual anomalies in at least
66 of the 100 years. The minimum number of years required for the shorter time periods (1910 to 1945, 1946 to 1975, and 1976 to 2000) was
24, 20, and 16 years respectively. [Based on Figure 2.9]

since the late 19th century has occurred in two distinct periods:
1910 to 1945 and since 1976. The rate of increase of temperature
for both periods is about 0.15C/decade. Recent warming has
been greater over land compared to oceans; the increase in
sea surface temperature over the period 1950 to 1993 is about
half that of the mean land-surface air temperature. The high
global temperature associated with the 1997 to 1998 El Nino
event stands out as an extreme event, even taking into account
the recent rate of warming.
The regional patterns of the warming that occurred in the
early part of the 20th century were different than those that
occurred in the latter part. Figure 3 shows the regional patterns
of the warming that have occurred over the full 20th century,
as well as for three component time periods. The most recent
period of warming (1976 to 1999) has been almost global,
but the largest increases in temperature have occurred over
the mid- and high latitudes of the continents in the Northern
Hemisphere. Year-round cooling is evident in the north-western
North Atlantic and the central North Pacific Oceans, but the
North Atlantic cooling trend has recently reversed. The recent
regional patterns of temperature change have been shown to

172

IPCC Third Assessment Report

be related, in part, to various phases of atmospheric-oceanic
oscillations, such as the North Atlantic-Arctic Oscillation and
possibly the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. Therefore, regional
temperature trends over a few decades can be strongly
influenced by regional variability in the climate system and
can depart appreciably from a global average. The 1910 to
1945 warming was initially concentrated in the North Atlantic.
By contrast, the period 1946 to 1975 showed significant
cooling in the North Atlantic, as well as much of the Northern
Hemisphere, and warming in much of the Southern
Hemisphere.
New analyses indicate that global ocean heat content has
increased significantly since the late 1950s. More than half of
the increase in heat content has occurred in the upper 300 m
of the ocean, equivalent to a rate of temperature increase in
this layer of about 0.04C/decade.
New analyses of daily maximum and minimum land-surface
temperatures for 1950 to 1993 continue to show that this
measure of diurnal temperature range is decreasing very
widely, although not everywhere. On average, minimum

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

temperatures are increasing at about twice the rate of maximum
temperatures (0.2 versus 0.1C/decade).

a)

Anomaly (C)

0.5

Temperatures above the surface layer from satellite
and weather balloon records

0.0

-0.5

Surface temperatures during the pre-instrumental
period from the proxy record
It is likely that the rate and duration of the warming of the
20th century is larger than any other time during the last
4

In this Technical Summary and in the Summary for Policymakers, the
following words have been used to indicate approximate judgmental
estimates of confidence: virtually certain (greater than 99% chance that
a result is true); very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance);
medium likelihood (33-66% chance); unlikely (10-33% chance); very
unlikely (1-10% chance); exceptionally unlikely (less than 1% chance).
The reader is referred to individual chapters for more details.

Balloons
Satellites
Surface

-1.0

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

b)
2
Anomaly (C)

Surface, balloon and satellite temperature measurements show
that the troposphere and Earth's surface have warmed and
that the stratosphere has cooled. Over the shorter time period
for which there have been both satellite and weather balloon
data (since 1979), the balloon and satellite records show
significantly less lower-tropospheric warming than observed
at the surface. Analyses of temperature trends since 1958 for
the lowest 8 km of the atmosphere and at the surface are in
good agreement, as shown in Figure 4a, with a warming of about
0.1C per decade. However, since the beginning of the satellite
record in 1979, the temperature data from both satellites and
weather balloons show a warming in the global middle-to-lower
troposphere at a rate of approximately 0.05  0.10C per
decade. The global average surface temperature has increased
significantly by 0.15  0.05C/decade. The difference in the
warming rates is statistically significant. By contrast, during
the period 1958 to 1978, surface temperature trends were near
zero, while trends for the lowest 8 km of the atmosphere were
near 0.2C/decade. About half of the observed difference in
warming since 1979 is likely4 to be due to the combination of the
differences in spatial coverage of the surface and tropospheric
observations and the physical effects of the sequence of
volcanic eruptions and a substantial El Nino (see Box 4 for a
general description of ENSO) that occurred within this period.
The remaining difference is very likely real and not an
observing bias. It arises primarily due to differences in the
rate of temperature change over the tropical and sub-tropical
regions, which were faster in the lowest 8 km of the atmosphere
before about 1979, but which have been slower since then.
There are no significant differences in warming rates over midlatitude continental regions in the Northern Hemisphere. In
the upper troposphere, no significant global temperature trends
have been detected since the early 1960s. In the stratosphere,
as shown in Figure 4b, both satellites and balloons show
substantial cooling, punctuated by sharp warming episodes of
one to two years long that are due to volcanic eruptions.

0

-2

Satellites

Agung

El Chichon

Pinatubo

Balloons
-4

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Figure 4: (a) Time-series of seasonal temperature anomalies of the
troposphere based on balloons and satellites in addition to the surface.
(b) Time-series of seasonal temperature anomalies of the lower
stratosphere from balloons and satellites. [Based on Figure 2.12]

1,000 years. The 1990s are likely to have been the warmest
decade of the millennium in the Northern Hemisphere, and
1998 is likely to have been the warmest year. There has been
a considerable advance in understanding of temperature change
that occurred over the last millennium, especially from the
synthesis of individual temperature reconstructions. This new
detailed temperature record for the Northern Hemisphere is
shown in Figure 5. The data show a relatively warm period
associated with the 11th to 14th centuries and a relatively cool
period associated with the 15th to 19th centuries in the
Northern Hemisphere. However, evidence does not support
these "Medieval Warm Period" and "Little Ice Age" periods,
respectively, as being globally synchronous. As Figure 5
indicates, the rate and duration of warming of the Northern
Hemisphere in the 20th century appears to have been
unprecedented during the millennium, and it cannot simply
be considered as a recovery from the "Little Ice Age" of the
15th to 19th centuries. These analyses are complemented by
sensitivity analysis of the spatial representativeness of available
palaeoclimatic data, indicating that the warmth of the recent
decade is outside the 95% confidence interval of temperature
uncertainty, even during the warmest periods of the last
millennium. Moreover, several different analyses have now
been completed, each suggesting that the Northern Hemisphere
temperatures of the past decade have been warmer than any
other time in the past six to ten centuries. This is the timespan over which temperatures with annual resolution can be
calculated using hemispheric-wide tree-ring, ice-cores, corals,
and and other annually-resolved proxy data. Because less data
are available, less is known about annual averages prior to
1,000 years before the present and for conditions prevailing
in most of the Southern Hemisphere prior to 1861.

173

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

1.0

Northern Hemisphere anomaly (C)
relative to 1961 to 1990

Instrumental data (AD 1902 to 1999)
Reconstruction (AD 1000 to 1980)
Reconstruction (40 year smoothed)

1998 instrumental value

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Year
Figure 5: Millennial Northern Hemisphere (NH) temperature reconstruction (blue - tree rings, corals, ice cores, and historical records) and
instrumental data (red) from AD 1000 to 1999. Smoother version of NH series (black), and two standard error limits (gray shaded) are shown.
[Based on Figure 2.20]

It is likely that large rapid decadal temperature changes
occurred during the last glacial and its deglaciation (between
about 100,000 and 10,000 years ago), particularly in high
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. In a few places during
the deglaciation, local increases in temperature of 5 to 10C
are likely to have occurred over periods as short as a few
decades. During the last 10,000 years, there is emerging
evidence of significant rapid regional temperature changes,
which are part of the natural variability of climate.

174

B.2. Observed Changes in Precipitation and
Atmospheric Moisture

land (versus ocean) area for the latitudes 10N to 10S is
relatively small. Nonetheless, direct measurements of precipitation
and model reanalyses of inferred precipitation indicate that
rainfall has also increased over large parts of the tropical oceans.
Where and when available, changes in annual streamflow often
relate well to changes in total precipitation. The increases in
precipitation over Northern Hemisphere mid- and high latitude
land areas have a strong correlation to long-term increases in
total cloud amount. In contrast to the Northern Hemisphere,
no comparable systematic changes in precipitation have been
detected in broad latitudinal averages over the Southern
Hemisphere.

Since the time of the SAR, annual land precipitation has
continued to increase in the middle and high latitudes of the
Northern Hemisphere (very likely to be 0.5 to 1%/decade),
except over Eastern Asia. Over the sub-tropics (10N to 30N),
land-surface rainfall has decreased on average (likely to be
about 0.3%/decade), although this has shown signs of recovery
in recent years. Tropical land-surface precipitation measurements
indicate that precipitation likely has increased by about 0.2 to
0.3%/ decade over the 20th century, but increases are not
evident over the past few decades and the amount of tropical

It is likely that total atmospheric water vapour has increased
several per cent per decade over many regions of the Northern
Hemisphere. Changes in water vapour over approximately the
past 25 years have been analysed for selected regions using in
situ surface observations, as well as lower-tropospheric
measurements from satellites and weather balloons. A pattern
of overall surface and lower-tropospheric water vapour
increases over the past few decades is emerging from the most
reliable data sets, although there are likely to be time-dependent
biases in these data and regional variations in the trends.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

Water vapour in the lower stratosphere is also likely to have
increased by about 10% per decade since the beginning of the
observational record (1980).

B.4. Observed Changes in Sea Level

Changes in total cloud amounts over Northern Hemisphere
mid- and high latitude continental regions indicate a likely
increase in cloud cover of about 2% since the beginning of
the 20th century, which has now been shown to be positively
correlated with decreases in the diurnal temperature range.
Similar changes have been shown over Australia, the only
Southern Hemisphere continent where such an analysis has
been completed. Changes in total cloud amount are uncertain
both over sub-tropical and tropical land areas, as well as over
the oceans.

Based on tide gauge data, the rate of global mean sea level
rise during the 20th century is in the range 1.0 to 2.0 mm/yr,
with a central value of 1.5 mm/yr (the central value should
not be interpreted as a best estimate). (See Box 2 for the factors
that influence sea level.) As Figure 6 indicates, the longest
instrumental records (two or three centuries at most) of local
sea level come from tide gauges. Based on the very few long
tide-gauge records, the average rate of sea level rise has been
larger during the 20th century than during the 19th century.
No significant acceleration in the rate of sea level rise during
the 20th century has been detected. This is not inconsistent
with model results due to the possibility of compensating
factors and the limited data.

B.3. Observed Changes in Snow Cover and Landand Sea-Ice Extent
Decreasing snow cover and land-ice extent continue to be
positively correlated with increasing land-surface temperatures.
Satellite data show that there are very likely to have been
decreases of about 10% in the extent of snow cover since the
late 1960s. There is a highly significant correlation between
increases in Northern Hemisphere land temperatures and the
decreases. There is now ample evidence to support a major
retreat of alpine and continental glaciers in response to 20th
century warming. In a few maritime regions, increases in
precipitation due to regional atmospheric circulation changes
have overshadowed increases in temperature in the past two
decades, and glaciers have re-advanced. Over the past 100 to
150 years, ground-based observations show that there is very
likely to have been a reduction of about two weeks in the annual
duration of lake and river ice in the mid- to high latitudes of
the Northern Hemisphere.
Northern Hemisphere sea-ice amounts are decreasing, but
no significant trends in Antarctic sea-ice extent are apparent.
A retreat of sea-ice extent in the Arctic spring and summer of
10 to 15% since the 1950s is consistent with an increase in
spring temperatures and, to a lesser extent, summer temperatures
in the high latitudes. There is little indication of reduced Arctic
sea-ice extent during winter when temperatures have increased
in the surrounding region. By contrast, there is no readily
apparent relationship between decadal changes of Antarctic
temperatures and sea-ice extent since 1973. After an initial
decrease in the mid-1970s, Antarctic sea-ice extent has
remained stable, or even slightly increased.
New data indicate that there likely has been an approximately
40% decline in Arctic sea-ice thickness in late summer to early
autumn between the period of 1958 to 1976 and the mid-1990s,
and a substantially smaller decline in winter. The relatively
short record length and incomplete sampling limit the
interpretation of these data. Interannual variability and interdecadal variability could be influencing these changes.

Changes during the instrumental record

Changes during the pre-instrumental record
Since the last glacial maximum about 20,000 years ago, the
sea level in locations far from present and former ice sheets
has risen by over 120 m as a result of loss of mass from these
ice sheets. Vertical land movements, both upward and downward,
are still occurring in response to these large transfers of mass
from ice sheets to oceans. The most rapid rise in global sea
level was between 15,000 and 6,000 years ago, with an average
rate of about 10 mm/yr. Based on geological data, eustatic sea
level (i.e., corresponding to a change in ocean volume) may
have risen at an average rate of 0.5 mm/yr over the past 6,000
years and at an average rate of 0.1 to 0.2 mm/yr over the last
3,000 years. This rate is about one tenth of that occurring during
the 20th century. Over the past 3,000 to 5,000 years,
oscillations in global sea level on time-scales of 100 to 1,000
years are unlikely to have exceeded 0.3 to 0.5 m.
B.5. Observed Changes in Atmospheric and
Oceanic Circulation Patterns
The behaviour of ENSO (see Box 4 for a general description),
has been unusual since the mid-1970s compared with the
previous 100 years, with warm phase ENSO episodes being
relatively more frequent, persistent, and intense than the
opposite cool phase. This recent behaviour of ENSO is reflected
in variations in precipitation and temperature over much of
the global tropics and sub-tropics. The overall effect is likely
to have been a small contribution to the increase in global
temperatures during the last few decades. The Inter-decadal
Pacific Oscillation and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation are
associated with decadal to multidecadal climate variability over
the Pacific basin. It is likely that these oscillations modulate
ENSO-related climate variability.
Other important circulation features that affect the climate in
large regions of the globe are being characterised. The North

175

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Box 2: What causes sea level to change?
The level of the sea at the shoreline is determined by many
factors in the global environment that operate on a great range
of time-scales, from hours (tidal) to millions of years (ocean
basin changes due to tectonics and sedimentation). On the
time-scale of decades to centuries, some of the largest
influences on the average levels of the sea are linked to climate
and climate change processes.
Firstly, as ocean water warms, it expands. On the basis of
observations of ocean temperatures and model results, thermal
expansion is believed to be one of the major contributors to
historical sea level changes. Further, thermal expansion is
expected to contribute the largest component to sea level rise
over the next hundred years. Deep ocean temperatures change
only slowly; therefore, thermal expansion would continue
for many centuries even if the atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases were to stabilise.
The amount of warming and the depth of water affected vary
with location. In addition, warmer water expands more than
colder water for a given change in temperature. The geographical
distribution of sea level change results from the geographical
variation of thermal expansion, changes in salinity, winds,
and ocean circulation. The range of regional variation is
substantial compared with the global average sea level rise.
Sea level also changes when the mass of water in the ocean
increases or decreases. This occurs when ocean water is
exchanged with the water stored on land. The major land
store is the water frozen in glaciers or ice sheets. Indeed,

Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) is linked to the strength of the
westerlies over the Atlantic and extra-tropical Eurasia. During
winter the NAO displays irregular oscillations on interannual
to multi-decadal time-scales. Since the 1970s, the winter NAO
has often been in a phase that contributes to stronger westerlies,
which correlate with cold season warming over Eurasia. New
evidence indicates that the NAO and changes in Arctic sea ice
are likely to be closely coupled. The NAO is now believed to
be part of a wider scale atmospheric Arctic Oscillation that
affects
much of the extratropical Northern Hemisphere. A
*
similar Antarctic Oscillation has been in an enhanced positive
phase during the last 15 years, with stronger westerlies over
the Southern Oceans.
B.6. Observed Changes in Climate Variability and
Extreme Weather and Climate Events
New analyses show that in regions where total precipitation
has increased, it is very likely that there have been even more
pronounced increases in heavy and extreme precipitation

176

IPCC Third Assessment Report

the main reason for the lower sea level during the last glacial
period was the amount of water stored in the large extension
of the ice sheets on the continents of the Northern
Hemisphere. After thermal expansion, the melting of
mountain glaciers and ice caps is expected to make the largest
contribution to the rise of sea level over the next hundred
years. These glaciers and ice caps make up only a few per
cent of the world's land-ice area, but they are more sensitive
to climate change than the larger ice sheets in Greenland and
Antarctica, because the ice sheets are in colder climates with
low precipitation and low melting rates. Consequently, the
large ice sheets are expected to make only a small net
contribution to sea level change in the coming decades.
Sea level is also influenced by processes that are not explicitly
related to climate change. Terrestrial water storage (and
hence, sea level) can be altered by extraction of ground water,
building of reservoirs, changes in surface runoff, and seepage
into deep aquifers from reservoirs and irrigation. These
factors may be offsetting a significant fraction of the expected
acceleration in sea level rise from thermal expansion and
glacial melting. In addition, coastal subsidence in river delta
regions can also influence local sea level. Vertical land
movements caused by natural geological processes, such as
slow movements in the Earth's mantle and tectonic
displacements of the crust, can have effects on local sea level
that are comparable to climate-related impacts. Lastly, on
seasonal, interannual, and decadal time-scales, sea level
responds to changes in atmospheric and ocean dynamics, with
the most striking example occurring during El Nino events.

events. The converse is also true. In some regions, however,
heavy and extreme events (i.e., defined to be within the upper
or lower ten percentiles) have increased despite the fact that
total precipitation has decreased or remained constant. This is
attributed to a decrease in the frequency of precipitation events.
Overall, it is likely that for many mid- and high latitude areas,
primarily in the Northern Hemisphere, statistically significant
increases have occurred in the proportion of total annual
precipitation derived from heavy and extreme precipitation
events; it is likely that there has been a 2 to 4% increase in the
frequency of heavy precipitation events over the latter half of
the 20th century. Over the 20th century (1900 to 1995), there
were relatively small increases in global land areas experiencing
severe drought or severe wetness. In some regions, such as
parts of Asia and Africa, the frequency and intensity of drought
have been observed to increase in recent decades. In many
regions, these changes are dominated by inter-decadal and
multi-decadal climate variability, such as the shift in ENSO
towards more warm events. In many regions, inter-daily
temperature variability has decreased, and increases in the daily

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

Figure 6: Time-series of relative sea level for the past 300 years from Northern Europe: Amsterdam, Netherlands; Brest, France; Sheerness,
UK; Stockholm, Sweden (detrended over the period 1774 to 1873 to remove to first order the contribution of post-glacial rebound); Swinoujscie,
Poland (formerly Swinemunde, Germany); and Liverpool, UK. Data for the latter are of "Adjusted Mean High Water" rather than Mean Sea
Level and include a nodal (18.6 year) term. The scale bar indicates 100 mm. [Based on Figure 11.7]

minimum temperature are lengthening the freeze-free period
in most mid- and high latitude regions. Since 1950 it is very
likely that there has been a significant reduction in the
frequency of much-below-normal seasonal mean temperatures
across much of the globe, but there has been a smaller increase
in the frequency of much-above-normal seasonal temperatures.

since the 1970s. Recent analyses of changes in severe local
weather (e.g., tornadoes, thunderstorm days, and hail) in a
few selected regions do not provide compelling evidence to
suggest long-term changes. In general, trends in severe weather
events are notoriously difficult to detect because of their
relatively rare occurrence and large spatial variability.

There is no compelling evidence to indicate that the
characteristics of tropical and extratropical storms have
changed. Changes in tropical storm intensity and frequency
are dominated by interdecadal to multidecadal variations,
which may be substantial, e.g., in the tropical North Atlantic.
Owing to incomplete data and limited and conflicting analyses,
it is uncertain as to whether there have been any long-term
and large-scale increases in the intensity and frequency of
extra-tropical cyclones in the Northern Hemisphere. Regional
increases have been identified in the North Pacific, parts of
North America, and Europe over the past several decades. In
the Southern Hemisphere, fewer analyses have been completed,
but they suggest a decrease in extra-tropical cyclone activity

B.7. The Collective Picture: A Warming World and
Other Changes in the Climate System
As summarised above, a suite of climate changes is now welldocumented, particularly over the recent decades to century
time period, with its growing set of direct measurements. Figure
7 illustrates these trends in temperature indicators (Figure 7a)
and hydrological and storm-related indicators (Figure 7b), as
well as also providing an indication of certainty about the
changes.

177

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

(a) Temperature Indicators
O C E A N

L A N D

LOWER STRATOSPHERE

O C E A N

**lower stratosphere: 0.5 to 2.5 oC decrease since 1979

TROPOSPHERE

* Little or no change since 1979
** 0.0 to 0.2 oC increase since 1979 - satellites & balloons
* 0.2 to 0.4 o C increase since ~1960

Upper
Low- to Mid-

** N.H. Spring snow cover extent:

NEAR-SURFACE

since
1987, 10% below 1966-86 mean

* 1990s warmest decade of the millennium
and 1998 warmest year for at least the N.H.

** marine air temperature: 0.4 to 0.7oC
increase since late-19th century

*** massive

retreat of mountain glaciers
during 20th century

*** sea surface temperature:

0.4 to 0.8 oC increase since
the late 19th century.

*

* land night time air temperature

global ocean (to 300m depth)
heat content increase since 1950s
o
equal to 0.04 C / decade

increasing at twice the rate of daytime
temperatures since 1950

** lake and river ice retreat at mid and high
latitudes since the late 19th century (2 week
decrease in ice duration)

*** land air temperatures: 0.4 to 0.8 oC
increase since late 19th century

* Arctic sea ice: summer
thickness decrease of 40%
and 10 to 15% decrease in
extent during spring and
summer since
1950s
? Ant arctic sea ice:
no significant change
since 1978

*** Virtually certain (probability > 99%)
** Very likely (probability _
> 90% but _
< 99%)
* Likely (probability > 66% but < 90%)

Likelihood:

? Medium likelihood (probability > 33% but _
< 66%)

(b) Hydrological and Stor m related Indicators
L A N D

O C E A N

*

LOWER STRATOSPHERE
TROPOSPHERE

20% water vapour increase since 1980 (above 18 km)
upper troposphere:

*no significant global trends since 1980;
15% increase in tropics (10oN to 10oS)

Water vapour
troposphere:

*many regions with increases since about 1960
* 2% increase in total cloud amount

? 2% increase in total
cloud amount over the
ocean since 1952

NEAR-SURFACE

over land during the 20th century

? no systematic large-scale
change in tornadoes, thunder-days, hail

* 2 to 3% decrease in sub-tropics
* 2 to 3% increase in tropics

O C E A N

20th century
land surface rainfall



   ? no consistent 20th century

change in extra-tropical
storm frequency / intensity

**5 to10% increase in N. Hemisphere
** no widespread changes in
tropical storm frequency / intensity
during the 20th century

Likelihood:

mid-to-high latitude precipitation since 1900,
with much of it due to heavy / extreme events
* widespread significant increases
in surface water vapour in the
N. Hemisphere, 1975 to 1995

*** Virtually certain (probability > 99%)
** Very likely (probability >_ 90% but <_ 99%)
* Likely (probability > 66% but < 90%)
? Medium likelihood (probability > 33% but <
_ 66%)

178

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Figure 7: (a) Schematic of
observed variations of the
temperature indicators.
[Based on Figure 2.39a]
(b) Schematic of observed
variations of the hydrological
and storm-related indicators.
[Based on Figure 2.39b]

The Scientific Basis

Taken together, these trends illustrate a collective
picture of a warming world:
* Surface temperature measurements over the land and
oceans (with two separate estimates over the latter) have
been measured and adjusted independently. All data sets
show quite similar upward trends globally, with two major
warming periods globally: 1910 to 1945 and since 1976.
There is an emerging tendency for global land-surface air
temperatures to warm faster than the global ocean-surface
temperatures.
* Weather balloon measurements show that lowertropospheric temperatures have been increasing since 1958,
though only slightly since 1979. Since 1979, satellite data
are available and show similar trends to balloon data.
* The decrease in the continental diurnal temperature range
coincides with increases in cloud amount, precipitation,
and increases in total water vapour.
* The nearly worldwide decrease in mountain glacier extent
and ice mass is consistent with worldwide surface
temperature increases. A few recent exceptions in coastal
regions are consistent with atmospheric circulation
variations and related precipitation increases.
* The decreases in snow cover and the shortening seasons
of lake and river ice relate well to increases in Northern
Hemispheric land-surface temperatures.
* The systematic decrease in spring and summer sea-ice
extent and thickness in the Arctic is consistent with increases
in temperature over most of the adjacent land and ocean.
* Ocean heat content has increased, and global average sea
level has risen.
* The increases in total tropospheric water vapour in the
last 25 years are qualitatively consistent with increases in
tropospheric temperatures and an enhanced hydrologic
cycle, resulting in more extreme and heavier precipitation
events in many areas with increasing precipitation, e.g.,
middle and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere.
Some important aspects of climate appear not to have
changed.
* A few areas of the globe have not warmed in recent decades,
mainly over some parts of the Southern Hemisphere oceans
and parts of Antarctica.
* No significant trends in Antarctic sea-ice extent are apparent
over the period of systematic satellite measurements (since
1978).
* Based on limited data, the observed variations in the intensity
and frequency of tropical and extra-tropical cyclones and
severe local storms show no clear trends in the last half of
the 20th century, although multi-decadal fluctuations are
sometimes apparent.
The variations and trends in the examined indicators imply
that it is virtually certain that there has been a generally increasing

WGI Technical Summary

trend in global surface temperature over the 20th century,
although short-term and regional deviations from this trend
occur.

C. The Forcing Agents That Cause
Climate Change
In addition to the past variations and changes in the Earth's
climate, observations have also documented the changes that
have occurred in agents that can cause climate change. Most
notable among these are increases in the atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols (microscopic
airborne particles or droplets) and variations in solar activity,
both of which can alter the Earth's radiation budget and hence
climate. These observational records of climate-forcing agents
are part of the input needed to understand the past climate
changes noted in the preceding Section and, very importantly,
to predict what climate changes could lie ahead (see Section F).
Like the record of past climate changes, the data sets for forcing
agents are of varying length and quality. Direct measurements
of solar irradiance exist for only about two decades. The
sustained direct monitoring of the atmospheric concentrations
of carbon dioxide (CO2) began about the middle of the 20th
century and, in later years, for other long-lived, well-mixed
gases such as methane. Palaeo-atmospheric data from ice cores
reveal the concentration changes occurring in earlier millennia
for some greenhouse gases. In contrast, the time-series
measurements for the forcing agents that have relatively short
residence times in the atmosphere (e.g., aerosols) are more
recent and are far less complete, because they are harder to
measure and are spatially heterogeneous. Current data sets
show the human influence on atmospheric concentrations of
both the long-lived greenhouse gases and short-lived forcing
agents during the last part of the past millennium. Figure 8
illustrates the effects of the large growth over the Industrial
Era in the anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases and
sulphur dioxide, the latter being a precursor of aerosols.
A change in the energy available to the global Earthatmosphere system due to changes in these forcing agents is
termed radiative forcing (Wm-2) of the climate system (see
Box 1). Defined in this manner, radiative forcing of climate
change constitutes an index of the relative global mean impacts
on the surface-troposphere system due to different natural and
anthropogenic causes. This Section updates the knowledge of
the radiative forcing of climate change that has occurred from
pre-industrial times to the present. Figure 9 shows the estimated
radiative forcings from the beginning of the Industrial Era
(1750) to 1999 for the quantifiable natural and anthropogenic
forcing agents. Although not included in the figure due to their
episodic nature, volcanic eruptions are the source of another
important natural forcing. Summaries of the information about
each forcing agent follow in the sub-sections below.

179

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

sources. Lastly, as shown in Figure 9, the radiative forcings of
individual agents can be positive (i.e., a tendency to warm the
Earth's surface) or negative (i.e., a tendency to cool the Earth's
surface).

(a)

CO2 (ppm)

1.5

Carbon Dioxide

360
340

1.0

320
0.5

300
280

C.1. Observed Changes in Globally Well-Mixed
Greenhouse Gas Concentrations and Radiative
Forcing

0.0

0.5
0.4

1500

0.3

1250

0.2
1000

0.1

750

N2O (ppb)

310

0.0

Radiative forcing (Wm-2)

Methane

1750

CH4 (ppb)

Atmospheric concentration

260

0.15

Nitrous Oxide

0.10
290

0.05
0.0

270
250
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Year

200

Sulphur
50

100
25

0
1600

0
1800
Year

SO2 emissions (Millions of
tonnes sulphur per year)

Sulphate concentration

(mg SO42- per tonne of ice)

(b)

2000

Figure 8: Records of changes in atmospheric composition. (a)
Atmospheric concentrations of CO2, CH4 and N2O over the past
1,000 years. Ice core and firn data for several sites in Antarctica
and Greenland (shown by different symbols) are supplemented
with the data from direct atmospheric samples over the past few
decades (shown by the line for CO2 and incorporated in the curve
representing the global average of CH4). The estimated radiative
forcing from these gases is indicated on the right-hand scale. (b)
Sulphate concentration in several Greenland ice cores with the
episodic effects of volcanic eruptions removed (lines) and total SO2
emissions from sources in the US and Europe (crosses). [Based
on (a) Figure 3.2b (CO2), Figure 4.1a and b (CH4) and Figure 4.2
(N2O) and (b) Figure 5.4a]

The forcing agents included in Figure 9 vary greatly in their
form, magnitude and spatial distribution. Some of the
greenhouse gases are emitted directly into the atmosphere;
some are chemical products from other emissions. Some
greenhouse gases have long atmospheric residence times and,
as a result, are well-mixed throughout the atmosphere. Others
are short-lived and have heterogeneous regional concentrations.
Most of the gases originate from both natural and anthropogenic

180

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Over the millennium before the Industrial Era, the atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases remained relatively constant.
Since then, however, the concentrations of many greenhouse
gases have increased directly or indirectly because of human
activities.
Table 1 provides examples of several greenhouse gases and
summarises their 1750 and 1998 concentrations, their change
during the 1990s, and their atmospheric lifetimes. The
contribution of a species to radiative forcing of climate change
depends on the molecular radiative properties of the gas, the
size of the increase in atmospheric concentration, and the
residence time of the species in the atmosphere, once emitted.
The latter - the atmospheric residence time of the greenhouse
gas - is a highly policy relevant characteristic. Namely,
emissions of a greenhouse gas that has a long atmospheric
residence time is a quasi-irreversible commitment to sustained
radiative forcing over decades, centuries, or millennia, before
natural processes can remove the quantities emitted.
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
The atmospheric concentration of CO2 has increased from
280 ppm5 in 1750 to 367 ppm in 1999 (31%, Table 1). Today's
CO2 concentration has not been exceeded during the past
420,000 years and likely not during the past 20 million years.
The rate of increase over the past century is unprecedented, at
least during the past 20,000 years (Figure 10). The CO2 isotopic
composition and the observed decrease in Oxygen (O2)
demonstrates that the observed increase in CO2 is predominately
due to the oxidation of organic carbon by fossil-fuel combustion
and deforestation. An expanding set of palaeo-atmospheric
data from air trapped in ice over hundreds of millennia provide
a context for the increase in CO2 concentrations during the
Industrial Era (Figure 10). Compared to the relatively stable
CO2 concentrations (280  10 ppm) of the preceding several
thousand years, the increase during the Industrial Era is
dramatic. The average rate of increase since 1980 is 0.4%/yr.
The increase is a consequence of CO2 emissions. Most of the
emissions during the past 20 years are due to fossil fuel burning,

5

Atmospheric abundances of trace gases are reported here as the mole
fraction (molar mixing ratio) of the gas relative to dry air (ppm = 10-6,
ppb = 10-9, ppt = 10-12). Atmospheric burden is reported as the total
mass of the gas (e.g., Mt = Tg = 1012 g). The global carbon cycle is
expressed in PgC = GtC.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

3
Halocarbons

Warming

Aerosols

N2O
CH4

Fossil
fuel
burning
(black
carbon)

CO2

1

Tropospheric
ozone

Aviation-induced

Mineral
Dust

Solar
Contrails Cirrus

0
Cooling

Radiative Forcing (Wm-2)

2

Stratospheric
ozone

Fossil
fuel
Biomass
burning burning
Sulphate
(organic
carbon)

-1

Tropospheric
aerosol
indirect
effect
(1st type)

Landuse
(albedo)

-2

High

Medium

Medium

Low

Very
Low

Very
Low

Very
Low

Very
Low

Very Very Very
Low Low Low

Very
Low

Level of Scientific Understanding
Figure 9: Global, annual-mean radiative forcings (Wm-2) due to a number of agents for the period from pre-industrial (1750) to present (late
1990s; about 2000) (numerical values are also listed in Table 6.11 of Chapter 6). For detailed explanations, see Chapter 6.13. The height of
the rectangular bar denotes a central or best estimate value, while its absence denotes no best estimate is possible. The vertical line about
the rectangular bar with "x" delimiters indicates an estimate of the uncertainty range, for the most part guided by the spread in the published
values of the forcing. A vertical line without a rectangular bar and with "o" delimiters denotes a forcing for which no central estimate can be
given owing to large uncertainties. The uncertainty range specified here has no statistical basis and therefore differs from the use of the term
elsewhere in this document. A "level of scientific understanding" index is accorded to each forcing, with high, medium, low and very low
levels, respectively. This represents the subjective judgement about the reliability of the forcing estimate, involving factors such as the
assumptions necessary to evaluate the forcing, the degree of knowledge of the physical/chemical mechanisms determining the forcing, and
the uncertainties surrounding the quantitative estimate of the forcing (see Table 6.12). The well-mixed greenhouse gases are grouped
together into a single rectangular bar with the individual mean contributions due to CO2, CH4, N2O and halocarbons shown (see Tables 6.1
and 6.11). Fossil fuel burning is separated into the "black carbon" and "organic carbon" components with its separate best estimate and range.
The sign of the effects due to mineral dust is itself an uncertainty. The indirect forcing due to tropospheric aerosols is poorly understood. The
same is true for the forcing due to aviation via its effects on contrails and cirrus clouds. Only the "first" type of indirect effect due to aerosols as
applicable in the context of liquid clouds is considered here. The "second" type of effect is conceptually important, but there exists very little
confidence in the simulated quantitative estimates. The forcing associated with stratospheric aerosols from volcanic eruptions is highly
variable over the period and is not considered for this plot (however, see Figure 6.8). All the forcings shown have distinct spatial and seasonal
features (Figure 6.7) such that the global, annual means appearing on this plot do not yield a complete picture of the radiative perturbation. They
are only intended to give, in a relative sense, a first-order perspective on a global, annual mean scale and cannot be readily employed to obtain
the climate response to the total natural and/or anthropogenic forcings. As in the SAR, it is emphasised that the positive and negative global
mean forcings cannot be added up and viewed a priori as providing offsets in terms of the complete global climate impact. [Based on Figure 6.6]

the rest (10 to 30%) is predominantly due to land-use change,
especially deforestation. As shown in Figure 9, CO2 is the
dominant human-influenced greenhouse gas, with a current
radiative forcing of 1.46 Wm-2, being 60% of the total from
the changes in concentrations of all of the long-lived and
globally mixed greenhouse gases.

Direct atmospheric measurements of CO2 concentrations made
over the past 40 years show that year to year fluctuations in
the rate of increase of atmospheric CO2 are large. In the 1990s,
the annual rates of CO2 increase in the atmosphere varied
from 0.9 to 2.8 ppm/yr, equivalent to 1.9 to 6.0 PgC/yr. Such
annual changes can be related statistically to short-term climate
variability, which alters the rate at which atmospheric CO2 is

181

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table 1: Example of greenhouse gases that are affected by human activities. [Based upon Chapter 3 and Table 4.1]
CO2
(Carbon
Dioxide)

CH4
(Methane)

N2O
(Nitrous
Oxide)

CFC-11
HCF-23
CF4
(Chlorofluoro- (Hydrofluoro- (Perfluoromethane)
carbon-11
carbon-23

Pre-industrial concentration

about 280 ppm about 700 ppb about 270 ppb zero

zero

40 ppt

Concentration in 1998

365 ppm

Rate of concentration changeb 1.5 ppm/yra
Atmospheric lifetime

5 to 200 yrc

1745 ppb

314 ppb

268 ppt

14 ppt

80 ppt

7.0 ppb/yra

0.8 ppb/yr

-1.4 ppt/yr

0.55 ppt/yr

1 ppt/yr

12 yrd

114 yrd

45 yr

260 yr

>50.000 yr

a

Rate has fluctuated between 0.9 ppm/yr and 2.8 ppm/yr for CO2 and between 0 and 13 ppb/yr for CH4 over the period 1990 to 1999.
Rate is calculated over the period 1990 to 1990.
c
No single lifetime can be defined for CO2 because of different rates of uptake by different removal processes.
d
This lifetime has been defined as an "adjustment time" that takes into account the indirect effect of the gas on its own residence time.
b

Table 2: Global CO2 budgets (in PgC/yr) based on measurements of atmospheric CO2 and O2. Positive values are fluxes to the
atmosphere; negative values represent uptake from the atmosphere. [Based upon Tables 3.1 and 3.3]
SARa,b

Atmospheric increase
Emissions (fossil fuel, cement)c
Ocean-atmosphere flux
Land-atmosphere fluxd

This reporta

1980 to 1989

1980 to 1989

1990 to 1999

-3.3  0.1
-5.5  0.3
-2.0  0.5
-0.2  0.6

-3.3  0.1
-5.4  0.3
-1.9  0.6
-0.2  0.7

-3.2  0.1
-6.3  0.4
-1.7  0.5
-1.4  0.7

Note that the uncertainties cited in this table are 1 standard error. The uncertainties cited in the SAR were 1.6 standard error (i.e., approximately
90% confidence interval). Uncertainties cited from the SAR were adjusted to 1 standard error. Error bars denote uncertainty, not interannual
variability, which is substantially greater.
b
Previous IPCC carbon budgets calculated ocean uptake from models and the land-atmosphere flux was inferred by difference.
c
The fossil fuel emissions term for the 1980s has been revised slightly downward since the SAR.
d
The land-atmosphere flux represents the balance of a positive term due to land-use change and a residual terrestrial sink. The two terms cannot be
separated on the basis of current atmospheric measurements. Using independent analyses to estimate the land-use change component for 1980 to
1989, the residual terrestrial sink can be inferred as follows: Land-use change 1.7 PgC/yr (0.6 to 2.5); Residual terrestrial sink -1.9 PgC/yr (-3.8
to 0.3). Comparable data for the 1990s are not yet available.
a

taken up and released by the oceans and land. The highest
rates of increase in atmospheric CO2 have typically been in
strong El Nino years (Box 4). These higher rates of increase
can be plausibly explained by reduced terrestrial uptake (or
terrestrial outgassing) of CO2 during El Nino years, overwhelming
the tendency of the ocean to take up more CO2 than usual.
Partitioning of anthropogenic CO2 between atmospheric increases
and land and ocean uptake for the past two decades can now
be calculated from atmospheric observations. Table 2 presents
a global CO2 budget for the 1980s (which proves to be similar
to the one constructed with the help of ocean model results in
the SAR) and for the 1990s. Measurements of the decrease in
atmospheric oxygen (O2) as well as the increase in CO2 were
used in the construction of these new budgets. Results from this
approach are consistent with other analyses based on the isotopic
composition of atmospheric CO2 and with independent estimates
based on measurements of CO2 and 13CO2 in seawater. The 1990s

182

IPCC Third Assessment Report

budget is based on newly available measurements and updates
the budget for 1989 to 1998 derived using SAR methodology
for the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change
and Forestry (2000). The terrestrial biosphere as a whole has
gained carbon during the 1980s and 1990s; i.e., the CO2 released
by land-use change (mainly tropical deforestation) was more
than compensated by other terrestrial sinks, which are likely
located in both the northern extra-tropics and in the tropics.
There remain large uncertainties associated with estimating
the CO2 release due to land-use change (and, therefore, with
the magnitude of the residual terrestrial sink).
Process-based modelling (terrestrial and ocean carbon
models) has allowed preliminary quantification of mechanisms
in the global carbon cycle. Terrestrial model results indicate
that enhanced plant growth due to higher CO2 (CO2 fertilisation)
and anthropogenic nitrogen deposition contribute significantly
to CO2 uptake, i.e., are potentially responsible for the residual

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

Variations in atmospheric CO2 concentrations on different time-scales
CO2 concentration (ppm)

360

380

(a)

360
CO2 concentration (ppm)

380
340
320
300

CO2 Mauna Loa
CO2 South Pole

280
260
240
220
200

(d) Vostok

340
320
300
280
260
240
220
200

180

180

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

400

2000

300

Year
380
340
320
300
280
260

Mauna Loa
Law Dome
Adelie Land
Siple
South Pole

240
220
200
180
800

1000

1200

1400
Year

1600

1800

5

0

(e)

360
340
320
300
280
260
240
220
180
25

2000

20

15
10
Age (Myr BP)

400

300
200
Age (Myr BP)

7500

(c) Taylor Dome

CO2 concentration (ppm)

CO2 concentration (ppm)

0

200

380
360

100

380

(b)
CO2 concentration (ppm)

CO2 concentration (ppm)

360

200
Age (kyr BP)

340
320
300
280
260
240
220

(f)
6000
4500
3000
1500

200
180
12500

0

10000

7500

5000

2500

500

0

Age (yr BP)

100

0

Rate of increase of CO2 in the atmosphere
8
7

g)
monthly atmospheric increase (filtered)
annual atmospheric increase
fossil fuel emissions

PgC/yr

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Figure 10: Variations in atmospheric CO2 concentration on different time-scales. (a) Direct measurements of atmospheric CO2. (b) CO2
concentration in Antarctic ice cores for the past millenium. Recent atmospheric measurements (Mauna Loa) are shown for comparison. (c)
CO2 concentration in the Taylor Dome Antarctic ice core. (d) CO2 concentration in the Vostok Antarctic ice core. (Different colours represent
results from different studies.) (e to f) Geochemically inferred CO2 concentrations. (Coloured bars and lines represent different published
studies) (g) Annual atmospheric increases in CO2. Monthly atmospheric increases have been filtered to remove the seasonal cycle. Vertical
arrows denote El Nino events. A horizontal line defines the extended El Nino of 1991 to 1994. [Based on Figures 3.2 and 3.3]

183

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

terrestrial sink described above, along with other proposed
mechanisms, such as changes in land-management practices.
The modelled effects of climate change during the 1980s on
the terrestrial sink are small and of uncertain sign.
Methane (CH4)
Atmospheric methane (CH4) concentrations have increased
by about 150% (1,060 ppb) since 1750. The present CH4
concentration has not been exceeded during the past 420,000
years. Methane (CH4) is a greenhouse gas with both natural
(e.g., wetlands) and human-influenced sources (e.g., agriculture,
natural gas activities, and landfills). Slightly more than half of
current CH4 emissions are anthropogenic. It is removed from
the atmosphere by chemical reactions. As Figure 11 shows,
systematic, globally representative measurements of the
concentration of CH4 in the atmosphere have been made since
1983, and the record of atmospheric concentrations has been
extended to earlier times from air extracted from ice cores
and firn layers. The current direct radiative forcing of 0.48
Wm-2 from CH4 is 20% of the total from all of the long-lived
and globally mixed greenhouse gases (see Figure 9).
The atmospheric abundance of CH4 continues to increase, from
about 1,610 ppb in 1983 to 1,745 ppb in 1998, but the observed
annual increase has declined during this period. The increase
was highly variable during the 1990s; it was near zero in 1992
and as large as 13 ppb during 1998. There is no clear
quantitative explanation for this variability. Since the SAR,
quantification of certain anthropogenic sources of CH4, such
as that from rice production, has improved.
The rate of increase in atmospheric CH4 is due to a small
imbalance between poorly characterised sources and sinks, which
makes the prediction of future concentrations problematic.
Although the major contributors to the global CH4 budget
likely have been identified, most of them are quite uncertain
quantitatively because of the difficulty in assessing emission
rates of highly variable biospheric sources. The limitations of
poorly quantified and characterised CH4 source strengths
inhibit the prediction of future CH4 atmospheric concentrations
(and hence its contribution to radiative forcing) for any given
anthropogenic emission scenario, particularly since both
natural emissions and the removal of CH4 can be influenced
substantially by climate change.
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
The atmospheric concentration of nitrous oxide (N2O) has
steadily increased during the Industrial Era and is now 16%
(46 ppb) larger than in 1750. The present N2O concentration
has not been exceeded during at least the past thousand years.
Nitrous oxide is another greenhouse gas with both natural and
anthropogenic sources, and it is removed from the atmosphere
by chemical reactions. Atmospheric concentrations of N2O

184

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Figure 11: (a) Change in CH4 abundance (mole fraction, in ppb =
10-9) determined from ice cores, firn, and whole air samples plotted
for the last 1,000 years. Radiative forcing, approximated by a linear
scale since the pre-industrial era, is plotted on the right axis. (b)
Globally averaged CH4 (monthly varying) and deseasonalised CH4
(smooth line) abundance plotted for 1983 to 1999. (c) Instantaneous
annual growth rate (ppb/yr) in global atmospheric CH4 abundance
from 1983 through 1999 calculated as the derivative of the
deseasonalised trend curve above. Uncertainties (dotted lines) are
1 standard deviation. [Based on Figure 4.1]

continue to increase at a rate of 0.25%/yr (1980 to 1998).
Significant interannual variations in the upward trend of N2O
concentrations are observed, e.g., a 50% reduction in annual
growth rate from 1991 to 1993. Suggested causes are severalfold: a decrease in use of nitrogen-based fertiliser, lower biogenic
emissions, and larger stratospheric losses due to volcanicinduced circulation changes. Since 1993, the growth of N2O
concentrations has returned to rates closer to those observed
during the 1980s. While this observed multi-year variance has

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

provided some potential insight into what processes control
the behaviour of atmospheric N2O, the multi-year trends of
this greenhouse gas remain largely unexplained.
The global budget of nitrous oxide is in better balance than
in the SAR, but uncertainties in the emissions from individual
sources are still quite large. Natural sources of N2O are estimated
to be approximately 10 TgN/yr (1990), with soils being about
65% of the sources and oceans about 30%. New, higher estimates
of the emissions from anthropogenic sources (agriculture, biomass
burning, industrial activities, and livestock management) of
approximately 7 TgN/yr have brought the source/sink estimates
closer in balance, compared with the SAR. However, the
predictive understanding associated with this significant, longlived greenhouse gas has not improved significantly since the
last assessment. The radiative forcing is estimated at 0.15 Wm-
2
, which is 6% of the total from all of the long-lived and globally
mixed greenhouse gases (see Figure 9).

Figure 12: Global mean CFC-11 (CFCl3) tropospheric abundance
(ppt) from 1950 to 1998 based on smoothed measurements and
emission models. CFC-11's radiative forcing is shown on the right
axis. [Based on Figure 4.6]

Halocarbons and related compounds
The atmospheric concentrations of many of those gases that
are both ozone-depleting and greenhouse gases are either
decreasing (CFC-11, CFC-113, CH3CCl 3 and CCl 4) or
increasing more slowly (CFC-12) in response to reduced
emissions under the regulations of the Montreal Protocol and
its Amendments. Many of these halocarbons are also radiatively
effective, long-lived greenhouse gases. Halocarbons are carbon
compounds that contain fluorine, chlorine, bromine or iodine.
For most of these compounds, human activities are the sole source.
Halocarbons that contain chlorine (e.g., chlorofluorocarbons
- CFCs) and bromine (e.g., halons) cause depletion of the
stratospheric ozone layer and are controlled under the Montreal
Protocol. The combined tropospheric abundance of ozonedepleting gases peaked in 1994 and is slowly declining. The
atmospheric abundances of some of the major greenhouse
halocarbons have peaked, as shown for CFC-11 in Figure 12.
The concentrations of CFCs and chlorocarbons in the
troposphere are consistent with reported emissions. Halocarbons
contribute a radiative forcing of 0.34 Wm-2, which is 14% of
the radiative forcing from all of the globally mixed greenhouse
gases (Figure 9).

The perfluorocarbons (PFCs, e.g., CF4 and C2F6 ) and sulphur
hexafluoride (SF6 ) have anthropogenic sources, have
extremely long atmospheric residence times, and are strong
absorbers of infrared radiation. Therefore, these compounds,
even with relatively small emissions, have the potential to
influence climate far into the future. Perfluoromethane (CF4)
resides in the atmosphere for at least 50,000 years. It has a
natural background; however, current anthropogenic emissions
exceed natural ones by a factor of 1,000 or more and are
responsible for the observed increase. Sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6) is 22,200 times more effective a greenhouse gas than
CO2 on a per-kg basis. The current atmospheric concentrations
are very small (4.2 ppt), but have a significant growth rate
(0.24 ppt/yr). There is good agreement between the observed
atmospheric growth rate of SF6 and the emissions based on
revised sales and storage data.

The observed atmospheric concentrations of the substitutes for
the CFCs are increasing, and some of these compounds are
greenhouse gases. The abundances of the hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are increasing
as a result of continuation of earlier uses and of their use as
substitutes for the CFCs. For example, the concentration of
HFC-23 has increased by more than a factor of three between
1978 and 1995. Because current concentrations are relatively
low, the present contribution of HFCs to radiative forcing is
relatively small. The present contribution of HCFCs to
radiative forcing is also relatively small, and future emissions
of these gases are limited by the Montreal Protocol.

Ozone (O3 ) is an important greenhouse gas present in both
the stratosphere and troposphere. The role of ozone in the
atmospheric radiation budget is strongly dependent on the altitude
at which changes in ozone concentrations occur. The changes
in ozone concentrations are also spatially variable. Further, ozone
is not a directly emitted species, but rather it is formed in the
atmosphere from photochemical processes involving both natural
and human-influenced precursor species. Once formed, the
residence time of ozone in the atmosphere is relatively short,
varying from weeks to months. As a result, estimation of ozone's
radiative role is more complex and much less certain than for
the above long-lived and globally well-mixed greenhouse gases.

C.2. Observed Changes in Other Radiatively
Important Gases
Atmospheric ozone (O3)

185

Climate Change 2001

The observed losses of stratospheric ozone layer over the past
two decades have caused a negative forcing of 0.15  0.1
Wm -2 (i.e., a tendency toward cooling) of the surface
troposphere system. It was reported in Climate Change 1992:
The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment,
that depletion of the ozone layer by anthropogenic halocarbons
introduces a negative radiative forcing. The estimate shown
in Figure 9 is slightly larger in magnitude than that given in
the SAR, owing to the ozone depletion that has continued over
the past five years, and it is more certain as a result of an
increased number of modelling studies. Studies with General
Circulation Models indicate that, despite the inhomogeneity
in ozone loss (i.e., lower stratosphere at high latitudes), such
a negative forcing does relate to a surface temperature decrease
in proportion to the magnitude of the negative forcing.
Therefore, this negative forcing over the past two decades has
offset some of the positive forcing that is occurring from the
long-lived and globally well-mixed greenhouse gases (Figure
9). A major source of uncertainty in the estimation of the
negative forcing is due to incomplete knowledge of ozone
depletion near the tropopause. Model calculations indicate that
increased penetration of ultraviolet radiation to the troposphere,
as a result of stratospheric ozone depletion, leads to enhanced
removal rates of gases like CH4, thus amplifying the negative
forcing due to ozone depletion. As the ozone layer recovers in
future decades because of the effects of the Montreal Protocol,
relative to the present, future radiative forcing associated with
stratospheric ozone is projected to become positive.
The global average radiative forcing due to increases in
tropospheric ozone since pre-industrial times is estimated to
have enhanced the anthropogenic greenhouse gas forcing by
0.35  0.2 Wm-2. This makes tropospheric ozone the third most
important greenhouse gas after CO2 and CH4. Ozone is formed
by photochemical reactions and its future change will be
determined by, among other things, emissions of CH4 and
pollutants (as noted below). Ozone concentrations respond
relatively quickly to changes in the emissions of pollutants.
On the basis of limited observations and several modelling
studies, tropospheric ozone is estimated to have increased by
about 35% since the Pre-industrial Era, with some regions
experiencing larger and some with smaller increases. There
have been few observed increases in ozone concentrations in
the global troposphere since the mid-1980s at most of the few
remote locations where it is regularly measured. The lack of
observed increase over North America and Europe is related
to the lack of a sustained increase in ozone-precursor emissions
from those continents. However, some Asian stations indicate a
possible rise in tropospheric ozone, which could be related to the
increase in East Asian emissions. As a result of more modelling
studies than before, there is now an increased confidence in
the estimates of tropospheric ozone forcing. The confidence,
however, is still much less than that for the well-mixed greenhouse
gases, but more so than that for aerosol forcing. Uncertainties
arise because of limited information on pre-industrial ozone

186

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

distributions and limited information to evaluate modelled
global trends in the modern era (i.e., post-1960).
Gases with only indirect radiative influences
Several chemically reactive gases, including reactive nitrogen
species (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), and the volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), control, in part, the oxidising capacity
of the troposphere, as well as the abundance of ozone. These
pollutants act as indirect greenhouse gases through their
influence not only on ozone, but also on the lifetimes of CH4
and other greenhouse gases. The emissions of NOx and CO
are dominated by human activities.
Carbon monoxide is identified as an important indirect
greenhouse gas. Model calculations indicate that emission of
100 Mt of CO is equivalent in terms of greenhouse gas
perturbations to the emission of about 5 Mt of CH4. The
abundance of CO in the Northern Hemisphere is about twice
that in the Southern Hemisphere and has increased in the
second half of the 20th century along with industrialisation
and population.
The reactive nitrogen species NO and NO2, (whose sum is
denoted NOx ), are key compounds in the chemistry of the
troposphere, but their overall radiative impact remains difficult
to quantify. The importance of NOx in the radiation budget is
because increases in NOx concentrations perturb several
greenhouse gases; for example, decreases in methane and the
HFCs and increases in tropospheric ozone. Deposition of the
reaction products of NOx fertilises the biosphere, thereby
decreasing atmospheric CO2. While difficult to quantify,
increases in NOx that are projected to the year 2100 would
cause significant changes in greenhouse gases.
C.3. Observed and Modelled Changes in Aerosols
Aerosols (very small airborne particles and droplets) are known
to influence significantly the radiative budget of the Earth/
atmosphere. Aerosol radiative effects occur in two distinct
ways: (i) the direct effect, whereby aerosols themselves scatter
and absorb solar and thermal infrared radiation, and (ii) the
indirect effect, whereby aerosols modify the microphysical
and hence the radiative properties and amount of clouds.
Aerosols are produced by a variety of processes, both natural
(including dust storms and volcanic activity) and anthropogenic
(including fossil fuel and biomass burning). The atmospheric
concentrations of tropospheric aerosols are thought to have
increased over recent years due to increased anthropogenic
emissions of particles and their precursor gases, hence giving
rise to radiative forcing. Most aerosols are found in the lower
troposphere (below a few kilometres), but the radiative effect
of many aerosols is sensitive to the vertical distribution.
Aerosols undergo chemical and physical changes while in the
atmosphere, notably within clouds, and are removed largely

The Scientific Basis

and relatively rapidly by precipitation (typically within a week).
Because of this short residence time and the inhomogeneity
of sources, aerosols are distributed inhomogeneously in the
troposphere, with maxima near the sources. The radiative
forcing due to aerosols depends not only on these spatial
distributions, but also on the size, shape, and chemical
composition of the particles and various aspects (e.g., cloud
formation) of the hydrological cycle as well. As a result of all
of these factors, obtaining accurate estimates of this forcing
has been very challenging, from both the observational and
theoretical standpoints.
Nevertheless, substantial progress has been achieved in better
defining the direct effect of a wider set of different aerosols.
The SAR considered the direct effects of only three anthropogenic
aerosol species: sulphate aerosols, biomass-burning aerosols,
and fossil fuel black carbon (or soot). Observations have now
shown the importance of organic materials in both fossil fuel
carbon aerosols and biomass-burning carbon aerosols. Since
the SAR, the inclusion of estimates for the abundance of fossil
fuel organic carbon aerosols has led to an increase in the
predicted total optical depth (and consequent negative forcing)
associated with industrial aerosols. Advances in observations
and in aerosol and radiative models have allowed quantitative
estimates of these separate components, as well as an estimate
for the range of radiative forcing associated with mineral dust,
as shown in Figure 9. Direct radiative forcing is estimated to
be -0.4 Wm-2 for sulphate, -0.2 Wm-2 for biomass-burning
aerosols, -0.1 Wm-2 for fossil fuel organic carbon, and +0.2
Wm-2 for fossil fuel black carbon aerosols. Uncertainties
remain relatively large, however. These arise from difficulties
in determining the concentration and radiative characteristics
of atmospheric aerosols and the fraction of the aerosols that
are of anthropogenic origin, particularly the knowledge of the
sources of carbonaceous aerosols. This leads to considerable
differences (i.e., factor of two to three range) in the burden
and substantial differences in the vertical distribution (factor
of ten). Anthropogenic dust aerosol is also poorly quantified.
Satellite observations, combined with model calculations, are
enabling the identification of the spatial signature of the total
aerosol radiative effect in clear skies; however, the quantitative
amount is still uncertain.
Estimates of the indirect radiative forcing by anthropogenic
aerosols remain problematic, although observational evidence
points to a negative aerosol-induced indirect forcing in warm
clouds. Two different approaches exist for estimating the
indirect effect of aerosols: empirical methods and mechanistic
methods. The former have been applied to estimate the effects
of industrial aerosols, while the latter have been applied to
estimate the effects of sulphate, fossil fuel carbonaceous
aerosols, and biomass aerosols. In addition, models for the
indirect effect have been used to estimate the effects of the
initial change in droplet size and concentrations (a first indirect
effect), as well as the effects of the subsequent change in

WGI Technical Summary

precipitation efficiency (a second indirect effect). The studies
represented in Figure 9 provide an expert judgement for the
range of the first of these; the range is now slightly wider than
in the SAR; the radiative perturbation associated with the
second indirect effect is of the same sign and could be of similar
magnitude compared to the first effect.
The indirect radiative effect of aerosols is now understood to
also encompass effects on ice and mixed-phase clouds, but the
magnitude of any such indirect effect is not known, although
it is likely to be positive. It is not possible to estimate the number
of anthropogenic ice nuclei at the present time. Except at cold
temperatures (below -45C) where homogeneous nucleation
is expected to dominate, the mechanisms of ice formation in
these clouds are not yet known.
C.4. Observed Changes in Other Anthropogenic
Forcing Agents
Land-use (albedo) change
Changes in land use, deforestation being the major factor,
appear to have produced a negative radiative forcing of -0.2
 0.2 Wm-2 (Figure 8). The largest effect is estimated to be at
the high latitudes. This is because deforestation has caused
snow-covered forests with relatively low albedo to be replaced
with open, snow-covered areas with higher albedo. The estimate
given above is based on simulations in which pre-industrial
vegetation is replaced by current land-use patterns. However,
the level of understanding is very low for this forcing, and there
have been far fewer investigations of this forcing compared
to investigations of other factors considered in this report.
C.5. Observed and Modelled Changes in Solar and
Volcanic Activity
Radiative forcing of the climate system due to solar irradiance
change is estimated to be 0.3  0.2 Wm-2 for the period 1750
to the present (Figure 8), and most of the change is estimated
to have occurred during the first half of the 20th century. The
fundamental source of all energy in the Earth's climate system
is radiation from the Sun. Therefore, variation in solar output
is a radiative forcing agent. The absolute value of the spectrally
integrated total solar irradiance (TSI) incident on the Earth is
not known to better than about 4 Wm-2, but satellite observations
since the late 1970s show relative variations over the past two
solar 11-year activity cycles of about 0.1%, which is equivalent
to a variation in radiative forcing of about 0.2 Wm-2. Prior to
these satellite observations, reliable direct measurements of
solar irradiance are not available. Variations over longer periods
may have been larger, but the techniques used to reconstruct
historical values of TSI from proxy observations (e.g., sunspots)
have not been adequately verified. Solar variation varies more
substantially in the ultraviolet region, and studies with climate
models suggest that inclusion of spectrally resolved solar

187

Climate Change 2001

irradiance variations and solar-induced stratospheric ozone
changes may improve the realism of model simulations of the
impact of solar variability on climate. Other mechanisms for
the amplification of solar effects on climate have been proposed,
but do not have a rigorous theoretical or observational basis.

(Section F). Similarly, projection of the fate of emitted CO2
(i.e., the relative sequestration into the various reservoirs) and
other greenhouse gases requires an understanding of the
biogeochemical processes involved and incorporating these
into a numerical carbon cycle model.

Stratospheric aerosols from explosive volcanic eruptions lead
to negative forcing that lasts a few years. Several explosive
eruptions occurred in the periods 1880 to 1920 and 1960 to 1991,
and no explosive eruptions since 1991. Enhanced stratospheric
aerosol content due to volcanic eruptions, together with the
small solar irradiance variations, result in a net negative natural
radiative forcing over the past two, and possibly even the past
four, decades.

A climate model is a simplified mathematical representation
of the Earth's climate system (see Box 3). The degree to which
the model can simulate the responses of the climate system
hinges to a very large degree on the level of understanding of
the physical, geophysical, chemical and biological processes
that govern the climate system. Since the SAR, researchers
have made substantial improvements in the simulation of the
Earth's climate system with models. First, the current
understanding of some of the most important processes that
govern the climate system and how well they are represented
in present climate models are summarised here. Then, this
Section presents an assessment of the overall ability of present
models to make useful projections of future climate.

C.6. Global Warming Potentials
Radiative forcings and Global Warming Potentials (GWPs)
are presented in Table 3 for an expanded set of gases. GWPs
are a measure of the relative radiative effect of a given
substance compared to CO2, integrated over a chosen time
horizon. New categories of gases in Table 3 include fluorinated
organic molecules, many of which are ethers that are proposed
as halocarbon substitutes. Some of the GWPs have larger
uncertainties than that of others, particularly for those gases
where detailed laboratory data on lifetimes are not yet
available. The direct GWPs have been calculated relative to
CO2 using an improved calculation of the CO2 radiative
forcing, the SAR response function for a CO2 pulse, and new
values for the radiative forcing and lifetimes for a number of
halocarbons. Indirect GWPs, resulting from indirect radiative
forcing effects, are also estimated for some new gases,
including carbon monoxide. The direct GWPs for those species
whose lifetimes are well characterised are estimated to be
accurate within 35%, but the indirect GWPs are less certain.

D. The Simulation of the Climate System
and its Changes
The preceding two Sections reported on the climate from the
distant past to the present day through the observations of
climate variables and the forcing agents that cause climate to
change. This Section bridges to the climate of the future by
describing the only tool that provides quantitative estimates
of future climate changes, namely, numerical models. The basic
understanding of the energy balance of the Earth system means
that quite simple models can provide a broad quantitative estimate
of some globally averaged variables, but more accurate estimates
of feedbacks and of regional detail can only come from more
elaborate climate models. The complexity of the processes in
the climate system prevents the use of extrapolation of past
trends or statistical and other purely empirical techniques for
projections. Climate models can be used to simulate the climate
responses to different input scenarios of future forcing agents

188

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

D.1. Climate Processes and Feedbacks
Processes in the climate system determine the natural variability
of the climate system and its response to perturbations, such
as the increase in the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases. Many basic climate processes of importance are wellknown and modelled exceedingly well. Feedback processes
amplify (a positive feedback) or reduce (a negative feedback)
changes in response to an initial perturbation and hence are
very important for accurate simulation of the evolution of climate.
Water vapour
A major feedback accounting for the large warming predicted
by climate models in response to an increase in CO2 is the
increase in atmospheric water vapour. An increase in the
temperature of the atmosphere increases its water-holding
capacity; however, since most of the atmosphere is undersaturated,
this does not automatically mean that water vapour, itself, must
increase. Within the boundary layer (roughly the lowest 1 to 2
km of the atmosphere), water vapour increases with increasing
temperature. In the free troposphere above the boundary layer,
where the water vapour greenhouse effect is most important,
the situation is harder to quantify. Water vapour feedback, as
derived from current models, approximately doubles the
warming from what it would be for fixed water vapour. Since
the SAR, major improvements have occurred in the treatment
of water vapour in models, although detrainment of moisture
from clouds remains quite uncertain and discrepancies exist
between model water vapour distributions and those observed.
Models are capable of simulating the moist and very dry
regions observed in the tropics and sub-tropics and how they
evolve with the seasons and from year to year. While reassuring,
this does not provide a check of the feedbacks, although the
balance of evidence favours a positive clear-sky water vapour

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

Table 3: Direct Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) relative to carbon dioxide (for gases for which the lifetimes have been
adequately characterised). GWPs are an index for estimating relative global warming contribution due to atmospheric emission
of a kg of a particular greenhouse gas compared to emission of a kg of carbon dioxide. GWPs calculated for different time
horizons show the effects of atmospheric lifetimes of the different gases. [Based upon Table 6.7]
Global Warming Potential
(Time Horizon in years)
Lifetime
(years)

20 yrs

100 yrs

500 yrs

CO2
CH4
N2O

12.0b
114b

1
62
275

1
23
296

1
7
156

HFC-23
HFC-32
HFC-41

CHF3
CH2F2
CH3F

260
5.0
2.6

9400
1800
330

12000
550
97

10000
170
30

HFC-125
HFC-134
HFC-134a
HFC-143
HFC-143a
HFC-152
HFC-152a
HFC-161

CHF2CF3
CHF2CHF2
CH2FCF3
CHF2CH2F
CF3CH3
CH2FCH2F
CH3CHF2
CH3CH2F

29
9.6
13.8
3.4
52
0.5
1.4
0.3

5900
3200
3300
1100
5500
140
410
40

3400
1100
1300
330
4300
43
120
12

1100
330
400
100
1600
13
37
4

HFC-227ea
HFC-236cb
HFC-236ea
HFC-236fa
HFC-245ca
HFC-245fa
HFC-365mfc
HFC-43-10mee

CF3CHFCF3
CH2FCF2CF3
CHF2CHFCF3
CF3CH2CF3
CH2FCF2CHF2
CHF2CH2CF3
CF3CH2CF2CH3
CF3CHFCHFCF2CF3

33
13.2
10
220
5.9
7.2
9.9
15

5600
3300
3600
7500
2100
3000
2600
3700

3500
1300
1200
9400
640
950
890
1500

1100
390
390
7100
200
300
280
470

3200
50000
10000
2600
2600
3200
4100
3200

15100
3900
8000
5900
5900
6800
6000
6100

22200
5700
11900
8600
8600
10000
8900
9000

32400
8900
18000
12400
12400
14500
13200
13200

0.015

1

1

<<1

Gas
Carbon dioxide
Methanea
Nitrous oxide
Hydrofluorocarbons

Fully fluorinated species
SF6
CF4
C2F6
C3F8
C4F10
c-C4F8
C5F12
C6F14
Ethers and Halogenated Ethers
CH3OCH3
HFE-125
HFE-134
HFE-143a

CF3OCHF2
CHF2OCHF2
CH3OCF3

150
26.2
4.4

12900
10500
2500

14900
6100
750

9200
2000
230

HCFE-235da2
HFE-245fa2
HFE-254cb2
HFE-7100
HFE-7200
H-Galden 1040x
HG-10
HG-01

CF3CHClOCHF2
CF3CH2OCHF2
CHF2CF2OCH3
C4F9OCH3
C4F9OC2H5
CHF2OCF2OC2F4OCHF2
CHF2OCF2OCHF2
CHF2OCF2CF2OCHF2

2.6
4.4
0.22
5.0
0.77
6.3
12.1
6.2

1100
1900
99
1300
190
5900
7500
4700

340
570
30
390
55
1800
2700
1500

110
180
9
120
17
560
850
450

a
b

The methane GWPs include an indirect contribution from stratospheric H2O and O3 production.
The values for methane and nitrous oxide are adjustment times, which incorporate the indirect effects of emission of each gas on its own lifetime.

189

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Box 3. Climate Models: How are they built and how are they applied?
Comprehensive climate models are based on physical laws
represented by mathematical equations that are solved using
a three-dimensional grid over the globe. For climate
simulation, the major components of the climate system must
be represented in sub-models (atmosphere, ocean, land
surface, cryosphere and biosphere), along with the processes
that go on within and between them. Most results in this report
are derived from the results of models, which include some
representation of all these components. Global climate models
in which the atmosphere and ocean components have been
coupled together are also known as Atmosphere-Ocean
General Circulation Models (AOGCMs). In the atmospheric
module, for example, equations are solved that describe the
large-scale evolution of momentum, heat and moisture.
Similar equations are solved for the ocean. Currently, the
resolution of the atmospheric part of a typical model is about
250 km in the horizontal and about 1 km in the vertical above
the boundary layer. The resolution of a typical ocean model
is about 200 to 400 m in the vertical, with a horizontal
resolution of about 125 to 250 km. Equations are typically
solved for every half hour of a model integration. Many physical
processes, such as those related to clouds or ocean convection,
take place on much smaller spatial scales than the model grid
and therefore cannot be modelled and resolved explicitly.
Their average effects are approximately included in a simple
way by taking advantage of physically based relationships
with the larger-scale variables. This technique is known as
parametrization.

have been incorporated to represent the emissions of sulphur
and how they are oxidised to form aerosol particles. Currently
in progress, in a few models, is the coupling of the land carbon
cycle and the ocean carbon cycle. The atmospheric chemistry
component currently is modelled outside the main climate
model. The ultimate aim is, of course, to model as much as
possible of the whole of the Earth's climate system so that all
the components can interact and, thus, the predictions of climate
change will continuously take into account the effect of
feedbacks among components. The Figure above shows the
past, present and possible future evolution of climate models.

In order to make quantitative projections of future climate
change, it is necessary to use climate models that simulate
all the important processes governing the future evolution of
the climate. Climate models have developed over the past
few decades as computing power has increased. During that
time, models of the main components, atmosphere, land,
ocean and sea ice have been developed separately and then
gradually integrated. This coupling of the various components
is a difficult process. Most recently, sulphur cycle components

Many aspects of the Earth's climate system are chaotic - its
evolution is sensitive to small perturbations in initial conditions.
This sensitivity limits predictability of the detailed evolution
of weather to about two weeks. However, predictability of
climate is not so limited because of the systematic influences
on the atmosphere of the more slowly varying components of
the climate system. Nevertheless, to be able to make reliable
forecasts in the presence of both initial condition and model
uncertainty, it is desirable to repeat the prediction many times

feedback of the magnitude comparable to that found in
simulations.

between these effects depends on cloud height, thickness and
radiative properties. The radiative properties and evolution of
clouds depend on the distribution of atmospheric water vapour,
water drops, ice particles, atmospheric aerosols and cloud
thickness. The physical basis of cloud parametrizations is
greatly improved in models through inclusion of bulk
representation of cloud microphysical properties in a cloud
water budget equation, although considerable uncertainty
remains. Clouds represent a significant source of potential error
in climate simulations. The possibility that models underestimate
systematically solar absorption in clouds remains a controversial

Clouds
As has been the case since the first IPCC Assessment Report
in 1990, probably the greatest uncertainty in future projections
of climate arises from clouds and their interactions with
radiation. Clouds can both absorb and reflect solar radiation
(thereby cooling the surface) and absorb and emit long wave
radiation (thereby warming the surface). The competition

190

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Some models offset errors and surface flux imbalances through
"flux adjustments", which are empirically determined systematic
adjustments at the atmosphere-ocean interface held fixed in
time in order to bring the simulated climate closer to the
observed state. A strategy has been designed for carrying out
climate experiments that removes much of the effects of some
model errors on results. What is often done is that first a "control"
climate simulation is run with the model. Then, the climate
change experiment simulation is run, for example, with increased
CO2 in the model atmosphere. Finally, the difference is taken
to provide an estimate of the change in climate due to the
perturbation. The differencing technique removes most of the
effects of any artificial adjustments in the model, as well as
systematic errors that are common to both runs. However, a
comparison of different model results makes it apparent that
the nature of some errors still influences the outcome.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

The Development of Climate models, Past, Present and Future
Mid-1970s

Mid-1980s

Early 1990s

Late 1990s

Present day

Early 2000s?

Atmosphere

Atmosphere

Atmosphere

Atmosphere

Atmosphere

Atmosphere

Land surface

Land surface

Land surface

Land surface

Land surface

Ocean & sea-ice

Ocean & sea-ice

Ocean & sea-ice

Ocean & sea-ice

Sulphate
aerosol

Sulphate
aerosol
Non-sulphate
aerosol

Sulphate
aerosol
Non-sulphate
aerosol

Carbon cycle

Carbon cycle
Dynamic
vegetation

Ocean & sea-ice
model

Sulphur
cycle model
Land carbon
cycle model

Box 3, Figure 1: The development
of climate models over the last 25
years showing how the different
components are first developed
separately and later coupled into
comprehensive climate models.

Ocean carbon
cycle model

Atmospheric
chemistry

from different perturbed initial states and using different global
models. These ensembles are the basis of probability forecasts
of the climate state.
Comprehensive AOGCMs are very complex and take large
computer resources to run. To explore different scenarios of
emissions of greenhouse gases and the effects of assumptions
or approximations in parameters in the model more thoroughly,

matter. The sign of the net cloud feedback is still a matter of
uncertainty, and the various models exhibit a large spread.
Further uncertainties arise from precipitation processes and
the difficulty in correctly simulating the diurnal cycle and
precipitation amounts and frequencies.
Stratosphere
There has been a growing appreciation of the importance of
the stratosphere in the climate system because of changes in
its structure and recognition of the vital role of both radiative

Atmospheric
chemistry

Non-sulphate
aerosols

Carbon
cycle model
Dynamic
vegetation

Dynamic
vegetation

Atmospheric
chemistry

Atmospheric
chemistry

simpler models are also widely used. The simplifications may
include coarser resolution and simplified dynamics and
physical processes. Together, simple, intermediate, and
comprehensive models form a "hierarchy of climate models",
all of which are necessary to explore choices made in
parametrizations and assess the robustness of climate changes.

and dynamical processes. The vertical profile of temperature
change in the atmosphere, including the stratosphere, is an
important indicator in detection and attribution studies. Most
of the observed decreases in lower-stratospheric temperatures
have been due to ozone decreases, of which the Antarctic
"ozone hole" is a part, rather than increased CO2 concentrations.
Waves generated in the troposphere can propagate into the
stratosphere where they are absorbed. As a result, stratospheric
changes alter where and how these waves are absorbed, and
the effects can extend downward into the troposphere. Changes
in solar irradiance, mainly in the ultraviolet (UV), lead to

191

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

photochemically-induced ozone changes and, hence, alter the
stratospheric heating rates, which can alter the tropospheric
circulation. Limitations in resolution and relatively poor
representation of some stratospheric processes adds uncertainty
to model results.

and sub-grid scale variability in ice cover and thickness, which
can significantly influence albedo and atmosphere-ocean
exchanges, are being introduced in some climate models.

Ocean

Research with models containing the latest representations
of the land surface indicates that the direct effects of increased
CO2 on the physiology of plants could lead to a relative
reduction in evapotranspiration over the tropical continents,
with associated regional warming and drying over that
predicted for conventional greenhouse warming effects. Land
surface changes provide important feedbacks as anthropogenic
climate changes (e.g., increased temperature, changes in
precipitation, changes in net radiative heating, and the direct
effects of CO2) will influence the state of the land surface (e.g.,
soil moisture, albedo, roughness and vegetation). Exchanges
of energy, momentum, water, heat and carbon between the
land surface and the atmosphere can be defined in models as
functions of the type and density of the local vegetation and
the depth and physical properties of the soil, all based on landsurface data bases that have been improved using satellite
observations. Recent advances in the understanding of vegetation
photosynthesis and water use have been used to couple the
terrestrial energy, water and carbon cycles within a new
generation of land surface parametrizations, which have been
tested against field observations and implemented in a few
GCMs, with demonstrable improvements in the simulation of
land-atmosphere fluxes. However, significant problems remain
to be solved in the areas of soil moisture processes, runoff
prediction, land-use change and the treatment of snow and
sub-grid scale heterogeneity.

Major improvements have taken place in modelling ocean
processes, in particular heat transport. These improvements,
in conjunction with an increase in resolution, have been
important in reducing the need for flux adjustment in models
and in producing realistic simulations of natural large-scale
circulation patterns and improvements in simulating El Nino
(see Box 4). Ocean currents carry heat from the tropics to higher
latitudes. The ocean exchanges heat, water (through evaporation
and precipitation) and CO2 with the atmosphere. Because of
its huge mass and high heat capacity, the ocean slows climate
change and influences the time-scales of variability in the
ocean-atmosphere system. Considerable progress has been
made in the understanding of ocean processes relevant for
climate change. Increases in resolution, as well as improved
representation (parametrization) of important sub-grid scale
processes (e.g., mesoscale eddies), have increased the realism
of simulations. Major uncertainties still exist with the
representation of small-scale processes, such as overflows (flow
through narrow channels, e.g., between Greenland and Iceland),
western boundary currents (i.e., large-scale narrow currents
along coastlines), convection and mixing. Boundary currents
in climate simulations are weaker and wider than in nature,
although the consequences of this for climate are not clear.

Land surface

Cryosphere
The representation of sea-ice processes continues to improve,
with several climate models now incorporating physically
based treatments of ice dynamics. The representation of landice processes in global climate models remains rudimentary.
The cryosphere consists of those regions of Earth that are
seasonally or perennially covered by snow and ice. Sea ice is
important because it reflects more incoming solar radiation
than the sea surface (i.e., it has a higher albedo), and it insulates
the sea from heat loss during the winter. Therefore, reduction
of sea ice gives a positive feedback on climate warming at
high latitudes. Furthermore, because sea ice contains less salt
than sea water, when sea ice is formed the salt content (salinity)
and density of the surface layer of the ocean is increased. This
promotes an exchange of water with deeper layers of the ocean,
affecting ocean circulation. The formation of icebergs and the
melting of ice shelves returns fresh water from the land to the
ocean, so that changes in the rates of these processes could
affect ocean circulation by changing the surface salinity. Snow
has a higher albedo than the land surface; hence, reductions in
snow cover lead to a similar positive albedo feedback, although
weaker than for sea ice. Increasingly complex snow schemes

192

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Changes in land-surface cover can affect global climate in
several ways. Large-scale deforestation in the humid tropics
(e.g., South America, Africa, and Southeast Asia) has been
identified as the most important ongoing land-surface process,
because it reduces evaporation and increases surface
temperature. These effects are qualitatively reproduced by
most models. However, large uncertainties still persist on the
quantitative impact of large-scale deforestation on the
hydrological cycle, particularly over Amazonia.
Carbon cycle
Recent improvements in process-based terrestrial and ocean
carbon cycle models and their evaluation against observations
have given more confidence in their use for future scenario
studies. CO2 naturally cycles rapidly among the atmosphere,
oceans and land. However, the removal of the CO2 perturbation
added by human activities from the atmosphere takes far longer.
This is because of processes that limit the rate at which ocean
and terrestrial carbon stocks can increase. Anthropogenic CO2
is taken up by the ocean because of its high solubility (caused
by the nature of carbonate chemistry), but the rate of uptake is

The Scientific Basis

limited by the finite speed of vertical mixing. Anthropogenic CO2
is taken up by terrestrial ecosystems through several possible
mechanisms, for example, land management, CO2 fertilisation
(the enhancement of plant growth as a result of increased
atmospheric CO2 concentration) and increasing anthropogenic
inputs of nitrogen. This uptake is limited by the relatively small
fraction of plant carbon that can enter long-term storage (wood
and humus). The fraction of emitted CO2 that can be taken up
by the oceans and land is expected to decline with increasing
CO2 concentrations. Process-based models of the ocean and land
carbon cycles (including representations of physical, chemical
and biological processes) have been developed and evaluated
against measurements pertinent to the natural carbon cycle. Such
models have also been set up to mimic the human perturbation
of the carbon cycle and have been able to generate time-series
of ocean and land carbon uptake that are broadly consistent
with observed global trends. There are still substantial differences
among models, especially in how they treat the physical ocean
circulation and in regional responses of terrestrial ecosystem
processes to climate. Nevertheless, current models consistently
indicate that when the effects of climate change are considered,
CO2 uptake by oceans and land becomes smaller.

WGI Technical Summary

atmospheric processes involving the entire tropospherestratosphere system. Fluctuations in Atlantic Sea Surface
Temperatures (SSTs) are related to the strength of the NAO,
and a modest two-way interaction between the NAO and the
Atlantic Ocean, leading to decadal variability, is emerging as
important in projecting climate change.
Climate change may manifest itself both as shifting means,
as well as changing preference of specific climate regimes, as
evidenced by the observed trend toward positive values for
the last 30 years in the NAO index and the climate "shift" in
the tropical Pacific about 1976. While coupled models simulate
features of observed natural climate variability, such as the
NAO and ENSO, which suggests that many of the relevant
processes are included in the models, further progress is needed
to depict these natural modes accurately. Moreover, because
ENSO and NAO are key determinants of regional climate
change and can possibly result in abrupt and counter intuitive
changes, there has been an increase in uncertainty in those
aspects of climate change that critically depend on regional
changes.
The thermohaline circulation (THC)

D.2. The Coupled Systems
As noted in Section D.1, many feedbacks operate within the
individual components of the climate system (atmosphere,
ocean, cryosphere and land surface). However, many important
processes and feedbacks occur through the coupling of the
climate system components. Their representation is important
to the prediction of large-scale responses.
Modes of natural variability
There is an increasing realisation that natural circulation
patterns, such as ENSO and NAO, play a fundamental role in
global climate and its interannual and longer-term variability.
The strongest natural fluctuation of climate on interannual
time-scales is the ENSO phenomenon (see Box 4). It is an
inherently coupled atmosphere-ocean mode with its core
activity in the tropical Pacific, but with important regional
climate impacts throughout the world. Global climate models
are only now beginning to exhibit variability in the tropical
Pacific that resembles ENSO, mainly through increased
meridional resolution at the equator. Patterns of sea surface
temperature and atmospheric circulation similar to those
occurring during ENSO on interannual time-scales also occur
on decadal and longer time-scales.
The North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) is the dominant pattern
of northern wintertime atmospheric circulation variability and
is increasingly being simulated realistically. The NAO is
closely related to the Arctic Oscillation (AO), which has an
additional annular component around the Arctic. There is
strong evidence that the NAO arises mainly from internal

The thermohaline circulation (THC) is responsible for the
major part of the meridional heat transport in the Atlantic
Ocean. The THC is a global-scale overturning in the ocean driven
by density differences arising from temperature and salinity
effects. In the Atlantic, heat is transported by warm surface
waters flowing northward and cold saline waters from the North
Atlantic returning at depth. Reorganisations in the Atlantic
THC can be triggered by perturbations in the surface buoyancy,
which is influenced by precipitation, evaporation, continental
runoff, sea-ice formation, and the exchange of heat, processes
that could all change with consequences for regional and global
climate. Interactions between the atmosphere and the ocean
are also likely to be of considerable importance on decadal
and longer time-scales, where the THC is involved. The interplay
between the large-scale atmospheric forcing, with warming
and evaporation in low latitudes and cooling and increased
precipitation at high latitudes, forms the basis of a potential
instability of the present Atlantic THC. ENSO may also
influence the Atlantic THC by altering the fresh water balance
of the tropical Atlantic, therefore providing a coupling between
low and high latitudes. Uncertainties in the representation of
small-scale flows over sills and through narrow straits and of
ocean convection limit the ability of models to simulate
situations involving substantial changes in the THC. The less
saline North Pacific means that a deep THC does not occur in
the Pacific.
Non-linear events and rapid climate change
The possibility for rapid and irreversible changes in the climate
system exists, but there is a large degree of uncertainty about

193

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Box 4: The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
The strongest natural fluctuation of climate on interannual
time-scales is the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
phenomenon. The term "El Nino" originally applied to an
annual weak warm ocean current that ran southwards along
the coast of Peru about Christmas-time and only subsequently
became associated with the unusually large warmings. The
coastal warming, however, is often associated with a much
more extensive anomalous ocean warming to the International
Dateline, and it is this Pacific basinwide phenomenon that
forms the link with the anomalous global climate patterns.
The atmospheric component tied to "El Nino" is termed the
"Southern Oscillation". Scientists often call this phenomenon,
where the atmosphere and ocean collaborate together, ENSO
(El Nino-Southern Oscillation).
ENSO is a natural phenomenon, and there is good evidence
from cores of coral and glacial ice in the Andes that it has
been going on for millennia. The ocean and atmospheric
conditions in the tropical Pacific are seldom average, but
instead fluctuate somewhat irregularly between El Nino
events and the opposite "La Nina" phase, consisting of a
basinwide cooling of the tropical Pacific, with a preferred
period of about three to six years. The most intense phase of
each event usually lasts about a year.

194

nutrient-rich waters upwell from below along the equator and
western coasts of the Americas, favouring development of
phytoplankton, zooplankton, and hence fish. Because
convection and thunderstorms preferentially occur over
warmer waters, the pattern of sea surface temperatures
determines the distribution of rainfall in the tropics, and this
in turn determines the atmospheric heating patterns through
the release of latent heat. The heating drives the large-scale
monsoonal-type circulations in the tropics, and consequently
determines the winds. This strong coupling between the
atmosphere and ocean in the tropics gives rise to the El Nino
phenomenon.
During El Nino, the warm waters from the western tropical
Pacific migrate eastward as the trade winds weaken, shifting
the pattern of tropical rainstorms, further weakening the trade
winds, and thus reinforcing the changes in sea temperatures.
Sea level drops in the west, but rises in the east by as much as
0.25 m, as warm waters surge eastward along the equator.
However, the changes in atmospheric circulation are not
confined to the tropics, but extend globally and influence the
jet streams and storm tracks in mid-latitudes. Approximately
reverse patterns occur during the opposite La Nina phase of
the phenomenon.

A distinctive pattern of sea surface temperatures in the Pacific
Ocean sets the stage for ENSO events. Key features are the
"warm pool" in the tropical western Pacific, where the
warmest ocean waters in the world reside, much colder waters
in the eastern Pacific, and a cold tongue along the equator
that is most pronounced about October and weakest in March.
The atmospheric easterly trade winds in the tropics pile up
the warm waters in the west, producing an upward slope of
sea level along the equator of 0.60 m from east to west. The
winds drive the surface ocean currents, which determine
where the surface waters flow and diverge. Thus, cooler

Changes associated with ENSO produce large variations in
weather and climate around the world from year to year. These
often have a profound impact on humanity and society
because of associated droughts, floods, heat waves and other
changes that can severely disrupt agriculture, fisheries, the
environment, health, energy demand, air quality and also
change the risks of fire. ENSO also plays a prominent role in
modulating exchanges of CO2 with the atmosphere. The
normal upwelling of cold nutrient-rich and CO2-rich waters
in the tropical Pacific is suppressed during El Nino.

the mechanisms involved and hence also about the likelihood
or time-scales of such transitions. The climate system involves
many processes and feedbacks that interact in complex nonlinear ways. This interaction can give rise to thresholds in the
climate system that can be crossed if the system is perturbed
sufficiently. There is evidence from polar ice cores suggesting
that atmospheric regimes can change within a few years and
that large-scale hemispheric changes can evolve as fast as a
few decades. For example, the possibility of a threshold for a
rapid transition of the Atlantic THC to a collapsed state has
been demonstrated with a hierarchy of models. It is not yet clear
what this threshold is and how likely it is that human activity
would lead to it being exceeded (see Section F.6). Atmospheric
circulation can be characterised by different preferred patterns;

e.g., arising from ENSO and the NAO/AO, and changes in
their phase can occur rapidly. Basic theory and models suggest
that climate change may be first expressed in changes in the
frequency of occurrence of these patterns. Changes in vegetation,
through either direct anthropogenic deforestation or those caused
by global warming, could occur rapidly and could induce
further climate change. It is supposed that the rapid creation
of the Sahara about 5,500 years ago represents an example of
such a non-linear change in land cover.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

D.3. Regionalisation Techniques
Regional climate information was only addressed to a limited
degree in the SAR. Techniques used to enhance regional detail

The Scientific Basis

have been substantially improved since the SAR and have become
more widely applied. They fall into three categories: high and
variable resolution AOGCMs; regional (or nested limited area)
climate models (RCMs); and empirical/statistical and statistical/
dynamical methods. The techniques exhibit different strengths
and weaknesses and their use at the continental scale strongly
depends on the needs of specific applications.
Coarse resolution AOGCMs simulate atmospheric general
circulation features well in general. At the regional scale, the
models display area-average biases that are highly variable
from region to region and among models, with sub-continental
area averaged seasonal temperature biases typically 4C and
precipitation biases between -40 and +80%. These represent
an important improvement compared to AOGCMs evaluated
in the SAR.
The development of high resolution/variable resolution
Atmospheric General Circulation Models (AGCMs) since the
SAR generally shows that the dynamics and large-scale flow
in the models improves as resolution increases. In some cases,
however, systematic errors are worsened compared to coarser
resolution models, although only very few results have been
documented.
High resolution RCMs have matured considerably since the
SAR. Regional models consistently improve the spatial detail
of simulated climate compared to AGCMs. RCMs driven by
observed boundary conditions evidence area-averaged
temperature biases (regional scales of 105 to 106 km2) generally
below 2C, while precipitation biases are below 50%.
Regionalisation work indicates at finer scales that the changes
can be substantially different in magnitude or sign from the
large area-average results. A relatively large spread exists among
models, although attribution of the cause of these differences
is unclear.
D.4. Overall Assessment of Abilities
Coupled models have evolved and improved significantly since
the SAR. In general, they provide credible simulations of
climate, at least down to sub-continental scales and over
temporal scales from seasonal to decadal. Coupled models,
as a class, are considered to be suitable tools to provide useful
projections of future climates. These models cannot yet simulate
all aspects of climate (e.g., they still cannot account fully for
the observed trend in the surface-troposphere temperature
differences since 1979). Clouds and humidity also remain
sources of significant uncertainty, but there have been
incremental improvements in simulations of these quantities.
No single model can be considered "best", and it is important
to utilise results from a range of carefully evaluated coupled
models to explore effects of different formulations. The
rationale for increased confidence in models arises from model
performance in the following areas.

WGI Technical Summary

Flux adjustment
The overall confidence in model projections is increased by
the improved performance of several models that do not use
flux adjustment. These models now maintain stable, multicentury simulations of surface climate that are considered to
be of sufficient quality to allow their use for climate change
projections. The changes whereby many models can now run
without flux adjustment have come from improvements in both
the atmospheric and oceanic components. In the model
atmosphere, improvements in convection, the boundary layer,
clouds, and surface latent heat fluxes are most notable. In the
model ocean, the improvements are in resolution, boundary
layer mixing, and in the representation of eddies. The results
from climate change studies with flux adjusted and non-flux
adjusted models are broadly in agreement; nonetheless, the
development of stable non-flux adjusted models increases
confidence in their ability to simulate future climates.
Climate of the 20th century
Confidence in the ability of models to project future climates
is increased by the ability of several models to reproduce
warming trends in the 20th century surface air temperature
when driven by increased greenhouse gases and sulphate
aerosols. This is illustrated in Figure 13. However, only idealized
scenarios of sulphate aerosols have been used and contributions
from some additional processes and forcings may not have
been included in the models. Some modelling studies suggest
that inclusion of additional forcings like solar variability and
volcanic aerosols may improve some aspects of the simulated
climate variability of the 20th century.
Extreme events
Analysis of and confidence in extreme events simulated within
climate models are still emerging, particularly for storm tracks
and storm frequency. "Tropical-cyclone-like" vortices are being
simulated in climate models, although enough uncertainty
remains over their interpretation to warrant caution in projections
of tropical cyclone changes. However, in general, the analysis
of extreme events in both observations (see Section B.6) and
coupled models is underdeveloped.
Interannual variability
The performance of coupled models in simulating ENSO has
improved; however, its variability is displaced westward and
its strength is generally underestimated. When suitably
initialised with surface wind and sub-surface ocean data, some
coupled models have had a degree of success in predicting
ENSO events.

195

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

This is an important point to address. The SAR concluded that
"the balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible
human influence on global climate". It noted that the detection
and attribution of anthropogenic climate change signals will
be accomplished through a gradual accumulation of evidence.
The SAR also noted uncertainties in a number of factors,
including internal variability and the magnitude and patterns
of forcing and response, which prevented them from drawing
a stronger conclusion.

Observed and simulated global mean temperature
1.0

Temperature anomaly (C)

0.8

0.6

0.4

run 2
run 3

0.2

0

E.1. The Meaning of Detection and Attribution

-0.2

Control

run 1
Observed

-0.4
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940 1950
Year

1960

1970

1980

1990

Figure 13: Observed and modelled global annual mean temperature
anomalies (C) relative to the average of the observations over the
period 1900 to 1930. The control and three independent simulations
with the same greenhouse gas plus aerosol forcing and slightly
different initial conditions are shown from an AOGCM. The three
greenhouse gas plus aerosol simulations are labeled `run 1', `run
2', and `run 3' respectively. [Based on Figure 8.15]

Model intercomparisons
The growth in systematic intercomparisons of models provides
the core evidence for the growing capabilities of climate
models. For example, the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project (CMIP) is enabling a more comprehensive and
systematic evaluation and intercomparison of coupled models
run in a standardised configuration and responding to
standardised forcing. Some degree of quantification of
improvements in coupled model performance has now been
demonstrated. The Palaeoclimate Model Intercomparison
Project (PMIP) provides intercomparisons of models for the
mid-Holocene (6,000 years before present) and for the Last
Glacial Maximum (21,000 years before present). The ability
of these models to simulate some aspects of palaeoclimates,
compared to a range of palaeoclimate proxy data, gives
confidence in models (at least the atmospheric component)
over a range of difference forcings.

E. The Identification of a Human Influence
on Climate Change
Sections B and C characterised the observed past changes in
climate and in forcing agents, respectively. Section D examined
the capabilities of climate models to predict the response of
the climate system to such changes in forcing. This Section
uses that information to examine the question of whether a
human influence on climate change to date can be identified.

196

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Detection is the process of demonstrating that an observed
change is significantly different (in a statistical sense) than
can be explained by natural variability. Attribution is the
process of establishing cause and effect with some defined
level of confidence, including the assessment of competing
hypotheses. The response to anthropogenic changes in climate
forcing occurs against a backdrop of natural internal and
externally forced climate variability. Internal climate
variability, i.e., climate variability not forced by external
agents, occurs on all time-scales from weeks to centuries and
even millennia. Slow climate components, such as the ocean,
have particularly important roles on decadal and century timescales because they integrate weather variability. Thus, the
climate is capable of producing long time-scale variations of
considerable magnitude without external influences. Externally
forced climate variations (signals) may be due to changes in
natural forcing factors, such as solar radiation or volcanic
aerosols, or to changes in anthropogenic forcing factors, such
as increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases or aerosols.
The presence of this natural climate variability means that the
detection and attribution of anthropogenic climate change is a
statistical "signal to noise" problem. Detection studies
demonstrate whether or not an observed change is highly
unusual in a statistical sense, but this does not necessarily imply
that we understand its causes. The attribution of climate change
to anthropogenic causes involves statistical analysis and the
careful assessment of multiple lines of evidence to demonstrate,
within a pre-specified margin of error, that the observed
changes are:
* unlikely to be due entirely to internal variability;
* consistent with the estimated responses to the given
combination of anthropogenic and natural forcing; and
* not consistent with alternative, physically plausible
explanations of recent climate change that exclude important
elements of the given combination of forcings.
E.2. A Longer and More Closely Scrutinised
Observational Record
Three of the last five years (1995, 1997 and 1998) were the
warmest globally in the instrumental record. The impact of
observational sampling errors has been estimated for the global
and hemispheric mean temperature record. There is also a

The Scientific Basis

better understanding of the errors and uncertainties in the
satellite-based (Microwave Sounding Unit, MSU) temperature
record. Discrepancies between MSU and radiosonde data have
largely been resolved, although the observed trend in the
difference between the surface and lower tropospheric
temperatures cannot fully be accounted for (see Section B).
New reconstructions of temperature over the last 1,000 years
indicate that the temperature changes over the last hundred
years are unlikely to be entirely natural in origin, even taking
into account the large uncertainties in palaeo-reconstructions
(see Section B).

WGI Technical Summary

1850

1950

0.6

0.6
HadCM2

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.4

0

200

400

600

800

-0.4

1000
1850

1950

0.6

0.6
GFDL

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.4

0

200

400

600

800

-0.4

1000
1850

1950

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

HAM3L

0.2

E.3. New Model Estimates of Internal Variability

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.4

The warming over the past 100 years is very unlikely to be
due to internal variability alone, as estimated by current
models. The instrumental record is short and covers the period
of human influence and palaeo-records include natural forced
variations, such as those due to variations in solar irradiance
and in the frequency of major volcanic eruptions. These limitations
leave few alternatives to using long "control" simulations with
coupled models for the estimation of internal climate variability.
Since the SAR, more models have been used to estimate the
magnitude of internal climate variability, a representative
sample of which is given in Figure 14. As can be seen, there is
a wide range of global scale internal variability in these models.
Estimates of the longer time-scale variability relevant to
detection and attribution studies is uncertain, but, on
interannual and decadal time-scales, some models show similar
or larger variability than observed, even though models do
not include variance from external sources. Conclusions on
detection of an anthropogenic signal are insensitive to the
model used to estimate internal variability, and recent changes
cannot be accounted for as pure internal variability, even if
the amplitude of simulated internal variations is increased by
a factor of two or perhaps more. Most recent detection and
attribution studies find no evidence that model-estimated
internal variability at the surface is inconsistent with the
residual variability that remains in the observations after
removal of the estimated anthropogenic signals on the large
spatial and long time-scales used in detection and attribution
studies. Note, however, the ability to detect inconsistencies is
limited. As Figure 14 indicates, no model control simulation
shows a trend in surface air temperature as large as the observed
trend over the last 1,000 years.
E.4. New Estimates of Responses to Natural
Forcing
Assessments based on physical principles and model simulations
indicate that natural forcing alone is unlikely to explain the
recent observed global warming or the observed changes in
vertical temperature structure of the atmosphere. Fully
coupled ocean-atmosphere models have used reconstructions
of solar and volcanic forcings over the last one to three

0.2

0.0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

-0.4

Years

Figure 14: Global mean surface air temperature anomalies from
1,000 year control simulations with three different climate models,
- Hadley, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory and Hamburg,
compared to the recent instrumental record. No model control
simulation shows a trend in surface air temperature as large as the
observed trend. If internal variability is correct in these models, the
recent warming is likely not due to variability produced within the
climate system alone. [Based on Figure 12.1]

centuries to estimate the contribution of natural forcing to
climate variability and change. Although the reconstruction
of natural forcings is uncertain, including their effects produces
an increase in variance at longer (multi-decadal) time-scales.
This brings the low-frequency variability closer to that deduced
from palaeo-reconstructions. It is likely that the net natural
forcing (i.e., solar plus volcanic) has been negative over the
past two decades, and possibly even the past four decades.
Statistical assessments confirm that simulated natural variability,
both internal and naturally forced, is unlikely to explain the
warming in the latter half of the 20th century (see Figure 15).
However, there is evidence for a detectable volcanic influence
on climate and evidence that suggests a detectable solar
influence, especially in the early part of the 20th century. Even
if the models underestimate the magnitude of the response to
solar or volcanic forcing, the spatial and temporal patterns
are such that these effects alone cannot explain the observed
temperature changes over the 20th century.
E.5. Sensitivity to Estimates of Climate Change
Signals
There is a wide range of evidence of qualitative consistencies
between observed climate changes and model responses to
anthropogenic forcing. Models and observations show increasing
global temperature, increasing land-ocean temperature contrast,
diminishing sea-ice extent, glacial retreat, and increases in
precipitation at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere.
Some qualitative inconsistencies remain, including the fact
that models predict a faster rate of warming in the mid- to upper

197

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

ANTHROPOGENIC : Annual global mean temperatures
1.0
MODEL
OBSERVATIONS

Temperature anomalies (C)

(b)

NATURAL : Annual global mean temperatures
1.0
MODEL
OBSERVATIONS

Temperature anomalies (C)

(a)

0.5

0.0

-0.5
-1.0
1850

0.5

0.0

-0.5

1900

1950

2000

-1.0
1850

1900

Year

1950

2000

Year

(c)
Temperature anomalies (C)

ALL FORCINGS : Annual global mean temperatures
1.0
MODEL
OBSERVATIONS
0.5

0.0

-0.5
-1.0
1850

1900

1950

2000

Year
Figure 15: Global mean surface temperature anomalies relative to the 1880 to 1920 mean from the instrumental record compared with ensembles
of four simulations with a coupled ocean-atmosphere climate model forced (a) with solar and volcanic forcing only, (b) with anthropogenic forcing
including well mixed greenhouse gases, changes in stratospheric and tropospheric ozone and the direct and indirect effects of sulphate
aerosols, and (c) with all forcings, both natural and anthropogenic. The thick line shows the instrumental data while the thin lines show the individual
model simulations in the ensemble of four members. Note that the data are annual mean values. The model data are only sampled at the
locations where there are observations. The changes in sulphate aerosol are calculated interactively, and changes in tropospheric ozone were
calculated offline using a chemical transport model. Changes in cloud brightness (the first indirect effect of sulphate aerosols) were calculated
by an offline simulation and included in the model. The changes in stratospheric ozone were based on observations. The volcanic and solar
forcing were based on published combinations of measured and proxy data. The net anthropogenic forcing at 1990 was 1.0 Wm-2 including a net
cooling of 1.0 Wm-2 due to sulphate aerosols. The net natural forcing for 1990 relative to 1860 was 0.5 Wm-2, and for 1992 was a net cooling of
2.0 Wm-2 due to Mount Pinatubo. Other models forced with anthropogenic forcing give similar results to those shown in (b). [Based on Figure 12.7]

troposphere than is observed in either satellite or radiosonde
tropospheric temperature records.
All simulations with greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols
that have been used in detection studies have found that a
significant anthropogenic contribution is required to account
for surface and tropospheric trends over at least the last 30
years. Since the SAR, more simulations with increases in
greenhouse gases and some representation of aerosol effects
have become available. Several studies have included an explicit
representation of greenhouse gases (as opposed to an equivalent

198

IPCC Third Assessment Report

increase in CO2). Some have also included tropospheric ozone
changes, an interactive sulphur cycle, an explicit radiative treatment
of the scattering of sulphate aerosols, and improved estimates
of the changes in stratospheric ozone. Overall, while detection
of the climate response to these other anthropogenic factors is
often ambiguous, detection of the influence of greenhouse
gases on the surface temperature changes over the past 50
years is robust. In some cases, ensembles of simulations have
been run to reduce noise in the estimates of the time-dependent
response. Some studies have evaluated seasonal variation of
the response. Uncertainties in the estimated climate change signals

The Scientific Basis

have made it difficult to attribute the observed climate change
to one specific combination of anthropogenic and natural
influences, but all studies have found a significant anthropogenic
contribution is required to account for surface and tropospheric
trends over at least the last thirty years.

WGI Technical Summary

changes, but do not exclude the possibility that other forcings
have also contributed. Overall, the magnitude of the temperature
response to increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases is
found to be consistent with observations on the scales considered
(see Figure 16), but there remain discrepies between modelled
and observed response to other natural and anthropogenic factors.

E.6. A Wider Range of Detection Techniques
Temperature
Evidence of a human influence on climate is obtained over a
substantially wider range of detection techniques. A major
advance since the SAR is the increase in the range of techniques
used and the evaluation of the degree to which the results are
independent of the assumptions made in applying those
techniques. There have been studies using pattern correlations,
optimal detection studies using one or more fixed patterns
and time-varying patterns, and a number of other techniques.
The increase in the number of studies, breadth of techniques,
increased rigour in the assessment of the role of anthropogenic
forcing in climate, and the robustness of results to the assumptions
made using those techniques, has increased the confidence in
these aspects of detection and attribution.
Results are sensitive to the range of temporal and spatial
scales that are considered. Several decades of data are
necessary to separate forced signals from internal variability.
Idealised studies have demonstrated that surface temperature
changes are detectable only on scales in the order of 5,000
km. Such studies show that the level of agreement found
between simulations and observations in pattern correlation
studies is close to what one would expect in theory.
Most attribution studies find that, over the last 50 years, the
estimated rate and magnitude of global warming due to
increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases alone are
comparable with or larger than the observed warming.
Attribution studies address the question of "whether the
magnitude of the simulated response to a particular forcing
agent is consistent with observations". The use of multi-signal
techniques has enabled studies that discriminate between the
effects of different factors on climate. The inclusion of the
time dependence of signals has helped to distinguish between
natural and anthropogenic forcings. As more response patterns
are included, the problem of degeneracy (different combinations
of patterns yielding near identical fits to the observations)
inevitably arises. Nevertheless, even with all the major responses
that have been included in the analysis, a distinct greenhouse
gas signal remains detectable. Furthermore, most model estimates
that take into account both greenhouse gases and sulphate
aerosols are consistent with observations over this period. The
best agreement between model simulations and observations
over the last 140 years is found when both anthropogenic and
natural factors are included (see Figure 15). These results show
that the forcings included are sufficient to explain the observed

Uncertainties in other forcings that have been included do not
prevent identification of the effect of anthropogenic greenhouse
gases over the last 50 years. The sulphate forcing, while
uncertain, is negative over this period. Changes in natural forcing
during most of this period are also estimated to be negative.
Detection of the influence of anthropogenic greenhouse gases
therefore cannot be eliminated either by the uncertainty in
sulphate aerosol forcing or because natural forcing has not
been included in all model simulations. Studies that distinguish
the separate responses to greenhouse gas, sulphate aerosol and
natural forcing produce uncertain estimates of the amplitude
of the sulphate aerosol and natural signals, but almost all
studies are nevertheless able to detect the presence of the
anthropogenic greenhouse gas signal in the recent climate record.
The detection and attribution methods used should not be
sensitive to errors in the amplitude of the global mean response
to individual forcings. In the signal-estimation methods used
in this report, the amplitude of the signal is estimated from the
observations and not the amplitude of the simulated response.
Hence the estimates are independent of those factors determining
the simulated amplitude of the response, such as the climate
sensitivity of the model used. In addition, if the signal due to
a given forcing is estimated individually, the amplitude is
largely independent of the magnitude of the forcing used to
derive the response. Uncertainty in the amplitude of the solar
and indirect sulphate aerosol forcing should not affect the
magnitude of the estimated signal.
Sea level
It is very likely that the 20th century warming has contributed
significantly to the observed sea level rise, through thermal
expansion of sea water and widespread loss of land ice. Within
present uncertainties, observations and models are both
consistent with a lack of significant acceleration of sea level
rise during the 20th century.
E.7. Remaining Uncertainties in Detection and
Attribution
Some progress has been made in reducing uncertainty, though
many of the sources of uncertainty identified in the SAR still
exist. These include:
* Discrepancies between the vertical profile of temperature
change in the troposphere seen in observations and models.
These have been reduced as more realistic forcing histories
have been used in models, although not fully resolved.

199

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Scaling required on model-simulated signals

(a)
2

GSIO GS

GS

1

GSI

GS

GS

GS

GS

G

G

So

G SIO

S

G

V
S

0

N

-1
2

EC
H

H

AM

ad
C

M

3/
LS
G

3
M
ad
C
H

(b) Estimated contributions to 20th century warming (C/century)

1.0

G

G

0.5

GSIO

GS

G

GS

GS

GSI

GS

GS

GS

G
N

0.0

S

So
S

ad
H

3/
AM

C

LS

M

G

3
H

ad

C

M
C

G

C

C
G
C

M

2

1
M

30

C

L-

R

PY

FD
G

C
H

AM

4/

O

PY

G
EC

H

H

AM

4/

O

LS

M
AM

3/

C
ad
EC

EC

3

2
M
C
H

ad
H

H

ad

C

M

2

-0.5
-1.0

So V

2

SIO

EC
H

2.0
1.5

EC

EC

H

H

AM

ad
C

M
3
3/
L
H
SG
AM
4/
EC
O
PY
H
AM
C
4/
O
PY
G
FD C
LR
30
C
G
C
M
1
C
G
C
M
2

2
M
ad
C

H

H

ad
C

M

2

So

Figure 16: (a) Estimates of the "scaling factors" by which the amplitude of several model-simulated signals must be multiplied to reproduce
the corresponding changes in the observed record. The vertical bars indicate the 5 to 95% uncertainty range due to internal variability. A
range encompassing unity implies that this combination of forcing amplitude and model-simulated response is consistent with the corresponding
observed change, while a range encompassing zero implies that this model-simulated signal is not detectable. Signals are defined as the
ensemble mean response to external forcing expressed in large-scale (>5,000 km) near-surface temperatures over the 1946 to 1996 period
relative to the 1896 to 1996 mean. The first entry (G) shows the scaling factor and 5 to 95% confidence interval obtained with the assumption
that the observations consist only of a response to greenhouse gases plus internal variability. The range is significantly less than one
(consistent with results from other models), meaning that models forced with greenhouse gases alone significantly over predict the observed
warming signal. The next eight entries show scaling factors for model-simulated responses to greenhouse and sulphate forcing (GS), with
two cases including indirect sulphate and tropospheric ozone forcing, one of these also including stratospheric ozone depletion (GSI and
GSIO, respectively). All but one (CGCM1) of these ranges is consistent with unity. Hence there is little evidence that models are systematically
over- or under-predicting the amplitude of the observed response under the assumption that model-simulated GS signals and internal
variability are an adequate representation (i.e., that natural forcing has had little net impact on this diagnostic). Observed residual variability
is consistent with this assumption in all but one case (ECHAM3, indicated by the asterisk). One is obliged to make this assumption to include
models for which only a simulation of the anthropogenic response is available, but uncertainty estimates in these single signal cases are
incomplete since they do not account for uncertainty in the naturally forced response. These ranges indicate, however, the high level of
confidence with which internal variability, as simulated by these various models, can be rejected as an explanation of recent near-surface
temperature change. A more complete uncertainty analysis is provided by the next three entries, which show corresponding scaling factors
on individual greenhouse (G), sulphate (S), solar-plus-volcanic (N), solar-only (So) and volcanic-only (V) signals for those cases in which the
relevant simulations have been performed. In these cases, multiple factors are estimated simultaneously to account for uncertainty in the
amplitude of the naturally forced response. The uncertainties increase but the greenhouse signal remains consistently detectable. In one
case (ECHAM3) the model appears to be overestimating the greenhouse response (scaling range in the G signal inconsistent with unity), but
this result is sensitive to which component of the control is used to define the detection space. It is also not known how it would respond to
the inclusion of a volcanic signal. In cases where both solar and volcanic forcing is included (HadCM2 and HadCM3), G and S signals remain
detectable and consistent with unity independent of whether natural signals are estimated jointly or separately (allowing for different errors
in S and V responses). (b) Estimated contributions to global mean warming over the 20th century, based on the results shown in (a), with 5
to 95% confidence intervals. Although the estimates vary depending on which model's signal and what forcing is assumed, and are less
certain if more than one signal is estimated, all show a significant contribution from anthropogenic climate change to 20th century warming.
[Based on Figure 12.12]

200

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The Scientific Basis

*

*

*

*

Also, the difference between observed surface and lowertropospheric trends over the last two decades cannot be
fully reproduced by model simulations.
Large uncertainties in estimates of internal climate
variability from models and observations. Although as
noted above, these are unlikely (bordering on very unlikely)
to be large enough to nullify the claim that a detectable
climate change has taken place.
Considerable uncertainty in the reconstructions of solar
and volcanic forcing which are based on proxy or limited
observational data for all but the last two decades.
Detection of the influence of greenhouse gases on climate
appears to be robust to possible amplification of the solar
forcing by ozone-solar or solar-cloud interactions, provided
these do not alter the pattern or time-dependence of the
response to solar forcing. Amplification of the solar signal
by these processes, which are not yet included in models,
remains speculative.
Large uncertainties in anthropogenic forcing are
associated with the effects of aerosols. The effects of some
anthropogenic factors, including organic carbon, black
carbon, biomass aerosols, and changes in land use, have
not been included in detection and attribution studies.
Estimates of the size and geographic pattern of the effects
of these forcings vary considerably, although individually
their global effects are estimated to be relatively small.
Large differences in the response of different models to
the same forcing. These differences, which are often greater
than the difference in response in the same model with
and without aerosol effects, highlight the large uncertainties
in climate change prediction and the need to quantify
uncertainty and reduce it through better observational data
sets and model improvement.

WGI Technical Summary

based on scenarios of a future where greenhouse gas
concentrations are stabilised.
F.1. The IPCC Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios (SRES)
In 1996, the IPCC began the development of a new set of
emissions scenarios, effectively to update and replace the wellknown IS92 scenarios. The approved new set of scenarios is
described in the IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios
(SRES). Four different narrative storylines were developed to
describe consistently the relationships between the forces driving
emissions and their evolution and to add context for the scenario
quantification. The resulting set of 40 scenarios (35 of which
contain data on the full range of gases required to force climate
models) cover a wide range of the main demographic, economic
and technological driving forces of future greenhouse gas and
sulphur emissions. Each scenario represents a specific
quantification of one of the four storylines. All the scenarios
based on the same storyline constitute a scenario "family" (See
Box 5, which briefly describes the main characteristics of the
four SRES storylines and scenario families). The SRES
scenarios do not include additional climate initiatives, which
means that no scenarios are included that explicitly assume
implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change or the emissions targets of the Kyoto
Protocol. However, greenhouse gas emissions are directly
affected by non-climate change policies designed for a wide
range of other purposes (e.g., air quality). Furthermore,
government policies can, to varying degrees, influence the
greenhouse gas emission drivers, such as demographic change,
social and economic development, technological change,
resource use, and pollution management. This influence is
broadly reflected in the storylines and resulting scenarios.

E.8. Synopsis
In the light of new evidence and taking into account the
remaining uncertainties, most of the observed warming over
the last 50 years is likely to have been due to the increase in
greenhouse gas concentrations.

F. The Projections of the Earth's Future
Climate
The tools of climate models are used with future scenarios of
forcing agents (e.g., greenhouse gases and aerosols) as input
to make a suite of projected future climate changes that
illustrates the possibilities that could lie ahead. Section F.1
provides a description of the future scenarios of forcing agents
given in the IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios
(SRES) on which, wherever possible, the future changes
presented in this section are based. Sections F.2 to F.9 present
the resulting projections of changes to the future climate.
Finally, Section F.10 presents the results of future projections

Since the SRES was not approved until 15 March 2000, it
was too late for the modelling community to incorporate the
final approved scenarios in their models and have the results
available in time for this Third Assessment Report. However,
draft scenarios were released to climate modellers earlier to
facilitate their input to the Third Assessment Report, in
accordance with a decision of the IPCC Bureau in 1998. At
that time, one marker scenario was chosen from each of four
of the scenario groups based directly on the storylines (A1B,
A2, B1, and B2). The choice of the markers was based on
which of the initial quantifications best reflected the storyline
and features of specific models. Marker scenarios are no more
or less likely than any other scenarios, but are considered
illustrative of a particular storyline. Scenarios were also
selected later to illustrate the other two scenario groups (A1FI
and A1T) within the A1 family, which specifically explore
alternative technology developments, holding the other driving
forces constant. Hence there is an illustrative scenario for each
of the six scenario groups, and all are equally plausible. Since
the latter two illustrative scenarios were selected at a late stage

201

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Box 5: The Emissions Scenarios of the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)
A1. The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future
world of very rapid economic growth, global population that
peaks in mid-century and declines thereafter, and the rapid
introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major
underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity
building and increased cultural and social interactions, with
a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita
income. The A1 scenario family develops into three groups
that describe alternative directions of technological change
in the energy system. The three A1 groups are distinguished
by their technological emphasis: fossil intensive (A1FI), nonfossil energy sources (A1T), or a balance across all sources
(A1B) (where balanced is defined as not relying too heavily
on one particular energy source, on the assumption that similar
improvement rates apply to all energy supply and end use
technologies).
A2. The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very
heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance and
preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across regions
converge very slowly, which results in continuously increasing
population. Economic development is primarily regionally

in the process, the AOGCM modelling results presented in
this report only use two of the four draft marker scenarios. At
present, only scenarios A2 and B2 have been integrated by
more than one AOGCM. The AOGCM results have been
augmented by results from simple climate models that cover
all six illustrative scenarios. The IS92a scenario is also
presented in a number of cases to provide direct comparison
with the results presented in the SAR.
The final four marker scenarios contained in the SRES differ
in minor ways from the draft scenarios used for the AOGCM
experiments described in this report. In order to ascertain the
likely effect of differences in the draft and final SRES
scenarios, each of the four draft and final marker scenarios
were studied using a simple climate model. For three of the
four marker scenarios (A1B, A2, and B2) temperature change
from the draft and marker scenarios are very similar. The
primary difference is a change to the standardised values for
1990 to 2000, which is common to all these scenarios. This
results in a higher forcing early in the period. There are further
small differences in net forcing, but these decrease until, by
2100, differences in temperature change in the two versions
of these scenarios are in the range 1 to 2%. For the B1 scenario,
however, temperature change is significantly lower in the final
version, leading to a difference in the temperature change in
2100 of almost 20%, as a result of generally lower emissions
across the full range of greenhouse gases.

202

IPCC Third Assessment Report

oriented and per capita economic growth and technological
change more fragmented and slower than other storylines.
B1. The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a
convergent world with the same global population, that peaks
in mid-century and declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline,
but with rapid change in economic structures toward a service
and information economy, with reductions in material
intensity and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient
technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to economic,
social and environmental sustainability, including improved
equity, but without additional climate initiatives.
B2. The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world
in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social
and environmental sustainability. It is a world with continuously
increasing global population, at a rate lower than A2,
intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid
and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and
A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented towards
environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local
and regional levels.

Anthropogenic emissions of the three main greenhouse gases,
CO2, CH4 and N2O, together with anthropogenic sulphur
dioxide emissions, are shown for the six illustrative SRES
scenarios in Figure 17. It is evident that these scenarios
encompass a wide range of emissions. For comparison,
emissions are also shown for IS92a. Particularly noteworthy
are the much lower future sulphur dioxide emissions for the
six SRES scenarios, compared to the IS92 scenarios, due to
structural changes in the energy system as well as concerns
about local and regional air pollution.
F.2. Projections of Future Changes in Greenhouse
Gases and Aerosols
Models indicate that the illustrative SRES scenarios lead to very
different CO2 concentration trajectories (see Figure 18). By 2100,
carbon cycle models project atmospheric CO2 concentrations
of 540 to 970 ppm for the illustrative SRES scenarios (90 to
250% above the concentration of 280 ppm in 1750). The net
effect of land and ocean climate feedbacks as indicated by models
is to further increase projected atmospheric CO2 concentrations
by reducing both the ocean and land uptake of CO2. These
projections include the land and ocean climate feedbacks.
Uncertainties, especially about the magnitude of the climate
feedback from the terrestrial biosphere, cause a variation of
about -10 to +30% around each scenario. The total range is
490 to 1260 ppm (75 to 350% above the 1750 concentration).

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

Measures to enhance carbon storage in terrestrial ecosystems
could influence atmospheric CO2 concentration, but the upper
bound for reduction of CO2 concentration by such means is
40 to 70 ppm. If all the carbon released by historic land-use
changes could be restored to the terrestrial biosphere over the
course of the century (e.g., by reforestation), CO2 concentration
would be reduced by 40 to 70 ppm. Thus, fossil fuel CO2 emissions
are virtually certain to remain the dominant control over trends
in atmospheric CO2 concentration during this century.
Model calculations of the abundances of the primary nonCO2 greenhouse gases by the year 2100 vary considerably
across the six illustrative SRES scenarios. In general A1B,
A1T and B1 have the smallest increases, and A1FI and A2,
the largest. The CH4 changes from 1998 to 2100 range from
-190 to +1970 ppb (-11 to +112%), and N2O increases from
+38 to +144 ppb (+12 to +46%) (see Figures 17b and c). The
HFCs (134a, 143a, and 125) reach abundances of a few
hundred to a thousand ppt from negligible levels today. The

PFC CF4 is projected to increase to 200 to 400 ppt, and SF6 is
projected to increase to 35 to 65 ppt.
For the six illustrative SRES emissions scenarios, projected
emissions of indirect greenhouse gases (NOx, CO, VOC),
together with changes in CH4, are projected to change the
global mean abundance of the tropospheric hydroxyl radical
(OH), by -20% to +6% over the next century. Because of the
importance of OH in tropospheric chemistry, comparable, but
opposite sign, changes occur in the atmospheric lifetimes of
the greenhouse gases CH4 and HFCs. This impact depends in
large part on the magnitude of and the balance between NOx
and CO emissions. Changes in tropospheric O3 of -12 to +62%
are calculated from 2000 until 2100. The largest increase
predicted for the 21st century is for scenarios A1FI and A2
and would be more than twice as large as that experienced
since the Pre-industrial Era. These O3 increases are attributable
to the concurrent and large increases in anthropogenic NOx
and CH4 emissions.

26

20

24
N2O emissions (Tg N)

CO2 emissions (Gt C)

25

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

15

22

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

20

18

10
16
5

1000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2000

2100
150

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

SO2 emissions (Tg S)

CH4 emissions (Tg CH4)

2000

800

100

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

2040

2060

2080

2100

Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

50
600

2000

2020

2040
Year

2060

2080

2100

2000

2020

Year

Figure 17: Anthropogenic emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O and sulphur dioxide for the six illustrative SRES scenarios, A1B, A2, B1 and B2, A1FI
and A1T. For comparison the IS92a scenario is also shown. [Based on IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios.]

203

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

productivity. This problem reaches across continental boundaries
and couples emissions of NOx on a hemispheric scale.

1300
Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

CO2 concentration (ppm)

1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
1980

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

CH4 concentration (ppb)

4000
Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

3500
3000
2500

2000
1500

1980

2000

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

N2O concentration (ppb)

500
Scenarios
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

450

400

350

300
1980

2000

Figure 18: Atmospheric concentrations of CO2, CH4 and N2O resulting
from the six SRES scenarios and from the IS92a scenario computed
with current methodology. [Based on Figures 3.12 and 4.14]

The large growth in emissions of greenhouse gases and other
pollutants as projected in some of the six illustrative SRES
scenarios for the 21st century will degrade the global environment
in ways beyond climate change. Changes projected in the SRES
A2 and A1FI scenarios would degrade air quality over much
of the globe by increasing background levels of tropospheric
O3. In northern mid-latitudes during summer, the zonal average
of O3 increases near the surface are about 30 ppb or more,
raising background levels to about 80 ppb, threatening the
attainment of current air quality standards over most metropolitan
and even rural regions and compromising crop and forest

204

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Except for sulphate and black carbon, models show an
approximately linear dependence of the abundance of aerosols
on emissions. The processes that determine the removal rate
for black carbon differ substantially between the models,
leading to major uncertainty in the future projections of black
carbon. Emissions of natural aerosols such as sea salt, dust,
and gas phase precursors of aerosols such as terpenes, sulphur
dioxide (SO2), and dimethyl sulphide oxidation may increase
as a result of changes in climate and atmospheric chemistry.
The six illustrative SRES scenarios cover nearly the full range
of forcing that results from the full set of SRES scenarios.
Estimated total historical anthropogenic radiative forcing from
1765 to 1990 followed by forcing resulting from the six SRES
scenarios are shown in Figure 19. The forcing from the full range
of 35 SRES scenarios is shown on the figure as a shaded envelope,
since the forcings resulting from individual scenarios cross
with time. The direct forcing from biomass-burning aerosols
is scaled with deforestation rates. The SRES scenarios include
the possibility of either increases or decreases in anthropogenic
aerosols (e.g., sulphate aerosols, biomass aerosols, and black
and organic carbon aerosols), depending on the extent of fossil
fuel use and policies to abate polluting emissions. The SRES
scenarios do not include emissions estimates for non-sulphate
aerosols. Two methods for projecting these emissions were
considered in this report: the first scales the emissions of fossil
fuel and biomass aerosols with CO while the second scales
the emissions with SO2 and deforestation. Only the second
method was used for climate projections. For comparison,
radiative forcing is also shown for the IS92a scenario. It is
evident that the range for the new SRES scenarios is shifted
higher compared to the IS92 scenarios. This is mainly due to
the reduced future SO2 emissions of the SRES scenarios
compared to the IS92 scenarios, but also to the slightly larger
cumulative carbon emissions featured in some SRES scenarios.
In almost all SRES scenarios, the radiative forcing due to
CO2, CH4, N2O and tropospheric O3 continue to increase, with
the fraction of the total radiative forcing due to CO2 projected
to increase from slightly more than half to about three-quarters
of the total. The radiative forcing due to O3-depleting gases
decreases due to the introduction of emission controls aimed
at curbing stratospheric ozone depletion. The direct aerosol
(sulphate and black and organic carbon components taken
together) radiative forcing (evaluated relative to present day,
2000) varies in sign for the different scenarios. The direct plus
indirect aerosol effects are projected to be smaller in magnitude
than that of CO2. No estimates are made for the spatial aspects
of the future forcings. The indirect effect of aerosols on clouds
is included in simple climate model calculations and scaled
non-linearly with SO2 emissions, assuming a present day value
of -0.8 Wm-2, as in the SAR.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

10
A1FI
A1B
A1T
A2
B1
B2
IS92a
IS92c
IS92e

9
8

Forcing (Wm-2)

7
6

Model ensemble
all SRES
envelope

5
4
3
2
1
0
1800

1900

2000

2100

Year
Figure 19: Simple model results: estimated historical anthropogenic radiative forcing up to the year 2000 followed by radiative forcing for the
six illustrative SRES scenarios. The shading shows the envelope of forcing that encompasses the full set of thirty five SRES scenarios. The
method of calculation closely follows that explained in the chapters. The values are based on the radiative forcing for a doubling of CO2 from
seven AOGCMs. The IS92a, IS92c, and IS92e forcing is also shown following the same method of calculation. [Based on Figure 9.13a]

F.3. Projections of Future Changes in Temperature
AOGCM results
Climate sensitivity is likely to be in the range of 1.5 to 4.5C.
This estimate is unchanged from the first IPCC Assessment Report
in 1990 and the SAR. The climate sensitivity is the equilibrium
response of global surface temperature to a doubling of equivalent
CO 2 concentration. The range of estimates arises from
uncertainties in the climate models and their internal feedbacks,
particularly those related to clouds and related processes. Used
for the first time in this IPCC report is the Transient Climate
Response (TCR). The TCR is defined as the globally averaged
surface air temperature change, at the time of doubling of CO2,
in a 1%/yr CO2-increase experiment. This rate of CO2 increase
is assumed to represent the radiative forcing from all greenhouse
gases. The TCR combines elements of model sensitivity and
factors that affect response (e.g., ocean heat uptake). The range
of the TCR for current AOGCMs is 1.1 to 3.1C.
Including the direct effect of sulphate aerosols reduces global
mean mid-21st century warming. The surface temperature
response pattern for a given model, with and without sulphate
aerosols, is more similar than the pattern between two models
using the same forcing.
Models project changes in several broad-scale climate variables.
As the radiative forcing of the climate system changes, the land

warms faster and more than the ocean, and there is greater
relative warming at high latitudes. Models project a smaller surface
air temperature increase in the North Atlantic and circumpolar
southern ocean regions relative to the global mean. There is
projected to be a decrease in diurnal temperature range in many
areas, with night-time lows increasing more than daytime highs.
A number of models show a general decrease of daily variability
of surface air temperature in winter and increased daily variability
in summer in the Northern Hemisphere land areas. As the climate
warms, the Northern Hemisphere snow cover and sea-ice extent
are projected to decrease. Many of these changes are consistent
with recent observational trends, as noted in Section B.
Multi-model ensembles of AOGCM simulations for a range
of scenarios are being used to quantify the mean climate change
and uncertainty based on the range of model results. For the
end of the 21st century (2071 to 2100), the mean change in
global average surface air temperature, relative to the period
1961 to 1990, is 3.0C (with a range of 1.3 to 4.5C) for the
A2 draft marker scenario and 2.2C (with a range of 0.9 to
3.4C) for the B2 draft marker scenario. The B2 scenario
produces a smaller warming that is consistent with its lower
rate of increased CO2 concentration.
On time-scales of a few decades, the current observed rate of
warming can be used to constrain the projected response to a
given emissions scenario despite uncertainty in climate sensitivity.
Analysis of simple models and intercomparisons of AOGCM

205

Climate Change 2001

responses to idealised forcing scenarios suggest that, for most
scenarios over the coming decades, errors in large-scale
temperature projections are likely to increase in proportion to
the magnitude of the overall response. The estimated size of
and uncertainty in current observed warming rates attributable
to human influence thus provides a relatively model-independent
estimate of uncertainty in multi-decade projections under most
scenarios. To be consistent with recent observations,
anthropogenic warming is likely to lie in the range 0.1 to 0.2C/
decade over the next few decades under the IS92a scenario.
This is similar to the range of responses to this scenario based
on the seven versions of the simple model used in Figure 22.
Most of the features of the geographical response in the SRES
scenario experiments are similar for different scenarios (see
Figure 20) and are similar to those for idealised 1% CO2increase integrations. The biggest difference between the 1%
CO2-increase experiments, which have no sulphate aerosol,
and the SRES experiments is the regional moderating of the
warming over industrialised areas, in the SRES experiments,
where the negative forcing from sulphate aerosols is greatest.
This regional effect was noted in the SAR for only two models,
but this has now been shown to be a consistent response across
the greater number of more recent models.
It is very likely that nearly all land areas will warm more rapidly
than the global average, particularly those at northern high
latitudes in the cold season. Results (see Figure 21) from recent
AOGCM simulations forced with SRES A2 and B2 emissions
scenarios indicate that in winter the warming for all highlatitude northern regions exceeds the global mean warming in
each model by more than 40% (1.3 to 6.3C for the range of
models and scenarios considered). In summer, warming is in
excess of 40% above the global mean change in central and
northern Asia. Only in south Asia and southern South America
in June/July/ August, and Southeast Asia for both seasons, do the
models consistently show warming less than the global average.
Simple climate model results
Due to computational expense, AOGCMs can only be run for
a limited number of scenarios. A simple model can be calibrated
to represent globally averaged AOGCM responses and run
for a much larger number of scenarios.
The globally averaged surface temperature is projected to
increase by 1.4 to 5.8C (Figure 22(a)) over the period 1990
to 2100. These results are for the full range of 35 SRES
scenarios, based on a number of climate models.6, 7 Temperature
increases are projected to be greater than those in the SAR,
which were about 1.0 to 3.5C based on six IS92 scenarios.
The higher projected temperatures and the wider range are
due primarily to the lower projected SO2 emissions in the SRES
scenarios relative to the IS92 scenarios. The projected rate of
warming is much larger than the observed changes during the

206

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

20th century and is very likely to be without precedent during
at least the last 10,000 years, based on palaeoclimate data.
The relative ranking of the SRES scenarios in terms of global
mean temperature changes with time. In particular, for
scenarios with higher fossil fuel use (hence, higher carbon
dioxide emissions, e.g., A2), the SO2 emissions are also higher.
In the near term (to around 2050), the cooling effect of higher
sulphur dioxide emissions significantly reduces the warming
caused by increased emissions of greenhouse gases in scenarios
such as A2. The opposite effect is seen for scenarios B1 and
B2, which have lower fossil fuel emissions as well as lower
SO2 emissions, and lead to a larger near-term warming. In the
longer term, however, the level of emissions of long-lived
greenhouse gases such as CO2 and N2O become the dominant
determinants of the resulting climate changes.
By 2100, differences in emissions in the SRES scenarios and
different climate model responses contribute similar uncertainty
to the range of global temperature change. Further uncertainties
arise due to uncertainties in the radiative forcing. The largest
forcing uncertainty is that due to the sulphate aerosols.
F.4. Projections of Future Changes in Precipitation
Globally averaged water vapour, evaporation and precipitation
are projected to increase. At the regional scale both increases
and decreases in precipitation are seen. Results (see Figure 23)
from recent AOGCM simulations forced with SRES A2 and
B2 emissions scenarios indicate that it is likely for precipitation
to increase in both summer and winter over high-latitude
regions. In winter, increases are also seen over northern midlatitudes, tropical Africa and Antarctica, and in summer in
southern and eastern Asia. Australia, central America, and
southern Africa show consistent decreases in winter rainfall.
Based on patterns emerging from a limited number of studies
with current AOGCMs, older GCMs, and regionalisation
studies, there is a strong correlation between precipitation
interannual variability and mean precipitation. Future
increases in mean precipitation will likely lead to increases in
variability. Conversely, precipitation variability will likely
decrease only in areas of reduced mean precipitation.

6

Complex physically based climate models are the main tool for
projecting future climate change. In order to explore the range of
scenarios, these are complemented by simple climate models calibrated
to yield an equivalent response in temperature and sea level to complex
climate models. These projections are obtained using a simple climate
model whose climate sensitivity and ocean heat uptake are calibrated
to each of 7 complex climate models. The climate sensitivity used in
the simple model ranges from 1.7 to 4.2C, which is comparable to the
commonly accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5C.
7
This range does not include uncertainties in the modelling of radiative
forcing, e.g. aerosol forcing uncertainties. A small carbon cycle climate
feedback is included

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

A2

B2
Figure 20: The annual mean change of the temperature (colour shading) and its range (isolines) (Unit: C) for the SRES scenario A2 (upper
panel) and the SRES scenario B2 (lower panel). Both SRES scenarios show the period 2071 to 2100 relative to the period 1961 to 1990 and
were performed by OAGCMs. [Based on Figures 9.10d and 9.10e]

207

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

F.5. Projections of Future Changes in Extreme Events

everywhere. There is projected to be a general drying of the midcontinental areas during summer. This is ascribed to a combination
of increased temperature and potential evaporation that is not
balanced by increases of precipitation. There is little agreement
yet among models concerning future changes in mid-latitude storm
intensity, frequency, and variability. There is little consistent
evidence that shows changes in the projected frequency of
tropical cyclones and areas of formation. However, some measures
of intensities show projected increases, and some theoretical
and modelling studies suggest that the upper limit of these
intensities could increase. Mean and peak precipitation intensities
from tropical cyclones are likely to increase appreciably.

It is only recently that changes in extremes of weather and climate
observed to date have been compared to changes projected by
models (Table 4). More hot days and heat waves are very likely
over nearly all land areas. These increases are projected to be
largest mainly in areas where soil moisture decreases occur.
Increases in daily minimum temperature are projected to occur
over nearly all land areas and are generally larger where snow
and ice retreat. Frost days and cold waves are very likely to
become fewer. The changes in surface air temperature and surface
absolute humidity are projected to result in increases in the heat
index (which is a measure of the combined effects of temperature
and moisture). The increases in surface air temperature are
also projected to result in an increase in the "cooling degree
days" (which is a measure of the amount of cooling required on
a given day once the temperature exceeds a given threshold)
and a decrease in "heating degree days". Precipitation extremes
are projected to increase more than the mean and the intensity
of precipitation events are projected to increase. The frequency
of extreme precipitation events is projected to increase almost

For some other extreme phenomena, many of which may have
important impacts on the environment and society, there is
currently insufficient information to assess recent trends, and
confidence in models and understanding is inadequate to make
firm projections. In particular, very small-scale phenomena
such as thunderstorms, tornadoes, hail, and lightning are not
simulated in global models. Insufficient analysis has occurred
of how extra-tropical cyclones may change.

i

i
i

i
i
i

i

i
i

i
i

i
i

i
i

i

i

i
i

i
i

i

Change in temperature relative to model's global mean

i

Much greater than average warming
A2 B2
Greater than average warming
DJF
Less than average warming
Inconsistent magnitude of warming JJA
Cooling

i

Figure 21: Analysis of inter-model consistency in regional relative warming (warming relative to each model's global average warming).
Regions are classified as showing either agreement on warming in excess of 40% above the global average (`Much greater than average
warming'), agreement on warming greater than the global average (`Greater than average warming'), agreement on warming less than the
global average (`Less than average warming'), or disagreement amongst models on the magnitude of regional relative warming (`Inconsistent
magnitude of warming'). There is also a category for agreement on cooling (which never occurs). A consistent result from at least seven of
the nine models is deemed necessary for agreement. The global annual average warming of the models used span 1.2 to 4.5C for A2 and
0.9 to 3.4C for B2, and therefore a regional 40% amplification represents warming ranges of 1.7 to 6.3C for A2 and 1.3 to 4.7C for B2.
[Based on Chapter 10, Box 1 , Figure 1]

208

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

F.6. Projections of Future Changes in Thermohaline
Circulation
Most models show weakening of the Northern Hemisphere
Thermohaline Circulation (THC), which contributes to a

reduction of the surface warming in the northern North Atlantic.
Even in models where the THC weakens, there is still a warming
over Europe due to increased greenhouse gases. In experiments
where the atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration is stabilised
at twice its present day value, the North Atlantic THC is

(a) 6
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92e high
IS92a
IS92c low

Temperature change (C)

5

4

Several models
all SRES
envelope
Model ensemble
all SRES
envelope
(TAR method)

3

2

1

Bars show the
range in 2100
produced by
several models

0
2000

2020

2040
Year

2060

2080

2100

(b) 7

Temperature change (C)

6

5

A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2
IS92a (TAR method)

Several models
all SRES
envelope
Model ensemble
all SRES
envelope

4

3

2
Bars show the
range in 2100
produced by
several models

1

0
1800

1900

2000

2100

Year
Figure 22: Simple model results: (a) global mean temperature projections for the six illustrative SRES scenarios using a simple climate model
tuned to a number of complex models with a range of climate sensitivities. Also for comparison, following the same method, results are shown
for IS92a. The darker shading represents the envelope of the full set of thirty-five SRES scenarios using the average of the model results (mean
climate sensitivity is 2.8C). The lighter shading is the envelope based on all seven model projections (with climate sensitivity in the range 1.7
to 4.2C). The bars show, for each of the six illustrative SRES scenarios, the range of simple model results in 2100 for the seven AOGCM model
tunings. (b) Same as (a) but results using estimated historical anthropogenic forcing are also used. [Based on Figures 9.14 and 9.13b]

209

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

0
0 0

i i
i i

i i

i i

i

i i

i

i i

i i

i
i 0
i 0

i i

0 i
i i

i
i

i
i

0 0
0 i
i

i
i

Change in precipitation
Large increase
Small increase
0 No change
Small decrease
Large decrease
i Inconsistent sign

A2 B2
DJF
JJA

Figure 23: Analysis of inter-model consistency in regional precipitation change. Regions are classified as showing either agreement on increase
with an average change of greater than 20% (`Large increase'), agreement on increase with an average change between 5 and 20% (`Small
increase'), agreement on a change between -5 and +5% or agreement with an average change between -5 and 5% (`No change'), agreement
on decrease with an average change between -5 and -20% (`Small decrease'), agreement on decrease with an average change of less than
-20% (`Large decrease'), or disagreement (`Inconsistent sign'). A consistent result from at least seven of the nine models is deemed
necessary for agreement. [Based on Chapter 10, Box 1, Figure 2]

projected to recover from initial weakening within one to
several centuries. The THC could collapse entirely in either
hemisphere if the rate of change in radiative forcing is large
enough and applied long enough. Models indicate that a decrease
of the THC reduces its resilience to perturbations, i.e., a once
reduced THC appears to be less stable and a shut-down can
become more likely. However, it is too early to say with
confidence whether an irreversible collapse in the THC is likely
or not, or at what threshold it might occur and what the climate
implications could be. None of the current projections with
coupled models exhibits a complete shut-down of the THC
by 2100. Although the North Atlantic THC weakens in most
models, the relative roles of surface heat and fresh water fluxes
vary from model to model. Wind stress changes appear to play
only a minor role in the transient response.
F.7. Projections of Future Changes in Modes of
Natural Variability
Many models show a mean El Nino-like response in the tropical
Pacific, with the central and eastern equatorial Pacific sea
surface temperatures projected to warm more than the western
equatorial Pacific and with a corresponding mean eastward shift
of precipitation. Although many models show an El Nino-like

210

IPCC Third Assessment Report

change of the mean state of tropical Pacific sea surface
temperatures, the cause is uncertain. It has been related to changes
in the cloud radiative forcing and/or evaporative damping of
the east-west sea surface temperature gradient in some models.
Confidence in projections of changes in future frequency,
amplitude, and spatial pattern of El Nino events in the tropical
Pacific is tempered by some shortcomings in how well El Nino
is simulated in complex models. Current projections show little
change or a small increase in amplitude for El Nino events
over the next 100 years. However, even with little or no change
in El Nino amplitude, global warming is likely to lead to greater
extremes of drying and heavy rainfall and increase the risk of
droughts and floods that occur with El Nino events in many
regions. It also is likely that warming associated with increasing
greenhouse gas concentrations will cause an increase of Asian
summer monsoon precipitation variability. Changes in monsoon
mean duration and strength depend on the details of the emission
scenario. The confidence in such projections is limited by how
well the climate models simulate the detailed seasonal
evolution of the monsoons. There is no clear agreement on
changes in frequency or structure of naturally occurring modes
of variability, such as the North Atlantic Oscillation, i.e., the
magnitude and character of the changes vary across the models.

The Scientific Basis

WGI Technical Summary

Table 4: Estimates of confidence in observed and projected changes in extreme weather and climate events. The table depicts
an assessment of confidence in observed changes in extremes of weather and climate during the latter half of the 20th century
(left column) and in projected changes during the 21st century (right column)a. This assessment relies on observational and
modelling studies, as well as physical plausibility of future projections across all commonly used scenarios and is based on
expert judgement (see Footnote 4). [Based upon Table 9.6]
Confidence in observed changes
(latter half of the 20th century)

Changes in Phenomenon

Confidence in projected changes
(during the 21st century)

Likely

Higher maximum temperatures and Very likely
more hot days over nearly all land areas

Very likely

Higher minimum temperatures,
fewer cold days and frost days over
nearly all land areas

Very likely

Very likely

Reduced diurnal temperatures
range over most land areas

Very likely

Likely, over many areas

Increase of heat index8 over land areas Very likely, over most areas

Likely, over many Northern Hemisphere
mid- to high latitude land areas

More intense percipitation eventsb

Very likely, over many areas

Likely, in a few areas

Increased summer continental
drying and associated risk of
drought

Likely, over most mid-latitude
continental interiors (lack of consistent
projections in other areas)

Not observed in the few analyses
available

Increase in tropical cyclone peak
wind intensitiesc

Likely, over some areas

Insufficient data for assassement

Increase in tropical cyclone mean
and peak precipitation intensitiesc

Likely, over some areas

a

For more details see Chapter 2 (observations) and Chapter 9, 10 (projections).
For other areas, there are either insufficient data or conflicting analyses.
c
Past and future changes in tropical cyclone location and frequency are uncertain.
b

F.8. Projections of Future Changes in Land Ice (Glaciers,
Ice Caps and Ice Sheets), Sea Ice and Snow Cover
Glaciers and ice caps will continue their widespread retreat
during the 21st century and Northern Hemisphere snow cover
and sea ice are projected to decrease further. Methods have
been developed recently for estimating glacier melt from
seasonally and geographically dependent patterns of surface
air temperature change, that are obtained from AOGCM
experiments. Modelling studies suggest that the evolution of
glacial mass is controlled principally by temperature changes,
rather than precipitation changes, on the global average.
The Antarctic ice sheet is likely to gain mass because of greater
precipitation, while the Greenland ice sheet is likely to lose
mass because the increase in runoff will exceed the precipitation
increase. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) has attracted
special attention because it contains enough ice to raise sea level
8

Heat index: A combination of temperature and humidity that measures
effects on human comfort.

by 6 m and because of suggestions that instabilities associated
with its being grounded below sea level may result in rapid
ice discharge when the surrounding ice shelves are weakened.
However, loss of grounded ice leading to substantial sea level
rise from this source is now widely agreed to be very unlikely
during the 21st century, although its dynamics are still inadequately
understood, especially for projections on longer time-scales.
F.9. Projections of Future Changes in Sea Level
Projections of global average sea level rise from 1990 to 2100,
using a range of AOGCMs following the IS92a scenario
(including the direct effect of sulphate aerosol emissions), lie
in the range 0.11 to 0.77 m. This range reflects the systematic
uncertainty of modelling. The main contributions to this sea
level rise are:
* a thermal expansion of 0.11 to 0.43 m, accelerating through
the 21st century;
* a glacier contribution of 0.01 to 0.23 m;
* a Greenland contribution of -0.02 to 0.09 m; and
* an Antarctic contribution of -0.17 to +0.02 m.

211

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Also included in the computation of the total change are smaller
contributions from thawing of permafrost, deposition of
sediment, and the ongoing contributions from ice sheets as a
result of climate change since the Last Glacial Maximum. To
establish the range of sea level rise resulting from the choice
of different SRES scenarios, results for thermal expansion and
land-ice change from simple models tuned to several AOGCMs
are used (as in Section F.3 for temperature).

improved models which give a smaller contribution from
glaciers and ice sheets. If terrestrial storage continues at its
current rates, the projections could be changed by -0.21 to
0.11 m. For an average of the AOGCMs, the SRES scenarios
give results that differ by 0.02 m or less for the first half of the
21st century. By 2100, they vary over a range amounting to
about 50% of the central value. Beyond the 21st century, sea
level rise depends strongly on the emissions scenario.

For the full set of SRES scenarios, a sea level rise of 0.09 to
0.88 m is projected for 1990 to 2100 (see Figure 24), primarily
from thermal expansion and loss of mass from glaciers and
ice caps. The central value is 0.48 m, which corresponds to an
average rate of about two to four times the rate over the 20th
century. The range of sea level rise presented in the SAR was
0.13 to 0.94 m based on the IS92 scenarios. Despite higher
temperature change projections in this assessment, the sea level
projections are slightly lower, primarily due to the use of

Models agree on the qualitative conclusion that the range of
regional variation in sea level change is substantial compared
to global average sea level rise. However, confidence in the
regional distribution of sea level change from AOGCMs is
low because there is little similarity between models, although
nearly all models project greater than average rise in the Arctic
Ocean and less than average rise in the Southern Ocean.
Further, land movements, both isostatic and tectonic, will
continue through the 21st century at rates that are unaffected

1.0
A1B
A1T
A1FI
A2
B1
B2

Sea level rise (m)

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040 2050
Year

2060

2070

2080

2090

2100

Figure 24: Global average sea level rise 1990 to 2100 for the SRES scenarios. Thermal expansion and land ice changes were calculated
using a simple climate model calibrated separately for each of seven AOGCMs, and contributions from changes in permafrost, the effect of
sediment deposition and the long-term adjustment of the ice sheets to past climate change were added. Each of the six lines appearing in
the key is the average of AOGCMs for one of the six illustrative scenarios. The region in dark shading shows the range of the average of
AOGCMs for all thirty five SRES scenarios. The region in light shading shows the range of all AOGCMs for all thirty five scenarios. The region
delimited by the outermost lines shows the range of all AOGCMs and scenarios including uncertainty in land-ice changes, permafrost
changes and sediment deposition. Note that this range does not allow for uncertainty relating to ice-dynamic changes in the West Antarctic
ice sheet. [Based on Figure 11.12]

212

IPCC Third Assessment Report

by climate change. It can be expected that by 2100, many
regions currently experiencing relative sea level fall will instead
have a rising relative sea level. Lastly, extreme high water
levels will occur with increasing frequency as a result of mean
sea level rise. Their frequency may be further increased if storms
become more frequent or severe as a result of climate change.
F.10. Projections of Future Changes in Response
to CO2 Concentration Stabilisation Profiles
Greenhouse gases and aerosols

WGI Technical Summary

(a)

1100
1000

CO2 concentration (ppm)

The Scientific Basis

Stabilisation scenarios

WRE1000

900
800
WRE750
700
WRE650
600

WRE550

500

WRE450

400
300

(b)

20

Temperature
Global mean temperature continues to increase for hundreds
of years at a rate of a few tenths of a degree per century after
concentrations of CO2 have been stabilised, due to long timescales in the ocean. The temperature implications of CO2
concentration profiles leading to stabilisation from 450 ppm
to 1,000 ppm were studied using a simple climate model tuned
to seven AOGCMs with a mean climate sensitivity of 2.8C.
For all the pathways leading to stabilisation, the climate system
shows considerable warming during the 21st century and beyond
(see Figure 26). The lower the level at which concentrations
stabilise, the smaller the total temperature change.
Sea level
If greenhouse gas concentrations were stabilised (even at
present levels), sea level would nonetheless continue to rise
for hundreds of years. After 500 years, sea level rise from thermal

CO2 emissions (PgC/yr)

Bern-CC
1000
750

15
650
550
10
450
5

0

(c)

20
ISAM

CO2 emissions (PgC/yr)

All of the stabilisation profiles studied require CO2 emissions
to eventually drop well below current levels. Anthropogenic
CO2 emission rates that arrive at stable CO2 concentration
levels from 450 to 1,000 ppm were deduced from the
prescribed CO2 profiles (Figure 25a). The results (Figure 25b)
are not substantially different from those presented in the SAR;
however, the range is larger, mainly due to the range of future
terrestrial carbon uptake caused by different assumptions in
the models. Stabilisation at 450, 650 or 1,000 ppm would require
global anthropogenic emissions to drop below 1990 levels
within a few decades, about a century, or about two centuries,
respectively, and continue to steadily decrease thereafter.
Although there is sufficient uptake capacity in the ocean to
incorporate 70 to 80% of foreseeable anthropogenic CO2
emissions to the atmosphere, this process takes centuries due
to the rate of ocean mixing. As a result, even several centuries
after emissions occurred, about a quarter of the increase in
concentration caused by these emissions is still present in the
atmosphere. To maintain constant CO2 concentration beyond
2300 requires emissions to drop to match the rate of carbon
sinks at that time. Natural land and ocean sinks with the
capacity to persist for hundreds or thousands of years are small
(<0.2 PgC/yr).

1000
15

650

750

550
10
450
5

0
2000

2100

2200

2300

Year

Figure 25: Projected CO2 emissions permitting stabilisation of
atmospheric CO2 concentrations at different final values. Panel (a)
shows the assumed trajectories of CO2 concentration (WRE
scenarios) and panels (b) and (c) show the implied CO2 emissions,
as projected with two fast carbon cycle models, Bern-CC and ISAM.
The model ranges for ISAM were obtained by tuning the model to
approximate the range of responses to CO2 and climate from model
intercomparisons. This approach yields a lower bound on uncertainties
in the carbon cycle response. The model ranges for Bern-CC were
obtained by combining different bounding assumptions about the
behaviour of the CO2 fertilisation effect, the response of heterotrophic
respiration to temperature and the turnover time of the ocean, thus
approaching an upper bound on uncertainties in the carbon cycle
response. For each model, the upper and lower bounds are indicated
by the top and bottom of the shaded area. Alternatively, the lower
bound (where hidden) is indicated by a hatched line. [Based on
Figure 3.13]

expansion may have reached only half of its eventual level,
which models suggest may lie within a range of 0.5 to 2.0 m
and 1 to 4 m for CO2 levels of twice and four times preindustrial, respectively. The long time-scale is characteristic
of the weak diffusion and slow circulation processes that
transport heat into the deep ocean.

213

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

The loss of a substantial fraction of the total glacier mass is
likely. Areas that are currently marginally glaciated are most
likely to become ice-free.

Current ice dynamic models project that the West Antarctic
ice sheet (WAIS) will contribute no more than 3 mm/yr to sea
level rise over the next thousand years, even if significant
changes were to occur in the ice shelves. Such results are
strongly dependent on model assumptions regarding climate
change scenarios, ice dynamics and other factors. Apart from
the possibility of an internal ice dynamic instability, surface
melting will affect the long-term viability of the Antarctic ice
sheet. For warmings of more than 10C, simple runoff models
predict that a zone of net mass loss would develop on the ice
sheet surface. Irreversible disintegration of the WAIS would
result because the WAIS cannot retreat to higher ground once
its margins are subjected to surface melting and begin to recede.
Such a disintegration would take at least a few millennia.
Thresholds for total disintegration of the East Antarctic ice
sheet by surface melting involve warmings above 20C, a
situation that has not occurred for at least 15 million years
and which is far more than predicted by any scenario of climate
change currently under consideration.

Temperature change (C)

Models project that a local annual average warming of larger
than 3C, sustained for millennia, would lead to virtually a
complete melting of the Greenland ice sheet with a resulting sea
level rise of about 7 m. Projected temperatures over Greenland
are generally greater than globally averaged temperatures by
a factor of 1.2 to 3.1 for the range of models used in Chapter
11. For a warming over Greenland of 5.5C, consistent with
mid-range stabilisation scenarios (see Figure 26), the Greenland
ice sheet is likely to contribute about 3 m in 1,000 years. For
a warming of 8C, the contribution is about 6 m, the ice sheet
being largely eliminated. For smaller warmings, the decay of
the ice sheet would be substantially slower (see Figure 27).

1,000
4
750
650

3

550
2

450
ppm

1

0
2000

The previous sections have contained descriptions of the
current state of knowledge of the climate of the past and
present, the current understanding of the forcing agents and
processes in the climate system and how well they can be
represented in climate models. Given the knowledge possessed
today, the best assessment was given whether climate change
can be detected and whether that change can be attributed to
human influence. With the best tools available today, projections

214

IPCC Third Assessment Report

2200
Year

2300

600
+8C

500
400
300

+5.5C

200
100
0
2000

G. Advancing Understanding

2100

Figure 26: Simple model results: Projected global mean temperature
changes when the concentration of CO2 is stabilised following the
WRE profiles (see Chapter 9 Section 9.3.3). For comparison, results
based on the S profiles in the SAR are also shown in green (S1000
not available). The results are the average produced by a simple
climate model tuned to seven AOGCMs. The baseline scenario is
scenario A1B, this is specified only to 2100. After 2100, the emissions
of gases other than CO2 are assumed to remain constant at their
A1B 2100 values. The projections are labelled according to the level
of CO2 stabilisation. The broken lines after 2100 indicate increased
uncertainty in the simple climate model results beyond 2100. The
black dots indicate the time of CO2 stabilisation. The stabilisation
year for the WRE1000 profile is 2375. [Based on Figure 9.16]

Global sea level change (cm)

Ice sheets will continue to react to climatic change during the
next several thousand years, even if the climate is stabilised.
Together, the present Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets
contain enough water to raise sea level by almost 70 m if they
were to melt, so that only a small fractional change in their
volume would have a significant effect.

5

+3C

2200

2400

2600

2800

3000

Year AD

Figure 27: Response of the Greenland ice sheet to three climatic
warming scenarios during the third millennium expressed in
equivalent changes of global sea level. The curve labels refer to
the mean temperature rise over Greenland by 3000 AD as predicted
by two-dimensional climate and ocean model forced by greenhouse
gas concentration rises until 2130 AD and kept constant after that.
Note that projected temperatures over Greenland are generally
greater globally averaged temperatures by a factor of 1.2 to 3.1 for
the models used in Chapter 11. [Based on Figure 11.16]

The Scientific Basis

were made of how the climate could change in the future for
different scenarios of emissions of greenhouse gases.
This Section looks into the future in a different way. Uncertainties
are present in each step of the chain from emissions of greenhouse
gases and aerosols, through to the impacts that they have on
the climate system and society (see Figure 28). Many factors
continue to limit the ability to detect, attribute, and understand
current climate change and to project what future climate
changes may be. Further work is needed in nine broad areas.

WGI Technical Summary

the climate system per se, it is important to understand this
variability and to expand the emerging capability of predicting
patterns of organised variability such as ENSO.
Explore more fully the probabilistic character of future climate
states by developing multiple ensembles of model calculations.
The climate system is a coupled non-linear chaotic system, and
therefore the long-term prediction of future exact climate states
is not possible. Rather the focus must be upon the prediction
of the probability distribution of the system's future possible
states by the generation of ensembles of model solutions.

G.1. Data
Arrest the decline of observational networks in many parts of
the world. Unless networks are significantly improved, it may
be difficult or impossible to detect climate change in many
areas of the globe.
Expand the observational foundation for climate studies to
provide accurate, long-term data with expanded temporal and
spatial coverage. Given the complexity of the climate system
and the inherent multi-decadal time-scale, there is a need for
long-term consistent data to support climate and environmental
change investigations and projections. Data from the present
and recent past, climate-relevant data for the last few centuries,
and for the last several millennia are all needed. There is a
particular shortage of data in polar regions and data for the
quantitative assessment of extremes on the global scale.
G.2. Climate Processes and Modelling
Estimate better future emissions and concentrations of
greenhouse gases and aerosols. It is particularly important
that improvements are realised in deriving concentrations from
emissions of gases and particularly aerosols, in addressing
biogeochemical sequestration and cycling, and specifically,
in determining the spatial-temporal distribution of CO2 sources
and sinks, currently and in the future.
Understand and characterise more completely dominant
processes (e.g., ocean mixing) and feedbacks (e.g., from clouds
and sea ice) in the atmosphere, biota, land and ocean surfaces,
and deep oceans. These sub-systems, phenomena, and
processes are important and merit increased attention to
improve prognostic capabilities generally. The interplay of
observation and models will be the key for progress. The rapid
forcing of a non-linear system has a high prospect of producing
surprises.
Address more completely patterns of long-term climate
variability. This topic arises both in model calculations and in
the climate system. In simulations, the issue of climate drift
within model calculations needs to be clarified better in part
because it compounds the difficulty of distinguishing signal
and noise. With respect to the long-term natural variability in

Improve the integrated hierarchy of global and regional
climate models with emphasis on improving the simulation of
regional impacts and extreme weather events. This will require
improvements in the understanding of the coupling between
the major atmospheric, oceanic, and terrestrial systems, and
extensive diagnostic modelling and observational studies that
evaluate and improve simulative performance. A particularly
important issue is the adequacy of data needed to attack the
question of changes in extreme events.
G.3. Human Aspects
Link more formally physical climate-biogeochemical models
with models of the human system and thereby provide the basis
for expanded exploration of possible cause-effect-cause patterns
linking human and non-human components of the Earth system.
At present, human influences generally are treated only through
emission scenarios that provide external forcings to the climate
system. In future more comprehensive models are required in
which human activities need to begin to interact with the dynamics
of physical, chemical, and biological sub-systems through a
diverse set of contributing activities, feedbacks and responses.
G.4. International Framework
Accelerate internationally progress in understanding climate
change by strengthening the international framework that is
needed to co-ordinate national and institutional efforts so that
research, computational, and observational resources may
be used to the greatest overall advantage. Elements of this
framework exist in the international programmes supported
by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and the United
Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO). There is a corresponding need for strengthening
the co-operation within the international research community,
building research capacity in many regions and, as is the goal
of this assessment, effectively describing research advances
in terms that are relevant to decision making.

215

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Source Information: Technical Summary
Socio-economic assumptions
(WGII/Ch 3; WGIII/Ch 2 - SRES)

This Appendix provides the cross-reference of the topics in
the Technical Summary (page and section) to the sections of
the chapters that contain expanded information about the topic.

Emissions scenarios

Concentration projections

Section A: Introduction

(WGI/Ch 6)

Climate projections
(WGI/Ch 8,9,10)

Sea level projections

Climate scenarios

(WGI/Ch 11)

(WGI/Ch 13)

(WGI/Ch 3,4,5,7; WGII/Ch 3)

Radiative forcing projections

Interactions and feedbacks

(WGI/Ch 3,4,5)

(WGII; WGIII)

Policy responses: adaptation and mitigation

(WGIII/Ch 2 - SRES)

Global change scenarios

TS Page
168

168

(WGII/Ch 3)

Impacts
(WGII)

Figure 28: The cascade of uncertainties in projections to be considered
in developing climate and related scenarios for climate change impact,
adaptation, and mitigation assessment. [Based on Figure 13.2]

169

Technical Summary Section and Topic -
Chapter Section
A.1. The IPCC and its Working Groups
Introduction to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (from the IPCC Secretariat,
Geneva) or the IPCC web page at http://
www.ipcc.ch
A.2. The First and Second Assessment Reports of
Working Group I
IPCC, 1990a: Climate Change: The IPCC
Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins
and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 365 pp.
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The
Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific
Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and
S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 198 pp.
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative
Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of
the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. J.T. Houghton,
L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A.
Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell
(eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom, 339 pp.
IPCC, 1996a: Climate Change 1995: The Science
of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander,
N Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
A.3. The Third Assessment Report: This Technical
Summary
Background to these questions is in Chapter 1.
Box 1: What drives changes in climate? - Chapter 1.

Section B: The Observed Changes in the Climate
System
TS Page
171-174

216

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Technical Summary Section and Topic -
Chapter Section
B.1. Observed Changes in Temperature
Temperatures in the instrumental record for land
and oceans - Chapter 2.2.2 and 2.3.
Temperatures above the surface layer from satellite

The Scientific Basis

174-175

175

175

175-176

176-177

177-179

and weather balloon records - Chapter 2.2.3 and 2.2.4.
Surface temperatures during the pre-instrumental
record from the proxy record
Last 1,000 years - Chapter 2.3.
Last glacial and deglaciation - Chapter 2.4.
B.2. Observed Changes in Precipitation and
Atmospheric Moisture
Annual land-surface precipitation - Chapter 2.5.2.
Water vapour - Chapter 2.5.3.
Cloud amounts - Chapter 2.5.5.
B.3. Observed Changes in Snow Cover and Landand Sea-Ice Extent
Snow cover and land-ice extent - Chapter 2.2.5.
Sea-ice extent - Chapter 2.2.5.
Arctic sea-ice thickness - Chapter 2.2.5.
B.4. Observed Changes in Sea Level Changes
During the Instrumental Record
Tide gauge data for the 20th century - Chapter 11.3.2.
Box 2: What causes sea level to change? - Chapter
11.2.
Changes during the pre-instrumental record Chapter 11.3.1.
B.5. Observed Changes in Atmospheric and
Oceanic Circulation Patterns
El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) - Chapter
2.6.2 and 2.6.3.
North Atlantic, Arctic, and Antarctic oscillations Chapter 2.6.5 and 2.6.6.
B.6. Observed Changes in Climate Variability and
Extreme Weather and Climate Events
Heavy and extreme precipitation - Chapter 2.7.2.
Tropical and extra-tropical storms - Chapter 2.7.3.
B.7. The Collective Picture: A Warming World and
Other Changes in the Climate System
A warming world - Chapter 2.8.
Little or no change - Chapter 2.2.5 and 2.7.3.

WGI Technical Summary

Gases with only indirect radiative influence Chapter 4.2.3, Chapter 6.13
186-187 C.3. Observed and Modelled Changes in Aerosols
Observed and modelled changes in aerosols Chapter 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4, Chapter 6.7 and 6.8.
187
C.4. Observed Changes in Other Anthropogenic
Forcing Agents
Land-use (albedo) change - Chapter 6.13.
187-188 C.5. Observed and Modelled Changes in Solar
Activity
Observed and modelled changes in solar activity Chapter 6.10.
188
C.6. Global Warming Potentials
Global warming potentials - Chapter 6.12
Section D: The Simulation of the Climate System
and Its Changes
TS Page
188-193

193-194

Section C: The Forcing Agents That Cause Climate
Change
194-195
TS Page
180-185

185-186

Technical Summary Section and Topic -
Chapter Section
C.1. Observed Changes in Globally Well-Mixed
Greenhouse Gas Concentrations and Radiative
Forcing.
Carbon dioxide - Chapter 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.3.1, 3.3.2,
and 3.5, Chapter 6.13
Methane - Chapter 4.2.1, Chapter 6.13.
Nitrous Oxide - Chapter 4.2, Chapter 6.13.
Halocarbons and Related Compounds - Chapter
4.2.2, Chapter 6.13.
C.2. Observed Changes in Other Radiatively
Important Gases
Atmospheric ozone - Chapter 4.2.2 and 4.2.4,
Chapter 6.13.

195-196

Technical Summary Section and Topic -
Chapter Section
D.1. Climate Processes and Feedbacks
Box 3: Climate Models: How are they built and
how are they applied? - Chapter 8.3.
Water vapour - Chapter 7.2.1.
Clouds - Chapter 7.2.2 and 7.2.3, Chapter 8.5.1.
Stratosphere - Chapter 7.2.4 and 7.2.5, Chapter 8.5.1.
Ocean - Chapter 7.3, Chapter 8.5.2.
Cryosphere - Chapter 7.5, Chapter 8.5.3.
Land surface - Chapter 7.4, Chapter 8.5.4.
Carbon cycle - Chapter 3.6.
D.2. The Coupled Systems
Modes of natural variability - Chapter 7.6, Chapter
8.7.
Box 4: The El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
- Chapter 7.6.5, Chapter 8.7.1
The thermohaline circulation - Chapter 7.3.7 and
7.7, Chapter 9.3.4.
Non-linear events and rapid climate change Chapter 7.7.
D.3. Regionalisation Techniques
Categories of techniques - Chapter 10.1, 10.2,
Chapter 13.
Coarse resolution AOGCMs - Chapter 10.3,
Chapter 13.
High resolution RCMs - Chapter 10.5, Chapter 13.
D.4. Overall Assessment of Abilities
Flux adjustment - Chapter 7.2, 7.3 and 7.6, Chapter
8.4 and 8.9.
Climate of the 20th century - Chapter 8.6.
Extreme events - Chapter 8.8.
Interannual variability - Chapter 8.7.
Model intercomparisons - Chapter 8.6.2 and 8.10.

217

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Section E: The Identification of a Human Influence
on Climate Change
TS Page
196
196-197

197
197
197-198

199

199-201

201

Technical Summary Section and Topic - Chapter
Section
E.1. The Meaning of Detection and Attribution
Detection/Attribution - Chapter 12.1.1 and 12.2.
E.2. A Longer and More Closely Scrutinised
Observational Record
Three of last five years - Chapter 12.2.1.
E.3. New Model Estimates of Internal Variability
The warming over the past 100 years - Chapter 12.2.2.
E.4. New Estimates of Responses to Natural Forcing
Natural forcing alone - Chapter 12.2.3.
E.5. Sensitivity to Estimates of Climate Changes
Signals
Responses to anthropogenic forcing - Chapter 12.2.3.
Significant anthropogenic forcing contribution Chapter 12.2.3.
E.6. A Wider Range of Detection Techniques
Temperature - Chapter 12.3 and 12.4.
Sea level - Chapter 11.4.
E.7. Remaining Uncertainties in Detection and
Attribution
Summary - Chapter 12.5.
E.8. Synopsis
Most of the observed warming over the past 50
years - Chapter 12.6.

205-206

206

208
209-210

210

211

211-213

213-214

Section F: The Projections of the Earth's Future
Climate
TS Page
201-202

202-204

218

Technical Summary Section and Topic -
Chapter Section
F.1. The IPCC Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios (SRES)
SRES scenarios - Chapter 6.15.2, SRES Report.
Box 5: The Emission Scenarios of the Special
Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) - Chapter
6.15.2, SRES Report, Appendix II.
F.2. Projections of Future Changes in Greenhouse
Gases and Aerosols
CO2 concentration trajectories - Chapter 3.3 and
3.7, Appendix II.
Carbon storage in terrestrial ecosystems - Chapter
3.2 and 3.6.
Abundance of the non-CO2 greenhouse gases Chapter 4.3, Chapter 6.15, Appendix II.
Emissions of indirect greenhouse gases and
atmospheric chemistry - Chapter 4.4.4 and 4.4.5,
Chapter 6.15.
Emissions of indirect greenhouse gases and air
quality - Chapter 4.4.5
Dependence of the abundance of aerosols on
emissions - Chapter 5.5, Chapter 6.15, Appendix II.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Projected aerosol emissions and the SRES scenarios
- Chapter 5.5
Radiative forcing - Chapter 6.15, Appendix II.
F.3. Projections of Future Changes in Temperature
AOGCM Results - Chapter 9.3
Simple Climate Model Results - Chapter 9.3
F.4. Projections of Future Changes in Precipitation
Globally averaged precipitation and variability Chapter 9.3.
F.5. Projections of Future Changes in Extreme Events
Changes in extreme events - Chapter 9.3.6.
F.6. Projections of Future Changes in Thermohaline
Circulation
Weakening of Thermohaline Circulation - Chapter
9.3.4.
F.7. Projections of Future Changes in Modes of
Natural Variability
Changes in modes of natural variability - Chapter
9.3.5.
F.8. Projections of Future Changes in Land Ice
(Glaciers, Ice Caps and Ice Sheets), Sea Ice and
Snow Cover
Glaciers, ice caps, and ice sheets - Chapter 11.5.4.
F.9. Projections of Future Changes in Sea Level
Global average sea level change - Chapter 11.5.1.
Regional sea level change - Chapter 11.5.2.
Extremes of sea level - Chapter 11.5.3.
F.10. Projections of Future Changes in Response
to CO2 Concentration Stabilisation Profiles
Greenhouse gases and aerosols - Chapter 3.7.3.
Temperature - Chapter 9.3.3.
Sea level - Chapter 11.5.4.

Section G: Advancing Understanding
TS Page
215

215

215

215

Technical Summary Section and Topic - Chapter
Section
G.1. Data
Decline of observational networks and the
observing system - Chapter 14.2.1.
G.2. Climate Processes and Modelling
Greenhouse gases and aerosols - Chapter 14.2.6.
Processes - Chapter 14.2.3.
Patterns of variability - Chapter 14.2.2.
Ensembles of model results - Chapter 14.2.2.
Hierarchy of models - Chapter 14.2.2
G.3. Human Aspects
Physical system/human system - Chapter 14.3,
Chapter 13.1
G.4. International Framework
Co-ordination - Chapter 14.4.

Climate Change 2001:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Working Group II Summaries

Summary for Policymakers
A Report of Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Technical Summary of the Working Group II Report
A Report accepted by Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change but not approved in detail

Part of the Working Group II contribution to the Third Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Contents

Summary for Policymakers

221

Technical Summary

237

1. Scope and Approach of the Assessment
1.1. Mandate of the Assessment
1.2. What is Potentially at Stake?
1.3. Approach of the Assessment
1.4. Treatment of Uncertainties

238
238
238
239
240

2. Methods and Tools of the Assessment
2.1. Detecting Responses to Climate Change using
Indicator Species or Systems
2.2 Anticipating the Effects of Future Climate
Change
2.3. Integrated Assessment
2.4. Costing and Valuation
2.5. Decision Analytic Frameworks

240

3. Scenarios of Future Change
3.1. Scenarios and their Role
3.2. Socioeconomic, Land-Use, and Environmental
Scenarios
3.3. Sea-Level Rise Scenarios
3.4. Climate Scenarios
3.5. Scenarios for the 21st Century
3.6. How can We Improve Scenarios and their Use?

243
243

241
242
242
242
243

243
243
244
244
245

4. Natural and Human Systems
4.1. Water Resources
4.2. Agriculture and Food Security
4.3. Terrestrial and Freshwater Ecosystems
4.4. Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems
4.5. Human Settlements, Energy, and Industry
4.6. Insurance and Other Financial Services
4.7. Human Health

245
246
249
250
252
253
253
259

5. Regional Analyses
5.1. Africa
5.2. Asia
5.3. Australia and New Zealand
5.4. Europe
5.5. Latin America
5.6. North America
5.7. Polar Regions
5.8. Small Island States

260
260
263
267
270
271
272
276
277

6. Adaptation, Sustainable Development, and
Equity
6.1. Adaptive Capacity
6.2. Development, Sustainability, and Equity

278
280
280

7. Global Issues and Synthesis
7.1. Detection of Climate Change Impacts
7.2. Reasons for Concern

282
282
284

8. Information Needs

284

Climate Change 2001:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Summary for Policymakers

A Report of Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
This summary, approved in detail at the Sixth Session of IPCC Working Group II (Geneva, Switzerland, 13-16 February
2001), represents the formally agreed statement of the IPCC concerning the sensitivity, adaptive capacity, and vulnerability of
natural and human systems to climate change, and the potential consequences of climate change.

Based on a draft prepared by:
Q.K. Ahmad, Oleg Anisimov, Nigel Arnell, Sandra Brown, Ian Burton, Max Campos, Osvaldo Canziani, Timothy Carter,
Stewart J. Cohen, Paul Desanker, William Easterling, B. Blair Fitzharris, Donald Forbes, Habiba Gitay, Andrew Githeko,
Patrick Gonzalez, Duane Gubler, Sujata Gupta, Andrew Haines, Hideo Harasawa, Jarle Inge Holten, Bubu Pateh Jallow,
Roger Jones, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Murari Lal, Emilio Lebre La Rovere, Neil Leary, Rik Leemans, Chunzhen Liu, Chris
Magadza, Martin Manning, Luis Jose Mata, James McCarthy, Roger McLean, Anthony McMichael, Kathleen Miller, Evan
Mills, M. Monirul Qader Mirza, Daniel Murdiyarso, Leonard Nurse, Camille Parmesan, Martin Parry, Jonathan Patz, Michel
Petit, Olga Pilifosova, Barrie Pittock, Jeff Price, Terry Root, Cynthia Rosenzweig, Jose Sarukhan, John Schellnhuber, Stephen
Schneider, Robert Scholes, Michael Scott, Graham Sem, Barry Smit, Joel Smith, Brent Sohngen, Alla Tsyban, Jean-Pascal
van Ypersele, Pier Vellinga, Richard Warrick, Tom Wilbanks, Alistair Woodward, David Wratt, and many reviewers

Climate Change 2001

1. Introduction
The sensitivity, adaptive capacity, and vulnerability of natural
and human systems to climate change, and the potential
consequences of climate change, are assessed in the report of
Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability.1 This report builds upon the past assessment
reports of the IPCC, reexamining key conclusions of the earlier
assessments and incorporating results from more recent
research.2, 3

Synthesis Report

emerge from integration of information across the full report.
Each of these findings addresses a different dimension of
climate change impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability, and no
one dimension is paramount. Section 3 presents findings
regarding individual natural and human systems, and Section
4 highlights some of the issues of concern for different regions
of the world. Section 5 identifies priority research areas to
further advance understanding of the potential consequences
of and adaptation to climate change.

2. Emergent Findings
Observed changes in climate, their causes, and potential future
changes are assessed in the report of Working Group I of the
IPCC, Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. The Working
Group I report concludes, inter alia, that the globally averaged
surface temperatures have increased by 0.6  0.2C over the
20th century; and that, for the range of scenarios developed in
the IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES), the
globally averaged surface air temperature is projected by
models to warm 1.4 to 5.8C by 2100 relative to 1990, and
globally averaged sea level is projected by models to rise 0.09
to 0.88 m by 2100. These projections indicate that the warming
would vary by region, and be accompanied by increases and
decreases in precipitation. In addition, there would be changes
in the variability of climate, and changes in the frequency and
intensity of some extreme climate phenomena. These general
features of climate change act on natural and human systems
and they set the context for the Working Group II assessment.
The available literature has not yet investigated climate change
impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability associated with the
upper end of the projected range of warming.
This Summary for Policymakers, which was approved by IPCC
member governments in Geneva in February 2001, describes
the current state of understanding of the impacts, adaptation,
and vulnerability to climate change and their uncertainties.
Further details can be found in the underlying report.4 Section
2 of the Summary presents a number of general findings that

1

Climate change in IPCC usage refers to any change in climate over time,
whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity. This
usage differs from that in the Framework Convention on Climate Change,
where climate change refers to a change of climate that is attributed directly
or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global
atmosphere and that is in addition to natural climate variability observed
over comparable time periods. Attribution of climate change to natural
forcing and human activities has been addressed by Working Group I.
2
The report has been written by 183 Coordinating Lead Authors and Lead
Authors, and 243 Contributing Authors. It was reviewed by 440 government
and expert reviewers, and 33 Review Editors oversaw the review process.
3
Delegations from 100 IPCC member countries participated in the Sixth
Session of Working Group II in Geneva on 13-16 February 2001.
4
A more comprehensive summary of the report is provided in the
Technical Summary, and relevant sections of that volume are referenced
in brackets at the end of paragraphs of the Summary for Policymakers
for readers who need more information.

222

IPCC Third Assessment Report

2.1. Recent Regional Climate Changes, particularly
Temperature Increases, have Already Affected
Many Physical and Biological Systems
Available observational evidence indicates that regional
changes in climate, particularly increases in temperature, have
already affected a diverse set of physical and biological systems
in many parts of the world. Examples of observed changes
include shrinkage of glaciers, thawing of permafrost, later
freezing and earlier break-up of ice on rivers and lakes,
lengthening of mid- to high-latitude growing seasons, poleward
and altitudinal shifts of plant and animal ranges, declines of
some plant and animal populations, and earlier flowering of
trees, emergence of insects, and egg-laying in birds (see Figure
SPM-1). Associations between changes in regional temperatures
and observed changes in physical and biological systems have
been documented in many aquatic, terrestrial, and marine
environments. [2.1, 4.3, 4.4, 5.7, and 7.1]
The studies mentioned above and illustrated in Figure SPM-1
were drawn from a literature survey, which identified long-term
studies, typically 20 years or more, of changes in biological
and physical systems that could be correlated with regional
changes in temperature.5 In most cases where changes in
biological and physical systems were detected, the direction
of change was that expected on the basis of known mechanisms.
The probability that the observed changes in the expected
direction (with no reference to magnitude) could occur by
chance alone is negligible. In many parts of the world,
precipitation-related impacts may be important. At present,
there is a lack of systematic concurrent climatic and biophysical
data of sufficient length (2 or more decades) that are considered
necessary for assessment of precipitation impacts.

5

There are 44 regional studies of over 400 plants and animals, which
varied in length from about 20 to 50 years, mainly from North America,
Europe, and the southern polar region. There are 16 regional studies
covering about 100 physical processes over most regions of the world,
which varied in length from about 20 to 150 years. See Section 7.1 of
the Technical Summary for more detail.

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Hydrology
and Glaciers

WGII Summary for Policymakers

Sea Ice

Animals

Plants

Studies covering
Large Areas

Studies using
Remote Sensing

Figure SPM-1: Locations at which systematic long-term studies meet stringent criteria documenting recent temperature-related regional
climate change impacts on physical and biological systems. Hydrology, glacial retreat, and sea-ice data represent decadal to century trends.
Terrestrial and marine ecosystem data represent trends of at least 2 decades. Remote-sensing studies cover large areas. Data are for single
or multiple impacts that are consistent with known mechanisms of physical/biological system responses to observed regional temperaturerelated changes. For reported impacts spanning large areas, a representative location on the map was selected.

Factors such as land-use change and pollution also act on these
physical and biological systems, making it difficult to attribute
changes to particular causes in some specific cases. However,
taken together, the observed changes in these systems are
consistent in direction and coherent across diverse localities
and/or regions (see Figure SPM-1) with the expected effects
of regional changes in temperature. Thus, from the collective
evidence, there is high confidence6 that recent regional changes
in temperature have had discernible impacts on many physical
and biological systems.

2.2. There are Preliminary Indications that Some
Human Systems have been Affected by Recent
Increases in Floods and Droughts

6

2.3. Natural Systems are Vulnerable to Climate
Change, and Some will be Irreversibly Damaged

In this Summary for Policymakers, the following words have been used
where appropriate to indicate judgmental estimates of confidence (based
upon the collective judgment of the authors using the observational
evidence, modeling results, and theory that they have examined): very
high (95% or greater), high (67-95%), medium (33-67%), low (5-33%),
and very low (5% or less). In other instances, a qualitative scale to
gauge the level of scientific understanding is used: well established,
established-but-incomplete, competing explanations, and speculative.
The approaches used to assess confidence levels and the level of
scientific understanding, and the definitions of these terms, are presented
in Section 1.4 of the Technical Summary. Each time these terms are
used in the Summary for Policymakers, they are footnoted and in italics.

There is emerging evidence that some social and economic
systems have been affected by the recent increasing frequency
of floods and droughts in some areas. However, such systems
are also affected by changes in socioeconomic factors such as
demographic shifts and land-use changes. The relative impact
of climatic and socioeconomic factors are generally difficult
to quantify. [4.6 and 7.1]

Natural systems can be especially vulnerable to climate change
because of limited adaptive capacity (see Box SPM-1), and
some of these systems may undergo significant and irreversible
damage. Natural systems at risk include glaciers, coral reefs
and atolls, mangroves, boreal and tropical forests, polar and
alpine ecosystems, prairie wetlands, and remnant native
grasslands. While some species may increase in abundance or

223

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

1990
6

Temperature Change (C)

5
4

Reasons for Concern
6

Observed
A1FI
A1B
A1T
A2
B1
B2
IS92a

Several Models
All SRES Envelope
Risks to
Many

Large
Increase

Negative
for Most
Regions

Net
Negative
in All
Metrics

Higher

4

3

3

2
1
0
-1
1900

5

Risks to
Some

Increase

Negative
for Some
Regions

I

II

III

Positive
or
Negative
Market
Impacts;
Majority
of People
Adversely
Affected

Very
Low

IV

V

2
1
0
-1

2000
Year

2100

I
II
III
IV
V

Risks to Unique and Threatened Systems
Risks from Extreme Climate Events
Distribution of Impacts
Aggregate Impacts
Risks from Future Large-Scale Discontinuities

Figure SPM-2: Reasons for concern about projected climate change impacts. The risks of adverse impacts from climate change increase
with the magnitude of climate change. The left part of the figure displays the observed temperature increase relative to 1990 and the range of
projected temperature increase after 1990 as estimated by Working Group I of the IPCC for scenarios from the Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios. The right panel displays conceptualizations of five reasons for concern regarding climate change risks evolving through 2100.
White indicates neutral or small negative or positive impacts or risks, yellow indicates negative impacts for some systems or low risks, and
red means negative impacts or risks that are more widespread and/or greater in magnitude. The assessment of impacts or risks takes into
account only the magnitude of change and not the rate of change. Global mean annual temperature change is used in the figure as a proxy
for the magnitude of climate change, but projected impacts will be a function of, among other factors, the magnitude and rate of global and
regional changes in mean climate, climate variability and extreme climate phenomena, social and economic conditions, and adaptation.

range, climate change will increase existing risks of extinction
of some more vulnerable species and loss of biodiversity. It is
well-established6 that the geographical extent of the damage
or loss, and the number of systems affected, will increase with
the magnitude and rate of climate change (see Figure SPM-2).
[4.3 and 7.2.1]
2.4. Many Human Systems are Sensitive to Climate
Change, and Some are Vulnerable
Human systems that are sensitive to climate change include
mainly water resources; agriculture (especially food security)
and forestry; coastal zones and marine systems (fisheries);
human settlements, energy, and industry; insurance and other
financial services; and human health. The vulnerability of these
systems varies with geographic location, time, and social,
economic, and environmental conditions. [4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4,
4.5, 4.6, and 4.7]

224

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Projected adverse impacts based on models and other studies
include:
* A general reduction in potential crop yields in most tropical
and sub-tropical regions for most projected increases in
temperature [4.2]
* A general reduction, with some variation, in potential crop
yields in most regions in mid-latitudes for increases in
annual-average temperature of more than a few C [4.2]
* Decreased water availability for populations in many waterscarce regions, particularly in the sub-tropics [4.1]
* An increase in the number of people exposed to vectorborne (e.g., malaria) and water-borne diseases (e.g.,
cholera), and an increase in heat stress mortality [4.7]
* A widespread increase in the risk of flooding for many
human settlements (tens of millions of inhabitants in
settlements studied) from both increased heavy precipitation
events and sea-level rise [4.5]
* Increased energy demand for space cooling due to higher
summer temperatures. [4.5]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Box SPM-1. Climate Change Sensitivity, Adaptive
Capacity, and Vulnerability
Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either
adversely or beneficially, by climate-related stimuli. Climaterelated stimuli encompass all the elements of climate change,
including mean climate characteristics, climate variability,
and the frequency and magnitude of extremes. The effect
may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response to a
change in the mean, range, or variability of temperature) or
indirect (e.g., damages caused by an increase in the
frequency of coastal flooding due to sea-level rise).
Adaptive capacity is the ability of a system to adjust to
climate change (including climate variability and extremes)
to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of
opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
Vulnerability is the degree to which a system is susceptible
to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change,
including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is
a function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate
change and variation to which a system is exposed, its
sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.

Projected beneficial impacts based on models and other studies
include:
* Increased potential crop yields in some regions at midlatitudes for increases in temperature of less than a few C
[4.2]
* A potential increase in global timber supply from appropriately
managed forests [4.3]
* Increased water availability for populations in some waterscarce regions--for example, in parts of southeast Asia [4.1]
* Reduced winter mortality in mid- and high-latitudes [4.7]
* Reduced energy demand for space heating due to higher
winter temperatures. [4.5]
2.5. Projected Changes in Climate Extremes could
have Major Consequences
The vulnerability of human societies and natural systems to
climate extremes is demonstrated by the damage, hardship, and
death caused by events such as droughts, floods, heat waves,
avalanches, and windstorms. While there are uncertainties
attached to estimates of such changes, some extreme events
are projected to increase in frequency and/or severity during
the 21st century due to changes in the mean and/or variability
of climate, so it can be expected that the severity of their impacts
will also increase in concert with global warming (see Figure
SPM-2). Conversely, the frequency and magnitude of extreme
low temperature events, such as cold spells, is projected to
decrease in the future, with both positive and negative impacts.
The impacts of future changes in climate extremes are expected

WGII Summary for Policymakers

to fall disproportionately on the poor. Some representative
examples of impacts of these projected changes in climate
variability and climate extremes are presented in Table SPM-1.
[3.5, 4.6, 6, and 7.2.4]
2.6. The Potential for Large-Scale and Possibly
Irreversible Impacts Poses Risks that have yet to
be Reliably Quantified
Projected climate changes7 during the 21st century have the
potential to lead to future large-scale and possibly irreversible
changes in Earth systems resulting in impacts at continental
and global scales. These possibilities are very climate scenariodependent and a full range of plausible scenarios has not yet
been evaluated. Examples include significant slowing of the
ocean circulation that transports warm water to the North
Atlantic, large reductions in the Greenland and West Antarctic
Ice Sheets, accelerated global warming due to carbon cycle
feedbacks in the terrestrial biosphere, and releases of terrestrial
carbon from permafrost regions and methane from hydrates
in coastal sediments. The likelihood of many of these changes
in Earth systems is not well-known, but is probably very low;
however, their likelihood is expected to increase with the rate,
magnitude, and duration of climate change (see Figure SPM-2).
[3.5, 5.7, and 7.2.5]
If these changes in Earth systems were to occur, their impacts
would be widespread and sustained. For example, significant
slowing of the oceanic thermohaline circulation would impact
deep-water oxygen levels and carbon uptake by oceans and
marine ecosystems, and would reduce warming over parts of
Europe. Disintegration of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet or
melting of the Greenland Ice Sheet could raise global sea level
up to 3 m each over the next 1,000 years8, submerge many
islands, and inundate extensive coastal areas. Depending on
the rate of ice loss, the rate and magnitude of sea-level rise
could greatly exceed the capacity of human and natural systems
to adapt without substantial impacts. Releases of terrestrial
carbon from permafrost regions and methane from hydrates
in coastal sediments, induced by warming, would further
increase greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere and
amplify climate change. [3.5, 5.7, and 7.2.5]
2.7. Adaptation is a Necessary Strategy at All
Scales to Complement Climate Change Mitigation
Efforts
Adaptation has the potential to reduce adverse impacts of climate
change and to enhance beneficial impacts, but will incur costs

7

Details of projected climate changes, illustrated in Figure SPM-2, are
provided in the Working Group I Summary for Policymakers.
8
Details of projected contributions to sea-level rise from the West
Anarctic Ice Sheet and Greenland Ice Sheet are provided in the Working
Group I Summary for Policymakers.

225

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table SPM-1: Examples of impacts resulting from projected changes in extreme climate events.
Projected Changes during the 21st
Century in Extreme Climate
Phenomena and their Likelihooda

Representative Examples of Projected Impactsb
(all high confidence of occurrence in some areasc)

Simple Extremes
Higher maximum temperatures;
more hot days and heat wavesd over
nearly all land areas (very likelya)

* Increased incidence of death and serious illness in older age groups and urban
poor [4.7]
* Increased heat stress in livestock and wildlife [4.2 and 4.3]
* Shift in tourist destinations [Table TS-4 and 5.8]
* Increased risk of damage to a number of crops [4.2]
* Increased electric cooling demand and reduced energy supply reliability
[Table TS-4 and 4.5]

Higher (increasing) minimum
temperatures; fewer cold days, frost
days, and cold wavesd over nearly
all land areas (very likelya)

*
*
*
*

Decreased cold-related human morbidity and mortality [4.7]
Decreased risk of damage to a number of crops, and increased risk to others [4.2]
Extended range and activity of some pest and disease vectors [4.2 and 4.3]
Reduced heating energy demand [4.5]

More intense precipitation events
(very likelya over many areas)

*
*
*
*

Increased flood, landslide, avalanche, and mudslide damage [4.5]
Increased soil erosion [5.2.4]
Increased flood runoff could increase recharge of some floodplain aquifers [4.1]
Increased pressure on government and private flood insurance systems and
disaster relief [Table TS-4 and 4.6]

Increased summer drying over most
mid-latitude continental interiors
and associated risk of drought
(likelya)

*
*
*
*

Decreased crop yields [4.2]
Increased damage to building foundations caused by ground shrinkage [Table TS-4]
Decreased water resource quantity and quality [4.1 and 4.5]
Increased risk of forest fire [5.4.2]

Increase in tropical cyclone peak
wind intensities, mean and peak
precipitation intensities (likelya
over some areas)e

* Increased risks to human life, risk of infectious disease epidemics, and many
other risks [4.7]
* Increased coastal erosion and damage to coastal buildings and infrastructure
[4.5 and 7.2.4]
* Increased damage to coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs and mangroves [4.4]

Intensified droughts and floods
associated with El Nino events in
many different regions (likelya)
(see also under droughts and
intense precipitation events)

* Decreased agricultural and rangeland productivity in drought- and flood-prone
regions [4.3]
* Decreased hydro-power potential in drought-prone regions [5.1.1 and Figure TS-7]

Increased Asian summer monsoon
precipitation variability (likelya)

* Increased flood and drought magnitude and damages in temperate and tropical
Asia [5.2.4]

Increased intensity of mid-latitude
storms (little agreement between
current models)d

* Increased risks to human life and health [4.7]
* Increased property and infrastructure losses [Table TS-4]
* Increased damage to coastal ecosystems [4.4]

Complex Extremes

a

b
c
d
e

Likelihood refers to judgmental estimates of confidence used by TAR WGI: very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance). Unless
otherwise stated, information on climate phenomena is taken from the Summary for Policymakers, TAR WGI.
These impacts can be lessened by appropriate response measures.
High confidence refers to probabilities between 67 and 95% as described in Footnote 6 .
Information from TAR WGI, Technical Summary, Section F.5.
Changes in regional distribution of tropical cyclones are possible but have not been established.

and will not prevent all damages. Extremes, variability, and
rates of change are all key features in addressing vulnerability
and adaptation to climate change, not simply changes in average
climate conditions. Human and natural systems will to some

226

IPCC Third Assessment Report

degree adapt autonomously to climate change. Planned
adaptation can supplement autonomous adaptation, though
options and incentives are greater for adaptation of human
systems than for adaptation to protect natural systems.

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Adaptation is a necessary strategy at all scales to complement
climate change mitigation efforts. [6]
Experience with adaptation to climate variability and extremes
can be drawn upon to develop appropriate strategies for
adapting to anticipated climate change. Adaptation to current
climate variability and extremes often produces benefits as
well as forming a basis for coping with future climate change.
However, experience also demonstrates that there are constraints
to achieving the full measure of potential adaptation. In
addition, maladaptation, such as promoting development in
risk-prone locations, can occur due to decisions based on shortterm considerations, neglect of known climatic variability,
imperfect foresight, insufficient information, and over-reliance
on insurance mechanisms. [6]
2.8. Those with the Least Resources have the Least
Capacity to Adapt and are the Most Vulnerable
The ability of human systems to adapt to and cope with climate
change depends on such factors as wealth, technology,
education, information, skills, infrastructure, access to
resources, and management capabilities. There is potential for
developed and developing countries to enhance and/or acquire
adaptive capabilities. Populations and communities are highly
variable in their endowments with these attributes, and the
developing countries, particularly the least developed
countries, are generally poorest in this regard. As a result, they
have lesser capacity to adapt and are more vulnerable to climate
change damages, just as they are more vulnerable to other
stresses. This condition is most extreme among the poorest
people. [6.1; see also 5.1.7, 5.2.7, 5.3.5, 5.4.6, 5.6.1, 5.6.2,
5.7, and 5.8.1 for regional-scale information]
Benefits and costs of climate change effects have been
estimated in monetary units and aggregated to national,
regional, and global scales. These estimates generally exclude
the effects of changes in climate variability and extremes, do
not account for the effects of different rates of change, and
only partially account for impacts on goods and services that
are not traded in markets. These omissions are likely to result
in underestimates of economic losses and overestimates of
economic gains. Estimates of aggregate impacts are controversial
because they treat gains for some as canceling out losses for
others and because the weights that are used to aggregate across
individuals are necessarily subjective. [7.2.2 and 7.2.3]
Notwithstanding the limitations expressed above, based on a
few published estimates, increases in global mean temperature9
would produce net economic losses in many developing countries
9

WGII Summary for Policymakers

for all magnitudes of warming studied (low confidence6), and
losses would be greater in magnitude the higher the level of
warming (medium confidence6). In contrast, an increase in
global mean temperature of up to a few C would produce a
mixture of economic gains and losses in developed countries
(low confidence6), with economic losses for larger temperature
increases (medium confidence6). The projected distribution
of economic impacts is such that it would increase the disparity
in well-being between developed countries and developing
countries, with disparity growing for higher projected
temperature increases (medium confidence6). The more
damaging impacts estimated for developing countries reflects,
in part, their lesser adaptive capacity relative to developed
countries. [7.2.3]
Further, when aggregated to a global scale, world gross domestic
product (GDP) would change by  a few percent for global
mean temperature increases of up to a few C (low confidence6),
and increasing net losses would result for larger increases in
temperature (medium confidence6) (see Figure SPM-2). More
people are projected to be harmed than benefited by climate
change, even for global mean temperature increases of less
than a few C (low confidence6). These results are sensitive to
assumptions about changes in regional climate, level of
development, adaptive capacity, rate of change, the valuation
of impacts, and the methods used for aggregating monetary
losses and gains, including the choice of discount rate. [7.2.2]
The effects of climate change are expected to be greatest in
developing countries in terms of loss of life and relative effects
on investment and the economy. For example, the relative
percentage damages to GDP from climate extremes have been
substantially greater in developing countries than in developed
countries. [4.6]
2.9. Adaptation, Sustainable Development, and
Enhancement of Equity can be Mutually Reinforcing
Many communities and regions that are vulnerable to climate
change are also under pressure from forces such as population
growth, resource depletion, and poverty. Policies that lessen
pressures on resources, improve management of environmental
risks, and increase the welfare of the poorest members of
society can simultaneously advance sustainable development
and equity, enhance adaptive capacity, and reduce vulnerability
to climate and other stresses. Inclusion of climatic risks in the
design and implementation of national and international
development initiatives can promote equity and development
that is more sustainable and that reduces vulnerability to
climate change. [6.2]

Global mean temperature change is used as an indicator of the magnitude
of climate change. Scenario-dependent exposures taken into account
in these studies include regionally differentiated changes in temperature,
precipitation, and other climatic variables.

227

Climate Change 2001

3. Effects on and Vulnerability of Natural
and Human Systems
3.1. Hydrology and Water Resources
The effect of climate change on streamflow and groundwater
recharge varies regionally and between climate scenarios,
largely following projected changes in precipitation. A
consistent projection across most climate change scenarios is
for increases in annual mean streamflow in high latitudes and
southeast Asia, and decreases in central Asia, the area around
the Mediterranean, southern Africa, and Australia (medium
confidence6) (see Figure SPM-3); the amount of change,
however, varies between scenarios. For other areas, including
mid-latitudes, there is no strong consistency in projections of
streamflow, partly because of differences in projected rainfall
and partly because of differences in projected evaporation,
which can offset rainfall increases. The retreat of most glaciers
is projected to accelerate, and many small glaciers may
disappear (high confidence6). In general, the projected changes
in average annual runoff are less robust than impacts based
solely on temperature change because precipitation changes
vary more between scenarios. At the catchment scale, the effect
of a given change in climate varies with physical properties
and vegetation of catchments, and may be in addition to landcover changes. [4.1]
Approximately 1.7 billion people, one-third of the world's
population, presently live in countries that are water-stressed
(defined as using more than 20% of their renewable water
supply, a commonly used indicator of water stress). This
number is projected to increase to around 5 billion by 2025,
depending on the rate of population growth. The projected
climate change could further decrease the streamflow and
groundwater recharge in many of these water-stressed
countries--for example in central Asia, southern Africa, and
countries around the Mediterranean Sea--but may increase it
in some others. [4.1; see also 5.1.1, 5.2.3, 5.3.1, 5.4.1, 5.5.1,
5.6.2, and 5.8.4 for regional-scale information]

Synthesis Report

could exacerbate such events. Streamflow during seasonal low
flow periods would decrease in many areas due to greater
evaporation; changes in precipitation may exacerbate or offset
the effects of increased evaporation. The projected climate
change would degrade water quality through higher water
temperatures and increased pollutant load from runoff and
overflows of waste facilities. Quality would be degraded further
where flows decrease, but increases in flows may mitigate to
a certain extent some degradations in water quality by increasing
dilution. Where snowfall is currently an important component
of the water balance, a greater proportion of winter precipitation
may fall as rain, and this can result in a more intense peak
streamflow which in addition would move from spring to
winter. [4.1]
The greatest vulnerabilities are likely to be in unmanaged water
systems and systems that are currently stressed or poorly and
unsustainably managed due to policies that discourage efficient
water use and protection of water quality, inadequate watershed
management, failure to manage variable water supply and
demand, or lack of sound professional guidance. In unmanaged
systems there are few or no structures in place to buffer the
effects of hydrologic variability on water quality and supply.
In unsustainably managed systems, water and land uses can
add stresses that heighten vulnerability to climate change. [4.1]
Water resource management techniques, particularly those of
integrated water resource management, can be applied to adapt
to hydrologic effects of climate change, and to additional
uncertainty, so as to lessen vulnerabilities. Currently, supplyside approaches (e.g., increasing flood defenses, building
weirs, utilizing water storage areas, including natural systems,
improving infrastructure for water collection and distribution)
are more widely used than demand-side approaches (which alter
the exposure to stress); the latter is the focus of increasing attention.
However, the capacity to implement effective management
responses is unevenly distributed around the world and is low
in many transition and developing countries. [4.1]
3.2. Agriculture and Food Security

Demand for water is generally increasing due to population
growth and economic development, but is falling in some
countries because of increased efficiency of use. Climate
change is unlikely to have a big effect on municipal and
industrial water demands in general, but may substantially
affect irrigation withdrawals, which depend on how increases in
evaporation are offset or exaggerated by changes in precipitation.
Higher temperatures, hence higher crop evaporative demand,
mean that the general tendency would be towards an increase
in irrigation demands. [4.1]
Flood magnitude and frequency could increase in many regions
as a consequence of increased frequency of heavy precipitation
events, which can increase runoff in most areas as well as
groundwater recharge in some floodplains. Land-use change

228

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Based on experimental research, crop yield responses to
climate change vary widely, depending upon species and
cultivar; soil properties; pests and pathogens; the direct effects
of carbon dioxide (CO2) on plants; and interactions between
CO2, air temperature, water stress, mineral nutrition, air quality,
and adaptive responses. Even though increased CO 2
concentration can stimulate crop growth and yield, that benefit
may not always overcome the adverse effects of excessive
heat and drought (medium confidence6). These advances, along
with advances in research on agricultural adaptation, have been
incorporated since the Second Assessment Report (SAR) into
models used to assess the effects of climate change on crop
yields, food supply, farm incomes, and prices. [4.2]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Summary for Policymakers

(a)

(b)

< -250

-250 to -150

-150 to -50

-50 to -25

-25 to 0

0 to 25

25 to 50

50 to 150

>150

Change in Annual Runoff (mm yr-1)
Figure SPM-3: Projected changes in average annual water runoff by 2050, relative to average runoff for 1961-1990, largely follow projected
changes in precipitation. Changes in runoff are calculated with a hydrologic model using as inputs climate projections from two versions of
the Hadley Centre atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) for a scenario of 1% per annum increase in effective carbon
dioxide concentration in the atmosphere: (a) HadCM2 ensemble mean and (b) HadCM3. Projected increases in runoff in high latitudes and
southeast Asia, and decreases in central Asia, the area around the Mediterranean, southern Africa, and Australia are broadly consistent
across the Hadley Centre experiments, and with the precipitation projections of other AOGCM experiments. For other areas of the world,
changes in precipitation and runoff are scenario- and model-dependent.

Costs will be involved in coping with climate-induced yield losses
and adaptation of livestock production systems. These agronomic
and husbandry adaptation options could include, for example,
adjustments to planting dates, fertilization rates, irrigation
applications, cultivar traits, and selection of animal species. [4.2]
When autonomous agronomic adaptation is included, crop
modeling assessments indicate, with medium to low confidence6,
that climate change will lead to generally positive responses at

less than a few C warming and generally negative responses for
more than a few C in mid-latitude crop yields. Similar assessments
indicate that yields of some crops in tropical locations would
decrease generally with even minimal increases in temperature,
because such crops are near their maximum temperature tolerance
and dryland/rainfed agriculture predominates. Where there is
also a large decrease in rainfall, tropical crop yields would be
even more adversely affected. With autonomous agronomic
adaptation, crop yields in the tropics tend to be less adversely

229

Climate Change 2001

affected by climate change than without adaptation, but they still
tend to remain below levels estimated with current climate. [4.2]
Most global and regional economic studies not incorporating
climate change indicate that the downward trend in global real
commodity prices in the 20th century is likely to continue into
the 21st, although confidence in these predictions decreases
farther into the future. Economic modeling assessments indicate
that impacts of climate change on agricultural production and
prices are estimated to result in small percentage changes in
global income (low confidence6), with larger increases in more
developed regions and smaller increases or declines in
developing regions. Improved confidence in this finding depends
on further research into the sensitivity of economic modeling
assessments to their base assumptions. [4.2 and Box 5-5]
Most studies indicate that global mean annual temperature
increases of a few C or greater would prompt food prices to
increase due to a slowing in the expansion of global food
supply relative to growth in global food demand (established,
but incomplete6). At lesser amounts of warming than a few
C, economic models do not clearly distinguish the climate
change signal from other sources of change based on those
studies included in this assessment. Some recent aggregated
studies have estimated economic impacts on vulnerable
populations such as smallholder producers and poor urban
consumers. These studies find that climate change would lower
incomes of the vulnerable populations and increase the absolute
number of people at risk of hunger, though this is uncertain and
requires further research. It is established, though incompletely,
that climate change, mainly through increased extremes and
temporal/spatial shifts, will worsen food security in Africa. [4.2]
3.3. Terrestrial and Freshwater Ecosystems
Vegetation modeling studies continue to show the potential
for significant disruption of ecosystems under climate change
(high confidence6). Migration of ecosystems or biomes as
discrete units is unlikely to occur; instead at a given site, species
composition and dominance will change. The results of these
changes will lag behind the changes in climate by years to
decades to centuries (high confidence6). [4.3]
Distributions, population sizes, population density, and
behavior of wildlife have been, and will continue to be, affected
directly by changes in global or regional climate and indirectly
through changes in vegetation. Climate change will lead to
poleward movement of the boundaries of freshwater fish
distributions along with loss of habitat for cold- and coolwater fishes and gain in habitat for warm-water fishes (high
confidence6). Many species and populations are already at high
risk, and are expected to be placed at greater risk by the synergy
between climate change rendering portions of current habitat
unsuitable for many species, and land-use change fragmenting
habitats and raising obstacles to species migration. Without

230

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

appropriate management, these pressures will cause some
species currently classified as "critically endangered" to
become extinct and the majority of those labeled "endangered
or vulnerable" to become rarer, and thereby closer to extinction,
in the 21st century (high confidence6). [4.3]
Possible adaptation methods to reduce risks to species could
include: 1) establishment of refuges, parks, and reserves with
corridors to allow migration of species, and 2) use of captive
breeding and translocation. However, these options may have
limitations due to costs. [4.3]
Terrestrial ecosystems appear to be storing increasing amounts
of carbon. At the time of the SAR, this was largely attributed
to increasing plant productivity because of the interaction
between elevated CO2 concentration, increasing temperatures,
and soil moisture changes. Recent results confirm that
productivity gains are occurring but suggest that they are
smaller under field conditions than indicated by plant-pot
experiments (medium confidence6). Hence, the terrestrial
uptake may be due more to change in uses and management
of land than to the direct effects of elevated CO2 and climate.
The degree to which terrestrial ecosystems continue to be net
sinks for carbon is uncertain due to the complex interactions
between the factors mentioned above (e.g., arctic terrestrial
ecosystems and wetlands may act as both sources and sinks)
(medium confidence6). [4.3]
Contrary to the SAR, global timber market studies that include
adaptations through land and product management, even
without forestry projects that increase the capture and storage
of carbon, suggest that a small amount of climate change would
increase global timber supply and enhance existing market trends
towards rising market share in developing countries (medium
confidence6). Consumers may benefit from lower timber prices
while producers may gain or lose depending on regional changes
in timber productivity and potential dieback effects. [4.3]
3.4. Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems
Large-scale impacts of climate change on oceans are expected
to include increases in sea surface temperature and mean global
sea level, decreases in sea-ice cover, and changes in salinity,
wave conditions, and ocean circulation. The oceans are an
integral and responsive component of the climate system with
important physical and biogeochemical feedbacks to climate.
Many marine ecosystems are sensitive to climate change.
Climate trends and variability as reflected in multiyear climateocean regimes (e.g., Pacific Decadal Oscillation) and switches
from one regime to another are now recognized to strongly
affect fish abundance and population dynamics, with
significant impacts on fish-dependent human societies. [4.4]
Many coastal areas will experience increased levels of flooding,
accelerated erosion, loss of wetlands and mangroves, and

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

seawater intrusion into freshwater sources as a result of climate
change. The extent and severity of storm impacts, including
storm-surge floods and shore erosion, will increase as a result
of climate change including sea-level rise. High-latitude coasts
will experience added impacts related to higher wave energy
and permafrost degradation. Changes in relative sea level will
vary locally due to uplift and subsidence caused by other
factors. [4.4]
Impacts on highly diverse and productive coastal ecosystems such
as coral reefs, atolls and reef islands, salt marshes, and mangrove
forests will depend upon the rate of sea-level rise relative to
growth rates and sediment supply, space for and obstacles to
horizontal migration, changes in the climate-ocean environment
such as sea surface temperatures and storminess, and pressures
from human activities in coastal zones. Episodes of coral bleaching
over the past 20 years have been associated with several causes,
including increased ocean temperatures. Future sea surface
warming would increase stress on coral reefs and result in
increased frequency of marine diseases (high confidence6). [4.4]
Assessments of adaptation strategies for coastal zones have
shifted emphasis away from hard protection structures of
shorelines (e.g., seawalls, groins) toward soft protection
measures (e.g., beach nourishment), managed retreat, and
enhanced resilience of biophysical and socioeconomic systems
in coastal regions. Adaptation options for coastal and marine
management are most effective when incorporated with
policies in other areas, such as disaster mitigation plans and
land-use plans. [4.4]
3.5. Human Health
The impacts of short-term weather events on human health have
been further elucidated since the SAR, particularly in relation
to periods of thermal stress, the modulation of air pollution
impacts, the impacts of storms and floods, and the influences
of seasonal and interannual climatic variability on infectious
diseases. There has been increased understanding of the
determinants of population vulnerability to adverse health
impacts and the possibilities for adaptive responses. [4.7]
Many vector-, food-, and water-borne infectious diseases are
known to be sensitive to changes in climatic conditions. From
results of most predictive model studies, there is medium to
high confidence6 that, under climate change scenarios, there
would be a net increase in the geographic range of potential
transmission of malaria and dengue--two vector-borne
infections each of which currently impinge on 40-50% of the
world population.10 Within their present ranges, these and many
other infectious diseases would tend to increase in incidence
10

Eight studies have modeled the effects of climate change on these
diseases, five on malaria and three on dengue. Seven use a biological or
process-based approach, and one uses an empirical, statistical approach.

WGII Summary for Policymakers

and seasonality--although regional decreases would occur in
some infectious diseases. In all cases, however, actual disease
occurrence is strongly influenced by local environmental
conditions, socioeconomic circumstances, and public health
infrastructure. [4.7]
Projected climate change will be accompanied by an increase
in heat waves, often exacerbated by increased humidity and
urban air pollution, which would cause an increase in heatrelated deaths and illness episodes. The evidence indicates
that the impact would be greatest in urban populations,
affecting particularly the elderly, sick, and those without access
to air-conditioning (high confidence6). Limited evidence
indicates that in some temperate countries reduced winter
deaths would outnumber increased summer deaths (medium
confidence6); yet, published research has been largely confined
to populations in developed countries, thus precluding a
generalized comparison of changes in summer and winter
mortality. [3.5 and 4.7]
Extensive experience makes clear that any increase in flooding
will increase the risk of drowning, diarrhoeal and respiratory
diseases, and, in developing countries, hunger and malnutrition
(high confidence6). If cyclones were to increase regionally,
devastating impacts would often occur, particularly in densely
settled populations with inadequate resources. A reduction in
crop yields and food production because of climate change in
some regions, particularly in the tropics, will predispose foodinsecure populations to malnutrition, leading to impaired child
development and decreased adult activity. Socioeconomic
disruptions could occur in some regions, impairing both
livelihoods and health. [3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 4.5, and 4.7]
For each anticipated adverse health impact there is a range of
social, institutional, technological, and behavioral adaptation
options to lessen that impact. Adaptations could, for example,
encompass strengthening of the public health infrastructure,
health-oriented management of the environment (including air
and water quality, food safety, urban and housing design, and
surface water management), and the provision of appropriate
medical care facilities. Overall, the adverse health impacts of
climate change will be greatest in vulnerable lower income
populations, predominantly within tropical/subtropical countries.
Adaptive policies would, in general, reduce these impacts. [4.7]
3.6. Human Settlements, Energy, and Industry
A growing and increasingly quantitative literature shows that
human settlements are affected by climate change in one of
three major ways:
1) The economic sectors that support the settlement are
affected because of changes in resource productivity or
changes in market demand for the goods and services
produced there. [4.5]

231

Climate Change 2001

2) Some aspects of physical infrastructure (including energy
transmission and distribution systems), buildings, urban
services (including transportation systems), and specific
industries (such as agroindustry, tourism, and construction)
may be directly affected. [4.5]
3) Populations may be directly affected through extreme
weather, changes in health status, or migration. The problems
are somewhat different in the largest (<1 million) and midto small-sized population centers. [4.5]
The most widespread direct risk to human settlements from
climate change is flooding and landslides, driven by projected
increases in rainfall intensity and, in coastal areas, sea-level
rise. Riverine and coastal settlements are particularly at risk
(high confidence6), but urban flooding could be a problem
anywhere that storm drains, water supply, and waste
management systems have inadequate capacity. In such areas,
squatter and other informal urban settlements with high
population density, poor shelter, little or no access to resources
such as safe water and public health services, and low adaptive
capacity are highly vulnerable. Human settlements currently
experience other significant environmental problems which
could be exacerbated under higher temperature/increased
precipitation regimes, including water and energy resources
and infrastructure, waste treatment, and transportation [4.5]
Rapid urbanization in low-lying coastal areas of both the
developing and developed world is greatly increasing population
densities and the value of human-made assets exposed to
coastal climatic extremes such as tropical cyclones. Model-based
projections of the mean annual number of people who would
be flooded by coastal storm surges increase several fold (by
75 to 200 million people depending on adaptive responses)
for mid-range scenarios of a 40-cm sea-level rise by the 2080s
relative to scenarios with no sea-level rise. Potential damages
to infrastructure in coastal areas from sea-level rise have been
projected to be tens of billions US$ for individual countries--
for example, Egypt, Poland, and Vietnam. [4.5]
Settlements with little economic diversification and where a
high percentage of incomes derive from climate-sensitive
primary resource industries (agriculture, forestry, and fisheries)
are more vulnerable than more diversified settlements (high
confidence6). In developed areas of the Arctic, and where the
permafrost is ice-rich, special attention will be required to
mitigate the detrimental impacts of thawing, such as severe
damage to buildings and transport infrastructure (very high
confidence6). Industrial, transportation, and commercial
infrastructure is generally vulnerable to the same hazards as
settlement infrastructure. Energy demand is expected to
increase for space cooling and decrease for space heating, but
the net effect is scenario- and location-dependent. Some energy
production and distribution systems may experience adverse
impacts that would reduce supplies or system reliability while
other energy systems may benefit. [4.5 and 5.7]

232

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Possible adaptation options involve the planning of settlements
and their infrastructure, placement of industrial facilities, and
making similar long-lived decisions in a manner to reduce the
adverse effects of events that are of low (but increasing)
probability and high (and perhaps rising) consequences. [4.5]
3.7. Insurance and Other Financial Services
The costs of ordinary and extreme weather events have increased
rapidly in recent decades. Global economic losses from
catastrophic events increased 10.3-fold from 3.9 billion US$
yr-1 in the 1950s to 40 billion US$ yr-1 in the 1990s (all in
1999US$, unadjusted for purchasing power parity), with
approximately one-quarter of the losses occurring in developing
countries. The insured portion of these losses rose from a
negligible level to 9.2 billion US$ yr-1 during the same period.
Total costs are a factor of two larger when losses from smaller,
non-catastrophic weather-related events are included. As a
measure of increasing insurance industry vulnerability, the ratio
of global property/casual insurance premiums to weather related
losses fell by a factor of three between 1985 and 1999. [4.6]
The costs of weather events have risen rapidly despite
significant and increasing efforts at fortifying infrastructure
and enhancing disaster preparedness. Part of the observed
upward trend in disaster losses over the past 50 years is linked
to socioeconomic factors, such as population growth, increased
wealth, and urbanization in vulnerable areas, and part is linked
to climatic factors such as the observed changes in precipitation
and flooding events. Precise attribution is complex and there
are differences in the balance of these two causes by region
and type of event. [4.6]
Climate change and anticipated changes in weather-related
events perceived to be linked to climate change would increase
actuarial uncertainty in risk assessment (high confidence6).
Such developments would place upward pressure on insurance
premiums and/or could lead to certain risks being reclassified
as uninsurable with subsequent withdrawal of coverage. Such
changes would trigger increased insurance costs, slow the
expansion of financial services into developing countries, reduce
the availability of insurance for spreading risk, and increase
the demand for government-funded compensation following
natural disasters. In the event of such changes, the relative
roles of public and private entities in providing insurance and
risk management resources can be expected to change. [4.6]
The financial services sector as a whole is expected to be able to
cope with the impacts of climate change, although the historic
record demonstrates that low-probability high-impact events
or multiple closely spaced events severely affect parts of the sector,
especially if adaptive capacity happens to be simultaneously
depleted by non-climate factors (e.g., adverse financial market
conditions). The property/casualty insurance and reinsurance
segments and small specialized or undiversified companies have

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

exhibited greater sensitivity, including reduced profitability
and bankruptcy triggered by weather-related events. [4.6]
Adaptation to climate change presents complex challenges,
but also opportunities, to the sector. Regulatory involvement
in pricing, tax treatment of reserves, and the (in)ability of firms
to withdraw from at-risk markets are examples of factors that
influence the resilience of the sector. Public- and private-sector
actors also support adaptation by promoting disaster
preparedness, loss-prevention programs, building codes, and
improved land-use planning. However, in some cases, public
insurance and relief programs have inadvertently fostered
complacency and maladaptation by inducing development in
at-risk areas such as U.S. flood plains and coastal zones. [4.6]
The effects of climate change are expected to be greatest in
the developing world, especially in countries reliant on primary
production as a major source of income. Some countries
experience impacts on their GDP as a consequence of natural
disasters, with damages as high as half of GDP in one case.
Equity issues and development constraints would arise if weatherrelated risks become uninsurable, prices increase, or availability
becomes limited. Conversely, more extensive access to insurance
and more widespread introduction of micro-financing schemes
and development banking would increase the ability of
developing countries to adapt to climate change. [4.6]

4. Vulnerability Varies across Regions
The vulnerability of human populations and natural systems
to climate change differs substantially across regions and
across populations within regions. Regional differences in
baseline climate and expected climate change give rise to
different exposures to climate stimuli across regions. The
natural and social systems of different regions have varied
characteristics, resources, and institutions, and are subject to
varied pressures that give rise to differences in sensitivity and
adaptive capacity. From these differences emerge different key
concerns for each of the major regions of the world. Even
within regions however, impacts, adaptive capacity, and
vulnerability will vary. [5]
In light of the above, all regions are likely to experience some
adverse effects of climate change. Table SPM-2 presents in a
highly summarized fashion some of the key concerns for the
different regions. Some regions are particularly vulnerable
because of their physical exposure to climate change hazards
and/or their limited adaptive capacity. Most less-developed
regions are especially vulnerable because a larger share of
their economies are in climate-sensitive sectors and their
adaptive capacity is low due to low levels of human, financial,
and natural resources, as well as limited institutional and
technological capability. For example, small island states and
low-lying coastal areas are particularly vulnerable to increases

WGII Summary for Policymakers

in sea level and storms, and most of them have limited
capabilities for adaptation. Climate change impacts in polar
regions are expected to be large and rapid, including reduction
in sea-ice extent and thickness and degradation of permafrost.
Adverse changes in seasonal river flows, floods and droughts,
food security, fisheries, health effects, and loss of biodiversity
are among the major regional vulnerabilities and concerns of
Africa, Latin America, and Asia where adaptation opportunities
are generally low. Even in regions with higher adaptive
capacity, such as North America and Australia and New
Zealand, there are vulnerable communities, such as indigenous
peoples, and the possibility of adaptation of ecosystems is
very limited. In Europe, vulnerability is significantly greater
in the south and in the Arctic than elsewhere in the region. [5]

5. Improving Assessments of Impacts,
Vulnerabilities, and Adaptation
Advances have been made since previous IPCC assessments
in the detection of change in biotic and physical systems, and
steps have been taken to improve the understanding of adaptive
capacity, vulnerability to climate extremes, and other critical
impact-related issues. These advances indicate a need for
initiatives to begin designing adaptation strategies and building
adaptive capacities. Further research is required, however, to
strengthen future assessments and to reduce uncertainties in
order to assure that sufficient information is available for
policymaking about responses to possible consequences of
climate change, including research in and by developing
countries. [8]
The following are high priorities for narrowing gaps between
current knowledge and policymaking needs:
* Quantitative assessment of the sensitivity, adaptive capacity,
and vulnerability of natural and human systems to climate
change, with particular emphasis on changes in the range
of climatic variation and the frequency and severity of
extreme climate events
* Assessment of possible thresholds at which strongly
discontinuous responses to projected climate change and
other stimuli would be triggered
* Understanding dynamic responses of ecosystems to multiple
stresses, including climate change, at global, regional, and
finer scales
* Development of approaches to adaptation responses,
estimation of the effectiveness and costs of adaptation
options, and identification of differences in opportunities
for and obstacles to adaptation in different regions, nations,
and populations
* Assessment of potential impacts of the full range of
projected climate changes, particularly for non-market
goods and services, in multiple metrics and with consistent
treatment of uncertainties, including but not limited to
numbers of people affected, land area affected, numbers of

233

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table SPM-2: Regional adaptive capacity, vulnerability, and key concerns.a,b
Region

234

Adaptive Capacity, Vulnerability, and Key Concerns

Africa

* Adaptive capacity of human systems in Africa is low due to lack of economic resources and technology, and
vulnerability high as a result of heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture, frequent droughts and floods, and
poverty. [5.1.7]
* Grain yields are projected to decrease for many scenarios, diminishing food security, particularly in small
food-importing countries (medium to high confidence6). [5.1.2]
* Major rivers of Africa are highly sensitive to climate variation; average runoff and water availability would
decrease in Mediterranean and southern countries of Africa (medium confidence6). [5.1.1]
* Extension of ranges of infectious disease vectors would adversely affect human health in Africa (medium
confidence6). [5.1.4]
* Desertification would be exacerbated by reductions in average annual rainfall, runoff, and soil moisture,
especially in southern, North, and West Africa (medium confidence6). [5.1.6]
* Increases in droughts, floods, and other extreme events would add to stresses on water resources, food security,
human health, and infrastructures, and would constrain development in Africa (high confidence6). [5.1]
* Significant extinctions of plant and animal species are projected and would impact rural livelihoods, tourism,
and genetic resources (medium confidence6). [5.1.3]
* Coastal settlements in, for example, the Gulf of Guinea, Senegal, Gambia, Egypt, and along the East-Southern
African coast would be adversely impacted by sea-level rise through inundation and coastal erosion (high
confidence6). [5.1.5]

Asia

* Adaptive capacity of human systems is low and vulnerability is high in the developing countries of Asia; the
developed countries of Asia are more able to adapt and less vulnerable. [5.2.7]
* Extreme events have increased in temperate and tropical Asia, including floods, droughts, forest fires, and
tropical cyclones (high confidence6). [5.2.4]
* Decreases in agricultural productivity and aquaculture due to thermal and water stress, sea-level rise, floods and
droughts, and tropical cyclones would diminish food security in many countries of arid, tropical, and temperate
Asia; agriculture would expand and increase in productivity in northern areas (medium confidence6). [5.2.1]
* Runoff and water availability may decrease in arid and semi-arid Asia but increase in northern Asia (medium
confidence6). [5.2.3]
* Human health would be threatened by possible increased exposure to vector-borne infectious diseases and
heat stress in parts of Asia (medium confidence6). [5.2.6]
* Sea-level rise and an increase in the intensity of tropical cyclones would displace tens of millions of people in
low-lying coastal areas of temperate and tropical Asia; increased intensity of rainfall would increase flood
risks in temperate and tropical Asia (high confidence6). [5.2.5 and Table TS-8]
* Climate change would increase energy demand, decrease tourism attraction, and influence transportation in
some regions of Asia (medium confidence6). [5.2.4 and 5.2.7]
* Climate change would exacerbate threats to biodiversity due to land-use and land-cover change and population
pressure in Asia (medium confidence6). Sea-level rise would put ecological security at risk, including mangroves
and coral reefs (high confidence6). [5.2.2]
* Poleward movement of the southern boundary of the permafrost zones of Asia would result in a change of
thermokarst and thermal erosion with negative impacts on social infrastructure and industries (medium
confidence6). [5.2.2]

Australia
and New
Zealand

* Adaptive capacity of human systems is generally high, but there are groups in Australia and New Zealand,
such as indigenous peoples in some regions, with low capacity to adapt and consequently high vulnerability.
[5.3 and 5.3.5]
* The net impact on some temperate crops of climate and CO2 changes may initially be beneficial, but this
balance is expected to become negative for some areas and crops with further climate change (medium
confidence6). [5.3.3]
* Water is likely to be a key issue (high confidence6) due to projected drying trends over much of the region and
change to a more El Nino-like average state. [5.3 and 5.3.1]
* Increases in the intensity of heavy rains and tropical cyclones (medium confidence6), and region-specific
changes in the frequency of tropical cyclones, would alter the risks to life, property, and ecosystems from
flooding, storm surges, and wind damage. [5.3.4]
* Some species with restricted climatic niches and which are unable to migrate due to fragmentation of the
landscape, soil differences, or topography could become endangered or extinct (high confidence6). Australian
ecosystems that are particularly vulnerable to climate change include coral reefs, arid and semi-arid habitats
in southwest and inland Australia, and Australian alpine systems. Freshwater wetlands in coastal zones in both
Australia and New Zealand are vulnerable, and some New Zealand ecosystems are vulnerable to accelerated
invasion by weeds. [5.3.2]

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Summary for Policymakers

Table SPM-2 (continued)
Region

Adaptive Capacity, Vulnerability, and Key Concerns

Europe

* Adaptive capacity is generally high in Europe for human systems; southern Europe and the European Arctic
are more vulnerable than other parts of Europe. [5.4 and 5.4.6]
* Summer runoff, water availability, and soil moisture are likely to decrease in southern Europe, and would
widen the difference between the north and drought-prone south; increases are likely in winter in the north
and south (high confidence6). [5.4.1]
* Half of alpine glaciers and large permafrost areas could disappear by end of the 21st century (medium
confidence6). [5.4.1]
* River flood hazard will increase across much of Europe (medium to high confidence6); in coastal areas, the
risk of flooding, erosion, and wetland loss will increase substantially with implications for human settlement,
industry, tourism, agriculture, and coastal natural habitats. [5.4.1 and 5.4.4]
* There will be some broadly positive effects on agriculture in northern Europe (medium confidence6);
productivity will decrease in southern and eastern Europe (medium confidence6). [5.4.3]
* Upward and northward shift of biotic zones will take place. Loss of important habitats (wetlands, tundra,
isolated habitats) would threaten some species (high confidence6). [5.4.2]
* Higher temperatures and heat waves may change traditional summer tourist destinations, and less reliable
snow conditions may impact adversely on winter tourism (medium confidence6). [5.4.4]

Latin
America

* Adaptive capacity of human systems in Latin America is low, particularly with respect to extreme climate
events, and vulnerability is high. [5.5]
* Loss and retreat of glaciers would adversely impact runoff and water supply in areas where glacier melt is an
important water source (high confidence6). [5.5.1]
* Floods and droughts would become more frequent with floods increasing sediment loads and degrade water
quality in some areas (high confidence6). [5.5]
* Increases in intensity of tropical cyclones would alter the risks to life, property, and ecosystems from heavy
rain, flooding, storm surges, and wind damages (high confidence6). [5.5]
* Yields of important crops are projected to decrease in many locations in Latin America, even when the effects
of CO2 are taken into account; subsistence farming in some regions of Latin America could be threatened
(high confidence6). [5.5.4]
* The geographical distribution of vector-borne infectious diseases would expand poleward and to higher
elevations, and exposures to diseases such as malaria, dengue fever, and cholera will increase (medium
confidence6). [5.5.5]
* Coastal human settlements, productive activities, infrastructure, and mangrove ecosystems would be negatively
affected by sea-level rise (medium confidence6). [5.5.3]
* The rate of biodiversity loss would increase (high confidence6). [5.5.2]

North
America

* Adaptive capacity of human systems is generally high and vulnerability low in North America, but some
communities (e.g., indigenous peoples and those dependent on climate-sensitive resources) are more vulnerable;
social, economic, and demographic trends are changing vulnerabilities in subregions. [5.6 and 5.6.1]
* Some crops would benefit from modest warming accompanied by increasing CO2, but effects would vary
among crops and regions (high confidence6), including declines due to drought in some areas of Canada's
Prairies and the U.S. Great Plains, potential increased food production in areas of Canada north of current
production areas, and increased warm-temperate mixed forest production (medium confidence6). However,
benefits for crops would decline at an increasing rate and possibly become a net loss with further warming
(medium confidence6). [5.6.4]
* Snowmelt-dominated watersheds in western North America will experience earlier spring peak flows (high
confidence6), reductions in summer flows (medium confidence6), and reduced lake levels and outflows for the
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence under most scenarios (medium confidence6); adaptive responses would offset some,
but not all, of the impacts on water users and on aquatic ecosystems (medium confidence6). [5.6.2]
* Unique natural ecosystems such as prairie wetlands, alpine tundra, and cold-water ecosystems will be at risk
and effective adaptation is unlikely (medium confidence6). [5.6.5]
* Sea-level rise would result in enhanced coastal erosion, coastal flooding, loss of coastal wetlands, and increased
risk from storm surges, particularly in Florida and much of the U.S. Atlantic coast (high confidence6). [5.6.1]
* Weather-related insured losses and public sector disaster relief payments in North America have been increasing;
insurance sector planning has not yet systematically included climate change information, so there is potential
for surprise (high confidence6). [5.6.1]
* Vector-borne diseases--including malaria, dengue fever, and Lyme disease--may expand their ranges in
North America; exacerbated air quality and heat stress morbidity and mortality would occur (medium
confidence6); socioeconomic factors and public health measures would play a large role in determining the
incidence and extent of health effects. [5.6.6]

235

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table SPM-2 (continued)
Region

Adaptive Capacity, Vulnerability, and Key Concerns

Polar

* Natural systems in polar regions are highly vulnerable to climate change and current ecosystems have low
adaptive capacity; technologically developed communities are likely to adapt readily to climate change, but
some indigenous communities, in which traditional lifestyles are followed, have little capacity and few options
for adaptation. [5.7]
* Climate change in polar regions is expected to be among the largest and most rapid of any region on the Earth,
and will cause major physical, ecological, sociological, and economic impacts, especially in the Arctic, Antarctic
Peninsula, and Southern Ocean (high confidence6). [5.7]
* Changes in climate that have already taken place are manifested in the decrease in extent and thickness of
Arctic sea ice, permafrost thawing, coastal erosion, changes in ice sheets and ice shelves, and altered distribution
and abundance of species in polar regions (high confidence6). [5.7]
* Some polar ecosystems may adapt through eventual replacement by migration of species and changing species
composition, and possibly by eventual increases in overall productivity; ice edge systems that provide habitat
for some species would be threatened (medium confidence6). [5.7]
* Polar regions contain important drivers of climate change. Once triggered, they may continue for centuries,
long after greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilized, and cause irreversible impacts on ice sheets, global
ocean circulation, and sea-level rise (medium confidence6). [5.7]

Small
Island
States

* Adaptive capacity of human systems is generally low in small island states, and vulnerability high; small
island states are likely to be among the countries most seriously impacted by climate change. [5.8]
* The projected sea-level rise of 5 mm yr-1 for the next 100 years would cause enhanced coastal erosion, loss of
land and property, dislocation of people, increased risk from storm surges, reduced resilience of coastal
ecosystems, saltwater intrusion into freshwater resources, and high resource costs to respond to and adapt to
these changes (high confidence6). [5.8.2 and 5.8.5]
* Islands with very limited water supplies are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change on the water
balance (high confidence6). [5.8.4]
* Coral reefs would be negatively affected by bleaching and by reduced calcification rates due to higher CO
2
levels (medium confidence6); mangrove, sea grass bed, and other coastal ecosystems and the associated
biodiversity would be adversely affected by rising temperatures and accelerated sea-level rise (medium
confidence6). [4.4 and 5.8.3]
* Declines in coastal ecosystems would negatively impact reef fish and threaten reef fisheries, those who earn
their livelihoods from reef fisheries, and those who rely on the fisheries as a significant food source (medium
confidence6). [4.4 and 5.8.4]
* Limited arable land and soil salinization makes agriculture of small island states, both for domestic food
production and cash crop exports, highly vulnerable to climate change (high confidence6). [5.8.4]
* Tourism, an important source of income and foreign exchange for many islands, would face severe disruption
from climate change and sea-level rise (high confidence6). [5.8.5]

a

Because the available studies have not employed a common set of climate scenarios and methods, and because of uncertainties regarding the
sensitivities and adaptability of natural and social systems, the assessment of regional vulnerabilities is necessarily qualitative.
b
The regions listed in Table SPM-2 are graphically depicted in Figure TS-2 of the Technical Summary.

species at risk, monetary value of impact, and implications
in these regards of different stabilization levels and other
policy scenarios
* Improving tools for integrated assessment, including risk
assessment, to investigate interactions between components
of natural and human systems and the consequences of
different policy decisions
* Assessment of opportunities to include scientific information
on impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation in decisionmaking
processes, risk management, and sustainable development
initiatives
* Improvement of systems and methods for long-term
monitoring and understanding the consequences of climate
change and other stresses on human and natural systems.

236

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Cutting across these foci are special needs associated with
strengthening international cooperation and coordination for
regional assessment of impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation,
including capacity-building and training for monitoring,
assessment, and data gathering, especially in and for developing
countries (particularly in relation to the items identified above).

Climate Change 2001:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Technical Summary

A Report of Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
This summary was accepted but not approved in detail at the Sixth Session of IPCC Working Group II (Geneva, Switzerland,
13-16 February 2001). "Acceptance" of IPCC reports at a session of the Working Group or Panel signifies that the material
has not been subject to line-by-line discussion and agreement, but nevertheless presents a comprehensive, objective, and
balanced view of the subject matter.

Lead Authors
K.S. White (USA), Q.K. Ahmad (Bangladesh), O. Anisimov (Russia), N. Arnell (UK), S. Brown (USA), M. Campos (Costa
Rica), T. Carter (Finland), Chunzhen Liu (China), S. Cohen (Canada), P. Desanker (Malawi), D.J. Dokken (USA), W. Easterling
(USA), B. Fitzharris (New Zealand), H. Gitay (Australia), A. Githeko (Kenya), S. Gupta (India), H. Harasawa (Japan), B.P.
Jallow (The Gambia), Z.W. Kundzewicz (Poland), E.L. La Rovere (Brazil), M. Lal (India), N. Leary (USA), C. Magadza
(Zimbabwe), L.J. Mata (Venezuela), R. McLean (Australia), A. McMichael (UK), K. Miller (USA), E. Mills (USA), M.Q. Mirza
(Bangladesh), D. Murdiyarso (Indonesia), L.A. Nurse (Barbados), C. Parmesan (USA), M.L. Parry (UK), O. Pilifosova
(Kazakhstan), B. Pittock (Australia), J. Price (USA), T. Root (USA), C. Rosenzweig (USA), J. Sarukhan (Mexico), H.-J.
Schellnhuber (Germany), S. Schneider (USA), M.J. Scott (USA), G. Sem (Papua New Guinea), B. Smit (Canada), J.B. Smith
(USA), A. Tsyban (Russia), P. Vellinga (The Netherlands), R. Warrick (New Zealand), D. Wratt (New Zealand)
Review Editors
M. Manning (New Zealand) and C. Nobre (Brazil)

Climate Change 2001

1. Scope and Approach of the Assessment
1.1. Mandate of the Assessment
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
established by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in 1988
to assess scientific, technical, and socioeconomic information
that is relevant in understanding human-induced climate
change, its potential impacts, and options for mitigation and
adaptation. The IPCC currently is organized into three Working
Groups: Working Group I (WGI) addresses observed and
projected changes in climate; Working Group II (WGII)
addresses vulnerability, impacts, and adaptation related to
climate change; and Working Group III (WGIII) addresses
options for mitigation of climate change.
This volume--Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability--is the WGII contribution to the IPCC's
Third Assessment Report (TAR) on scientific, technical,
environmental, economic, and social issues associated with
the climate system and climate change.1 WGII's mandate for
the TAR is to assess the vulnerability of ecological systems,
socioeconomic sectors, and human health to climate change
as well as potential impacts of climate change, positive and
negative, on these systems. This assessment also examines
the feasibility of adaptation to enhance the positive effects of
climate change and ameliorate negative effects. This new
assessment builds on previous IPCC assessments, reexamining
key findings of earlier assessments and emphasizing new
information and implications from more recent studies.
1.2. What is Potentially at Stake?
Human activities--primarily burning of fossil fuels and
changes in land cover--are modifying the concentration of
atmospheric constituents or properties of the surface that
absorb or scatter radiant energy. The WGI contribution to the
TAR--Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis--found,
"In the light of new evidence and taking into account the
remaining uncertainties, most of the observed warming over
the last 50 years is likely to have been due to the increase in
greenhouse gas concentrations." Future changes in climate are
expected to include additional warming, changes in
precipitation patterns and amounts, sea-level rise, and changes
in the frequency and intensity of some extreme events.

1

238

Climate change in IPCC usage refers to any change in climate over time,
whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity. This
usage differs from the definition in Article 1 of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, where climate change refers
to a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human
activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which
is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable
time periods.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

The stakes associated with projected changes in climate are
high. Numerous Earth systems that sustain human societies are
sensitive to climate and will be impacted by changes in climate
(very high confidence). Impacts can be expected in ocean
circulation; sea level; the water cycle; carbon and nutrient cycles;
air quality; the productivity and structure of natural ecosystems;
the productivity of agricultural, grazing, and timber lands; and
the geographic distribution, behavior, abundance, and survival
of plant and animal species, including vectors and hosts of
human disease. Changes in these systems in response to climate
change, as well as direct effects of climate change on humans,
would affect human welfare, positively and negatively. Human
welfare would be impacted through changes in supplies of and
demands for water, food, energy, and other tangible goods that
are derived from these systems; changes in opportunities for
nonconsumptive uses of the environment for recreation and
tourism; changes in non-use values of the environment such as
cultural and preservation values; changes in incomes; changes
in loss of property and lives from extreme climate phenomena;
and changes in human health. Climate change impacts will affect
the prospects for sustainable development in different parts of
the world and may further widen existing inequalities. Impacts
will vary in distribution across people, places, and times (very
high confidence), raising important questions about equity.
Although the stakes are demonstrably high, the risks associated
with climate change are less easily established. Risks are a
function of the probability and magnitude of different types
of impacts. The WGII report assesses advances in the state of

Box TS-1. Climate Change Sensitivity, Adaptive
Capacity, and Vulnerability
Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either
adversely or beneficially, by climate-related stimuli. Climaterelated stimuli encompass all the elements of climate change,
including mean climate characteristics, climate variability,
and the frequency and magnitude of extremes. The effect
may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response to a
change in the mean, range or variability of temperature) or
indirect (e.g., damages caused by an increase in the
frequency of coastal flooding due to sea-level rise).
Adaptive capacity is the ability of a system to adjust to
climate change, including climate variability and extremes,
to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of
opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
Vulnerability is the degree to which a system is susceptible
to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change,
including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is
a function of the character, magnitude and rate of climate
change and variation to which a system is exposed, its
sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

CLIMATE CHANGE
including Variability

Human Interference

Initial Impacts
or Effects

Autonomous
Adaptations

Residual or
Net Impacts

VULNERABILITIES

MITIGATION
of Climate Change via
GHG Sources and Sinks

IMPACTS

Exposure

Planned
ADAPTATION
to the Impacts and Vulnerabilities

Policy Responses

Figure TS-1: Scope of the Working Group II assessment.

knowledge regarding impacts of climate stimuli to which
systems may be exposed, the sensitivity of exposed systems to
changes in climate stimuli, their adaptive capacity to alleviate
or cope with adverse impacts or enhance beneficial ones, and
their vulnerability to adverse impacts (see Box TS-1). Possible
impacts include impacts that threaten substantial and irreversible
damage to or loss of some systems within the next century;
modest impacts to which systems may readily adapt; and
impacts that would be beneficial for some systems.

1.3. Approach of the Assessment

Figure TS-1 illustrates the scope of the WGII assessment and
its relation to other parts of the climate change system. Human
activities that change the climate expose natural and human
systems to an altered set of stresses or stimuli. Systems that are
sensitive to these stimuli are affected or impacted by the changes,
which can trigger autonomous, or expected, adaptations. These
autonomous adaptations will reshape the residual or net
impacts of climate change. Policy responses in reaction to
impacts already perceived or in anticipation of potential future
impacts can take the form of planned adaptations to lessen
adverse effects or enhance beneficial ones. Policy responses
also can take the form of actions to mitigate climate change
through greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions and
enhancement of sinks. The WGII assessment focuses on the
central box of Figure TS-1--exposure, impacts, and
vulnerabilities--and the adaptation policy loop.

WGII's assessment has been conducted by an international
group of experts nominated by governments and scientific bodies
and selected by the WGII Bureau of the IPCC for their scientific
and technical expertise and to achieve broad geographical
balance. These experts come from academia, governments,
industry, and scientific and environmental organizations. They
participate without compensation from the IPCC, donating
substantial time to support the work of the IPCC.

The assessment process involves evaluation and synthesis of
available information to advance understanding of climate
change impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. The information
comes predominantly from peer-reviewed published literature.
Evidence also is drawn from published, non-peer-reviewed
literature and unpublished sources, but only after evaluation
of its quality and validity by the authors of this report.

This assessment is structured to examine climate change
impacts, adaptations, and vulnerabilities of systems and regions
and to provide a global synthesis of cross-system and crossregional issues. To the extent feasible, given the available
literature, climate change is examined in the context of
sustainable development and equity. The first section sets the
stage for the assessment by discussing the context of climate

239

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Polar Regions

Caribbean
Islands
Pacific
Islands
Indian
Ocean
Islands

Africa

Asia

Australia and
New Zealand

Europe

Latin America

North America

Polar Regions

Figure TS-2: Regions for the IPCC Working Group II Third Assessment Report. Note that regions in which small island states are located
include the Pacific, Indian, and Atlantic Oceans, and the Caribbean and Mediterranean Seas. The boundary between Europe and Asia runs
along the eastern Ural Mountains, River Ural, and Caspian Sea. For the polar regions, the Arctic consists of the area north of the Arctic
Circle, including Greenland; the Antarctic consists of the Antarctic continent, together with the Southern Ocean south of ~58S.

change, methods and tools, and scenarios. Individual chapters
assess vulnerabilities of water systems, terrestrial ecosystems
(including agriculture and forestry), ocean and coastal systems,
human settlements (including energy and industrial sectors),
insurance and other financial services, and human health. A
chapter is devoted to each of eight major regions of the world:
Africa, Asia, Australia and New Zealand, Europe, Latin America,
North America, polar regions, and small island states. These
regions are shown in Figure TS-2. All of the regions are highly
heterogeneous, and climate change impacts, adaptive capacity,
and vulnerability will vary in important ways within each of the
regions. The final section of the report synthesizes adaptation
capacity and its potential to alleviate adverse impacts, enhance
beneficial effects, and increase sustainable development and
equity and reviews information that is relevant for interpretation
of Article 2 of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and key provisions of international
agreements to address climate change. The report also contains
a Summary for Policymakers, which provides a brief synthesis
of the conclusions of the report that have particular relevance
to those who have responsibility for making climate change
response decisions. This Technical Summary provides a more
comprehensive summary of the assessment; it references
sections of the underlying report in brackets at the end of the
paragraphs for readers who would like more information on a
particular topic. [1.1]

240

IPCC Third Assessment Report

1.4. Treatment of Uncertainties
Since the SAR, greater emphasis has been placed on developing
methods for characterizing and communicating uncertainties.
Two approaches to evaluate uncertainties are applied in the
WGII assessment. A quantitative approach is adopted to assess
confidence levels in instances for which present understanding
of relevant processes, system behavior, observations, model
simulations, and estimates is sufficient to support broad
agreement among authors of the report about Bayesian
probabilities associated with selected findings. A more
qualitative approach is used to assess and report the quality or
level of scientific understanding that supports a conclusion
(see Box TS-2). These approaches, and the rationale for them,
are explained in more detail in Third Assessment Report: CrossCutting Issues Guidance Papers (http://www.gispri.or.jp),
supporting material prepared by the IPCC to increase the use
of consistent terms and concepts within and across the Working
Group volumes of the TAR. [1.1, 2.6].

2. Methods and Tools of the Assessment
Assessment of climate change impacts, adaptations, and
vulnerability draws on a wide range of physical, biological,
and social science disciplines and consequently employs an

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Box TS-2. Confidence Levels and State of
Knowledge
Quantitative Assessment of Confidence Levels
In applying the quantitative approach, authors of the report
assign a confidence level that represents the degree of belief
among the authors in the validity of a conclusion, based on
their collective expert judgment of observational evidence,
modeling results, and theory that they have examined. Five
confidence levels are used. In the tables of the Technical
Summary, symbols are substituted for words:
Very High (*****)
High (****)
Medium(***)
Low (**)
Very Low (*)

95% or greater
67-95%
33-67%
5-33%
5% or less

Qualitative Assessment of the State of Knowledge
In applying the qualitative approach, authors of the report
evaluate the level of scientific understanding in support of a
conclusion, based on the amount of supporting evidence
and the level of agreement among experts about the
interpretation of the evidence. Four qualitative classifications
are employed:
* Well-established: Models incorporate known processes,
observations are consistent with models, or multiple lines
of evidence support the finding.
* Established but incomplete: Models incorporate most
known processes, although some parameterizations may
not be well tested; observations are somewhat consistent
but incomplete; current empirical estimates are well
founded, but the possibility of changes in governing
processes over time is considerable; or only one or a
few lines of evidence support the finding.
* Competing explanations: Different model representations
account for different aspects of observations or evidence
or incorporate different aspects of key processes, leading
to competing explanations.
* Speculative: Conceptually plausible ideas that are not
adequately represented in the literature or that contain
many difficult-to-reduce uncertainties. [Box 1-1]

enormous variety of methods and tools. Since the SAR, such
methods have improved detection of climate change in biotic
and physical systems and produced new substantive findings.
In addition, cautious steps have been taken since the SAR to
expand the "tool-box" to address more effectively the human
dimensions of climate as both causes and consequences of
change and to deal more directly with cross-sectoral issues
concerning vulnerability, adaptation, and decisionmaking. In

WGII Technical Summary

particular, a greater number of studies have begun to apply
methods and tools for costing and valuing effects, treating
uncertainties, integrating effects across sectors and regions, and
applying decision analytic frameworks for evaluating adaptive
capacity. Overall, these modest methodological developments
are encouraging analyses that will build a more solid foundation
for understanding how decisions regarding adaptation to future
climate change might be taken. [2.8]
2.1. Detecting Responses to Climate Change using
Indicator Species or Systems
Since the SAR, methods have been developed and applied to
the detection of present impacts of 20th century climate change
on abiotic and biotic systems. Assessment of impacts on human
and natural systems that already have occurred as a result of
recent climate change is an important complement to model
projections of future impacts. Such detection is impeded by
multiple, often inter-correlated, nonclimatic forces that
concurrently affect those systems. Attempts to overcome this
problem have involved the use of indicator species (e.g.,
butterflies, penguins, frogs, and sea anemones) to detect
responses to climate change and to infer more general impacts
of climate change on natural systems (e.g., in native meadows,
coastal Antarctica, tropical cloud forest, and the Pacific rocky
intertidal, respectively). An important component of this
detection process is the search for systematic patterns of change
across many studies that are consistent with expectations, based
on observed or predicted changes in climate. Confidence in
attribution of these observed changes to climate change increases
as studies are replicated across diverse systems and geographic
regions. Even though studies now number in the hundreds,
some regions and systems remain underrepresented. [2.2]
To investigate possible links between observed changes in regional
climate and biological or physical processes in ecosystems,
the author team gathered more than 2,500 articles on climate
and one of the following entities: animals, plants, glaciers,
sea ice, and ice on lakes or streams. To determine if these
entities have been influenced by changing climate, only studies
meeting at least two of the following criteria were included:
* A trait of these entities (e.g., range boundary, melting date)
shows a change over time.
* The trait is correlated with changes in local temperature.
* Local temperature changed over time.
At least two of these three criteria had to exhibit a statistically
significant correlation. Only temperature was considered
because it is well established in the literature how it influences
the entities examined and because temperature trends are more
globally homogeneous than other locally varying climatic
factors, such as precipitation changes. Selected studies must
also have examined at least 10 years of data; more than 90%
had a time span of more than 20 years.

241

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

These stringent criteria reduced the number of studies used in
the analysis to 44 animal and plant studies that cover more
than 600 species. Of these species, about 90% (more than 550)
show changes in traits over time. Of these 550+ species, about
80% (more than 450) show change in a direction expected
given scientific understanding of known mechanisms that relate
temperature to each of the species traits. The probability that
more than 450 species of 550+ would show changes in the
directions expected by random chance is negligible.

investigate and understand causal relationships within and
between complicated systems. Methodological approaches
employed in such assessments include computer-aided
modeling, scenario analyses, simulation gaming and
participatory integrated assessment, and qualitative assessments
that are based on existing experience and expertise. Since the
SAR, significant progress has been made in developing and
applying such approaches to integrated assessment, globally
and regionally.

Sixteen studies examining glaciers, sea ice, snow cover extent/
snow melt, or ice on lakes or streams included more than 150
sites. Of these 150+ sites, 67% (100+) show changes in traits
over time. Of these 100+ sites, about 99% (99+) exhibited
trends in a direction expected, given scientific understanding
of known mechanisms that relate temperatures to physical
processes that govern change in that trait. The probability that
99+ of 100+ sites would show changes in the directions
expected by chance alone is negligible. [5.2, 5.4, 19.2]

However, progress to date, particularly with regard to
integrated modeling, has focused largely on mitigation issues
at the global or regional scale and only secondarily on issues
of impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation. Greater emphasis
on the development of methods for assessing vulnerability is
required, especially at national and subnational scales where
impacts of climate change are felt and responses are
implemented. Methods designed to include adaptation and
adaptive capacity explicitly in specific applications must be
developed. [2.4]

2.2. Anticipating the Effects of Future Climate Change
2.4. Costing and Valuation
Since the SAR, improvements in methods and tools for studying
impacts of future changes in climate have included greater
emphasis on the use of process-oriented models, transient
climate change scenarios, refined socioeconomic baselines,
and higher resolution spatial and temporal scales. Country
studies and regional assessments in every continent have tested
models and tools in a variety of contexts. First-order impact
models have been linked to global systems models. Adaptation
has been included in many assessments, often for the first time.
Methodological gaps remain concerning scales, data, validation,
and integration of adaptation and the human dimensions of
climate change. Procedures for assessing regional and local
vulnerability and long-term adaptation strategies require highresolution assessments, methodologies to link scales, and dynamic
modeling that uses corresponding and new data sets. Validation
at different scales often is lacking. Regional integration across
sectors is required to place vulnerability in the context of local
and regional development. Methods and tools to assess
vulnerability to extreme events have improved but are constrained
by low confidence in climate change scenarios and the sensitivity
of impact models to major climatic anomalies. Understanding
and integrating higher order economic effects and other human
dimensions of global change are required. Adaptation models
and vulnerability indices to prioritize adaptation options are at
early stages of development in many fields. Methods to enable
stakeholder participation in assessments need improvement. [2.3]
2.3. Integrated Assessment
Integrated assessment is an interdisciplinary process that
combines, interprets, and communicates knowledge from diverse
scientific disciplines from the natural and social sciences to

242

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Methods of economic costing and valuation rely on the notion
of opportunity cost of resources used, degraded, or saved.
Opportunity cost depends on whether the market is competitive
or monopolistic and on whether any externalities are
internalized. It also depends on the rate at which the future is
discounted, which can vary across countries, over time, and
over generations. The impact of uncertainty also can be valued
if the probabilities of different possible outcomes are known.
Public and nonmarket goods and services can be valued
through willingness to pay for them or willingness to accept
compensation for lack of them. Impacts on different groups,
societies, nations, and species must be assessed. Comparison
of alternative distributions of welfare across individuals and
groups within a country can be justified if they are made
according to internally consistent norms. Comparisons across
nations with different societal, ethical, and governmental
structures cannot yet be made meaningfully.
Since the SAR, no new fundamental developments in costing
and valuation methodology have taken place. Many new
applications of existing methods to a widening range of climate
change issues have demonstrated, however, the strengths and
limitations of some of these methods. Research efforts are
required to strengthen methods for multi-objective assessments.
Multi-objective assessments are increasingly preferred, but
the means by which their underlying metrics might more
accurately reflect diverse social, political, economic, and
cultural contexts must be developed. In addition, methods for
integrating across these multiple metrics are still missing from
the methodological repertoire. [2.5]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

2.5. Decision Analytic Frameworks
Policymakers who are responsible for devising and implementing
adaptive policies should be able to rely on results from one or
more of a diverse set of decision analytical frameworks.
Commonly used methods include cost-benefit and costeffectiveness analysis, various types of decision analysis
(including multi-objective studies), and participatory techniques
such as policy exercises.
Very few cases in which policymakers have used decision
analytical frameworks in evaluating adaptation options have
been reported. Among the large number of assessments of
climate change impacts reviewed in the TAR, only a small
fraction include comprehensive and quantitative estimates of
adaptation options and their costs, benefits, and uncertainty
characteristics. This information is necessary for meaningful
applications of any decision analytical method to issues of
adaptation. Greater use of such methods in support of adaptation
decisions is needed to establish their efficacy and to identify
directions for necessary research in the context of vulnerability
and adaptation to climate change. [2.7]

3. Scenarios of Future Change
3.1. Scenarios and their Role
A scenario is a coherent, internally consistent, and plausible
description of a possible future state of the world. Scenarios
are commonly required in climate change impact, adaptation,
and vulnerability assessments to provide alternative views of
future conditions considered likely to influence a given system
or activity. A distinction is made between climate scenarios,
which describe the forcing factor of focal interest to the IPCC,
and nonclimatic scenarios, which provide the socioeconomic
and environmental context within which climate forcing operates.
Most assessments of the impacts of future climate change are
based on results from impact models that rely on quantitative
climate and nonclimatic scenarios as inputs. [3.1.1, Box 3-1]
3.2. Socioeconomic, Land-Use, and Environmental
Scenarios
Nonclimatic scenarios describing future socioeconomic, landuse, and environmental changes are important for characterizing
the sensitivity of systems to climate change, their vulnerability,
and the capacity for adaptation. Such scenarios only recently
have been widely adopted in impact assessments alongside
climate scenarios.
Socioeconomic scenarios. Socioeconomic scenarios have been
used more extensively for projecting GHG emissions than for
assessing climate vulnerability and adaptive capacity. Most
socioeconomic scenarios identify several different topics or

WGII Technical Summary

domains, such as population or economic activity, as well as
background factors such as the structure of governance, social
values, and patterns of technological change. Scenarios make
it possible to establish baseline socioeconomic vulnerability,
pre-climate change; determine climate change impacts; and
assess post-adaptation vulnerability. [3.2]
Land-use and land-cover change scenarios. Land-use change
and land-cover change (LUC-LCC) involve several processes
that are central to the estimation of climate change and its
impacts. First, LUC-LCC influences carbon fluxes and GHG
emissions, which directly alter atmospheric composition and
radiative forcing properties. Second, LUC-LCC modifies landsurface characteristics and, indirectly, climatic processes.
Third, land-cover modification and conversion may alter the
properties of ecosystems and their vulnerability to climate
change. Finally, several options and strategies for mitigating
GHG emissions involve land cover and changed land-use
practices. A great diversity of LUC-LCC scenarios have been
constructed. Most of these scenarios do not address climate
change issues explicitly, however; they focus on other issues--
for example, food security and carbon cycling. Large
improvements have been made since the SAR in defining
current and historic land-use and land-cover patterns, as well
as in estimating future scenarios. Integrated assessment models
currently are the most appropriate tools for developing LUCLCC scenarios. [3.3.1, 3.3.2]
Environmental scenarios. Environmental scenarios refer to
changes in environmental factors other than climate that will
occur in the future regardless of climate change. Because these
factors could have important roles in modifying the impacts of
future climate change, scenarios are required to portray possible
future environmental conditions such as atmospheric composition
[e.g., carbon dioxide (CO2), tropospheric ozone, acidifying
compounds, and ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation]; water availability,
use, and quality; and marine pollution. Apart from the direct
effects of CO2 enrichment, changes in other environmental
factors rarely have been considered alongside climate changes
in past impact assessments, although their use is increasing
with the emergence of integrated assessment methods. [3.4.1]
3.3. Sea-Level Rise Scenarios
Sea-level rise scenarios are required to evaluate a diverse range
of threats to human settlements, natural ecosystems, and
landscape in the coastal zone. Relative sea-level scenarios (i.e.,
sea-level rise with reference to movements of the local land
surface) are of most interest for impact and adaptation
assessments. Tide gauge and wave-height records of 50 years
or more are required, along with information on severe weather
and coastal processes, to establish baseline levels or trends.
Recent techniques of satellite altimetry and geodetic leveling
have enhanced and standardized baseline determinations of
relative sea level over large areas of the globe. [3.6.2]

243

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-1: The SRES scenarios and their implications for atmospheric composition, climate, and sea level. Values of population,
GDP, and per capita income ratio (a measure of regional equity) are those applied in integrated assessment models used to
estimate emissions (based on Tables 3-2 and 3-9).

Date

Global
Population
(billions)a

Global
GDP (1012
US$ yr-1)b

Per Capita
Income
Ratioc

Ground Level
O3
Concentration
(ppm)d

CO2
Global
Concentration Temperature
(ppm)e
Change (C)f

Global
Sea-Level
Rise (cm)g

1990
2000
2050
2100

5.3
6.1-6.2
8.4-11.3
7.0-15.1

121
125-28
159-187
197-550

16.1
12.3-14.2
02.4-8.2
01.4-6.3

--
140
~60
>70

354
367
463-623
478-1099

0
2
5-32
9-88

0
0.2
0.8-2.6
1.4-5.8

a

Values for 2000 show range across the six illustrative SRES emissions scenarios; values for 2050 and 2100 show range across all 40 SRES scenarios.
See footnote a; gross domestic product (trillion 1990 US$ yr-1).
c
See footnote a; ratio of developed countries and economies-in-transition (Annex I) to developing countries (non-Annex I).
d
Model estimates for industrialized continents of northern hemisphere assuming emissions for 2000, 2060, and 2100 from the A1F and A2
illustrative SRES emissions scenarios at high end of the SRES range (Chapter 4, TAR WGI).
e
Observed 1999 value (Chapter 3, WGI TAR); values for 1990, 2050, and 2100 are from simple model runs across the range of 35 fully quantified
SRES emissions scenarios and accounting for uncertainties in carbon cycle feedbacks related to climate sensitivity (data from S.C.B. Raper,
Chapter 9, WGI TAR). Note that the ranges for 2050 and 2100 differ from those presented by TAR WGI (Appendix II), which were ranges across
the six illustrative SRES emissions scenarios from simulations using two different carbon cycle models.
f
Change in global mean annual temperature relative to 1990 averaged across simple climate model runs emulating results of seven AOGCMs with
an average climate sensitivity of 2.8C for the range of 35 fully quantified SRES emissions scenarios (Chapter 9, WGI TAR).
g
Based on global mean temperature changes but also accounting for uncertainties in model parameters for land ice, permafrost, and sediment
deposition (Chapter 11, WGI TAR).
b

Although some components of future sea-level rise can be
modeled regionally by using coupled ocean-atmosphere
models, the most common method of obtaining scenarios is to
apply global mean estimates from simple models. Changes in
the occurrence of extreme events such as storm surges and
wave setup, which can lead to major coastal impacts,
sometimes are investigated by superimposing historically
observed events onto a rising mean sea level. More recently,
some studies have begun to express future sea-level rise in
probabilistic terms, enabling rising levels to be evaluated in
terms of the risk of exceeding a critical threshold of impact.
[3.6.3, 3.6.4, 3.6.5, 3.6.6]
3.4. Climate Scenarios
Three main types of climate scenarios have been employed in
impact assessments: incremental scenarios, analog scenarios,
and climate model-based scenarios. Incremental scenarios are
simple adjustments of the baseline climate according to
anticipated future changes that can offer a valuable aid for
testing system sensitivity to climate. However, because they
involve arbitrary adjustments, they may not be realistic
meteorologically. Analogs of a changed climate from the past
record or from other regions may be difficult to identify and
are seldom applied, although they sometimes can provide
useful insights into impacts of climate conditions outside the
present-day range. [3.5.2]
The most common scenarios use outputs from general circulation
models (GCMs) and usually are constructed by adjusting a

244

IPCC Third Assessment Report

baseline climate (typically based on regional observations of
climate over a reference period such as 1961-1990) by the
absolute or proportional change between the simulated present
and future climates. Most recent impact studies have constructed
scenarios on the basis of transient GCM outputs, although some
still apply earlier equilibrium results. The great majority of
scenarios represent changes in mean climate; some recent
scenarios, however, also have incorporated changes in variability
and extreme weather events, which can lead to important
impacts for some systems. Regional detail is obtained from
the coarse-scale outputs of GCMs by using three main
methods: simple interpolation, statistical downscaling, and
high-resolution dynamical modeling. The simple method,
which reproduces the GCM pattern of change, is the most
widely applied in scenario development. In contrast, the
statistical and modeling approaches can produce local climate
changes that are different from large-scale GCM estimates.
More research is needed to evaluate the value added to impact
studies of such regionalization exercises. One reason for this
caution is the large uncertainty of GCM projections, which
requires further quantification through model intercomparisons,
new model simulations, and pattern scaling methods. [3.5.2,
3.5.4, 3.5.5]
3.5. Scenarios of the 21st Century
In 2000, the IPCC completed a Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios (SRES) to replace the earlier set of six IS92
scenarios developed for the IPCC in 1992. These newer
scenarios consider the period 1990 to 2100 and include a range

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

of socioeconomic assumptions (e.g., global population and
gross domestic product). Their implications for other aspects
of global change also have been calculated; some of these
implications are summarized for 2050 and 2100 in Table TS-1.
For example, mean ground-level ozone concentrations in July
over the industrialized continents of the northern hemisphere
are projected to rise from about 40 ppb in 2000 to more than
70 ppb in 2100 under the highest illustrative SRES emissions
scenarios; by comparison, the clean-air standard is below 80
ppb. Peak levels of ozone in local smog events could be many
times higher. Estimates of CO2 concentration range from 478
ppm to1099 ppm by 2100, given the range of SRES emissions
and uncertainties about the carbon cycle (Table TS-1). This
range of implied radiative forcing gives rise to an estimated global
warming from 1990 to 2100 of 1.4-5.8C, assuming a range
of climate sensitivities. This range is higher than the 0.7-3.5C
of the SAR because of higher levels of radiative forcing in the
SRES scenarios than in the IS92a-f scenarios--primarily as a
result of lower sulfate aerosol emissions, especially after 2050.
The equivalent range of estimates of global sea-level rise (for
this range of global temperature change in combination with a
range of ice melt sensitivities) to 2100 is 9-88 cm (compared
to 15-95 cm in the SAR). [3.2.4.1, 3.4.4, 3.8.1, 3.8.2]
In terms of mean changes in regional climate, results from
GCMs that have been run assuming the new SRES emissions
scenarios display many similarities with previous runs. The
WGI contribution to the TAR concludes that rates of warming
are expected to be greater than the global average over most
land areas and will be most pronounced at high latitudes in
winter. As warming proceeds, northern hemisphere snow cover
and sea-ice extent will be reduced. Models indicate warming
below the global average in the north Atlantic and circumpolar
southern ocean regions, as well as in southern and southeast
Asia and southern South America in June-August. Globally,
there will be increases in average water vapor and precipitation.
Regionally, December-February precipitation is expected to
increase over the northern extratropics, Antarctica, and tropical
Africa. Models also agree on a decrease in precipitation over
Central America and little change in southeast Asia. Precipitation
in June-August is estimated to increase in high northern
latitudes, Antarctica, and south Asia; it is expected to change
little in southeast Asia and to decrease in Central America,
Australia, southern Africa, and the Mediterranean region.
Changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme climate
events also can be expected. Based on the conclusions of the
WGI report and the likelihood scale employed therein, under
GHG forcing to 2100, it is very likely that daytime maximum
and minimum temperatures will increase, accompanied by an
increased frequency of hot days (see Table TS-2). It also is
very likely that heat waves will become more frequent, and
the number of cold waves and frost days (in applicable regions)
will decline. Increases in high-intensity precipitation events
are likely at many locations; Asian summer monsoon precipitation

WGII Technical Summary

variability also is likely to increase. The frequency of summer
drought will increase in many interior continental locations,
and droughts--as well as floods--associated with El Nino
events are likely to intensify. Peak wind intensity and mean
and peak precipitation intensities of tropical cyclones are likely
to increase. The direction of changes in the average intensity
of mid-latitude storms cannot be determined with current
climate models. [Table 3-10]
3.6. How can We Improve Scenarios and their Use?
Some features of scenario development and application that
are now well established and tested include continued
development of global and regional databases for defining
baseline conditions, widespread use of incremental scenarios
to explore system sensitivity prior to application of modelbased scenarios, improved availability and wider application
of estimates of long-term mean global changes on the basis of
projections produced by specialized international organizations
or the use of simple models, and a growing volume of
accessible information that enables construction of regional
scenarios for some aspects of global change. [3.9.1]
There also are numerous shortcomings of current scenario
development, many of which are being actively investigated.
These investigations include efforts to properly represent
socioeconomic, land-use, and environmental changes in
scenarios; to obtain scenarios at higher resolution (in time and
space); and to incorporate changes in variability as well as mean
conditions in scenarios. Increasing attention is required on
construction of scenarios that address policy-related issues such
as stabilization of GHG concentrations or adaptation, as well
as improving the representation of uncertainties in projections,
possibly within a risk assessment framework. [3.9.2]

4. Natural and Human Systems
Natural and human systems are expected to be exposed to
climatic variations such as changes in the average, range, and
variability of temperature and precipitation, as well as the
frequency and severity of weather events. Systems also would
be exposed to indirect effects from climate change such as
sea-level rise, soil moisture changes, changes in land and water
condition, changes in the frequency of fire and pest infestation,
and changes in the distribution of infectious disease vectors
and hosts. The sensitivity of a system to these exposures
depends on system characteristics and includes the potential
for adverse and beneficial effects. The potential for a system to
sustain adverse impacts is moderated by adaptive capacity. The
capacity to adapt human management of systems is determined
by access to resources, information and technology, the skill
and knowledge to use them, and the stability and effectiveness
of cultural, economic, social, and governance institutions that
facilitate or constrain how human systems respond.

245

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-2: Examples of impacts resulting from projected changes in extreme climate events.
Projected Changes during the 21st
Century in Extreme Climate
Phenomena and their Likelihooda

Representative Examples of Projected Impactsb
(all high confidence of occurrence in some areasc)

Simple Extremes
Higher maximum temperatures;
more hot days and heat wavesd over
nearly all land areas (very likelya)

*
*
*
*
*

Increased incidence of death and serious illness in older age groups and urban poor
Increased heat stress in livestock and wildlife
Shift in tourist destinations
Increased risk of damage to a number of crops
Increased electric cooling demand and reduced energy supply reliability

Higher (increasing) minimum
temperatures; fewer cold days, frost
days, and cold wavesd over nearly
all land areas (very likelya)

*
*
*
*

Decreased cold-related human morbidity and mortality
Decreased risk of damage to a number of crops, and increased risk to others
Extended range and activity of some pest and disease vectors
Reduced heating energy demand

More intense precipitation events
(very likelya over many areas)

*
*
*
*

Increased flood, landslide, avalanche, and mudslide damage
Increased soil erosion
Increased flood runoff could increase recharge of some floodplain aquifers
Increased pressure on government and private flood insurance systems and
disaster relief

Increased summer drying over most
mid-latitude continental interiors
and associated risk of drought
(likelya)

*
*
*
*

Decreased crop yields
Increased damage to building foundations caused by ground shrinkage
Decreased water resource quantity and quality
Increased risk of forest fire

Increase in tropical cyclone peak
wind intensities, mean and peak
precipitation intensities (likelya
over some areas)e

* Increased risks to human life, risk of infectious disease epidemics, and many
other risks
* Increased coastal erosion and damage to coastal buildings and infrastructure
* Increased damage to coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs and mangroves

Intensified droughts and floods
associated with El Nino events in
many different regions (likelya)
(see also under droughts and
intense precipitation events)

* Decreased agricultural and rangeland productivity in drought- and flood-prone
regions
* Decreased hydro-power potential in drought-prone regions

Increased Asian summer monsoon
precipitation variability (likelya)

* Increased flood and drought magnitude and damages in temperate and tropical Asia

Increased intensity of mid-latitude
storms (little agreement between
current models)d

* Increased risks to human life and health
* Increased property and infrastructure losses
* Increased damage to coastal ecosystems

Complex Extremes

a

b
c
d
e

Likelihood refers to judgmental estimates of confidence used by TAR WGI: very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance). Unless
otherwise stated, information on climate phenomena is taken from the Summary for Policymakers, TAR WGI.
These impacts can be lessened by appropriate response measures.
High confidence refers to probabilities between 67 and 95% as described in Footnote 6 of TAR WGII, Summary for Policymakers.
Information from TAR WGI, Technical Summary, Section F.5.
Changes in regional distribution of tropical cyclones are possible but have not been established.

4.1. Water Resources
There are apparent trends in streamflow volumes--increases and
decreases--in many regions. However, confidence that these
trends are a result of climate change is low because of factors
such as the variability of hydrological behavior over time, the
brevity of instrumental records, and the response of river flows

246

IPCC Third Assessment Report

to stimuli other than climate change. In contrast, there is high
confidence that observations of widespread accelerated glacier
retreat and shifts in the timing of streamflow from spring
toward winter in many areas are associated with observed
increases in temperature. High confidence in these findings
exists because these changes are driven by rising temperature
and are unaffected by factors that influence streamflow

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

(a)

(b)

< -250

-250 to -150

-150 to -50

-50 to -25

-25 to 0

0 to 25

Change in Annual Runoff (mm

25 to 50

50 to 150

>150

yr-1)

Figure TS-3: The pattern of changes in runoff largely follows the pattern of simulated changes in precipitation, which varies between climate
models. The modeled increases in runoff shown in both maps [(a) HadCM2 ensemble mean and (b) HadCM3; see Section 4.3.6.2 of Chapter
4 for discussion of models and scenarios used] for high latitudes and southeast Asia, and decreases in central Asia, the area around the
Mediterranean, southern Africa, and Australia are broadly consistent--in terms of direction of change--across most climate models. In other
parts of the world, changes in precipitation and runoff vary between climate change scenarios.

volumes. Glacier retreat will continue, and many small glaciers
may disappear (high confidence). The rate of retreat will depend
on the rate of temperature rise. [4.3.6.1, 4.3.11]
The effect of climate change on streamflow and groundwater
recharge varies regionally and among scenarios, largely
following projected changes in precipitation. In some parts
of the world, the direction of change is consistent between
scenarios, although the magnitude is not. In other parts of the
world, the direction of change is uncertain. Possible streamflow
changes under two climate change scenarios are shown in

Figure TS-3. Confidence in the projected direction and
magnitude of change in streamflow and groundwater recharge
is largely dependent on confidence in the projected changes
in precipitation. The mapped increase in streamflow in high
latitudes and southeast Asia and the decrease in streamflow in
central Asia, the area around the Mediterranean, and southern
Africa are broadly consistent across climate models. Changes
in other areas vary between climate models. [4.3.5, 4.3.6.2]
Peak streamflow will move from spring to winter in many areas
where snowfall currently is an important component of the

247

Climate Change 2001

water balance (high confidence). Higher temperatures mean
that a greater proportion of winter precipitation falls as rain
rather than snow and therefore is not stored on the land surface
until it melts in spring. In particularly cold areas, an increase
in temperature would still mean that winter precipitation falls
as snow, so there would be little change in streamflow timing
in these regions. The greatest changes therefore are likely to
be in "marginal" zones--including central and eastern Europe
and the southern Rocky Mountain chain--where a small
temperature rise reduces snowfall substantially. [4.3.6.2]

Climate change is unlikely to have a large effect on municipal
and industrial demands but may substantially affect irrigation
withdrawals. In the municipal and industrial sectors, it is likely
that nonclimatic drivers will continue to have very substantial
effects on demand for water. Irrigation withdrawals, however,
are more climatically determined, but whether they increase or
decrease in a given area depends on the change in precipitation:
Higher temperatures, hence crop evaporative demand, would
mean that the general tendency would be toward an increase
in irrigation demands. [4.4.2, 4.4.3, 4.5.2]

Water quality generally would be degraded by higher water
temperatures (high confidence). The effect of temperature on
water quality would be modified by changes in flow volume,
which may either exacerbate or lessen the effect of temperature,
depending on the direction of change in flow volume. Other
things being equal, increasing water temperature alters the rate
of operation of biogeochemical processes (some degrading,
some cleaning) and, most important, lowers the dissolved
oxygen concentration of water. In rivers this effect may be
offset to an extent by increased streamflow--which would
dilute chemical concentrations further--or enhanced by lower
streamflow, which would increase concentrations. In lakes,
changes in mixing may offset or exaggerate the effects of
increased temperature. [4.3.10]

The impact of climate change on water resources depends
not only on changes in the volume, timing, and quality of
streamflow and recharge but also on system characteristics,
changing pressures on the system, how management of the
system evolves, and what adaptations to climate change are
implemented. Nonclimatic changes may have a greater impact
on water resources than climate change. Water resources
systems are evolving continually to meet changing management
challenges. Many of the increased pressures will increase
vulnerability to climate change, but many management changes
will reduce vulnerability. Unmanaged systems are likely to be
most vulnerable to climate change. By definition, these systems
have no management structures in place to buffer the effects
of hydrological variability. [4.5.2]

Flood magnitude and frequency are likely to increase in most
regions, and low flows are likely to decrease in many regions.
The general direction of change in extreme flows and flow
variability is broadly consistent among climate change scenarios,
although confidence in the potential magnitude of change in
any catchment is low. The general increase in flood magnitude
and frequency is a consequence of a projected general increase
in the frequency of heavy precipitation events, although the
effect of a given change in precipitation depends on catchment
characteristics. Changes in low flows are a function of changes in
precipitation and evaporation. Evaporation generally is projected
to increase, which may lead to lower low flows even where
precipitation increases or shows little change. [4.3.8, 4.3.9]

Climate change challenges existing water resources management
practices by adding uncertainty. Integrated water resources
management will enhance the potential for adaptation to change.
The historic basis for designing and operating infrastructure
no longer holds with climate change because it cannot be
assumed that the future hydrological regime will be the same
as that of the past. The key challenge, therefore, is incorporating
uncertainty into water resources planning and management.
Integrated water resources management is an increasingly used
means of reconciling different and changing water uses and
demands, and it appears to offer greater flexibility than
conventional water resources management. Improved ability
to forecast streamflow weeks or months ahead also would
significantly enhance water management and its ability to cope
with a changing hydrological variability. [4.6]

Approximately 1.7 billion people, one-third of the world's
population, presently live in countries that are water-stressed
(i.e., using more than 20% of their renewable water supply--
a commonly used indicator of water stress). This number is
projected to increase to about 5 billion by 2025, depending
on the rate of population growth. Projected climate change
could further decrease streamflow and groundwater recharge
in many of these water-stressed countries--for example, in
central Asia, southern Africa, and countries around the
Mediterranean Sea--but may increase it in some others.
Demand for water generally is increasing, as a result of
population growth and economic development, but is falling in
some countries. Climate change may decrease water availability
in some water-stressed regions and increase it in others.

248

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Adaptive capacity (specifically, the ability to implement
integrated water resources management), however, is very
unevenly distributed across the world. In practice, it may be
very difficult to change water management practices in a
country where, for example, management institutions and
market-like processes are not well developed. The challenge,
therefore, is to develop ways to introduce integrated water
management practices into specific institutional settings--
which is necessary even in the absence of climate change to
improve the effectiveness of water management. [4.6.4]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Maize

100

Wheat

Rice

Without adaptation
With adaptation
* CO2 effects not considered
Change in Yield (%)

50

0

-50

-100

Egypt

Romania

USA

Egypt

Mongolia

Australia

Egypt

Temperate
Asia

Yates

Cuculeanu

Tung*

Yates

Smith*

Howden

Yates

Matthews

Figure TS-4: Ranges of percentage changes in crop yields (expressed in vertical extent of vertical bars only) spanning selected climate
change scenarios--with and without agronomic adaptation--from paired studies listed in Table 5-4. Each pair of ranges is differentiated by
geographic location and crop. Pairs of vertical bars represent the range of percentage changes with and without adaptation. Endpoints of
each range represent collective high and low percentage change values derived from all climate scenarios used in the study. The horizontal
extent of the bars is not meaningful. On the x-axis, the last name of the lead author is listed as it appears in Table 5-4; full source information
is provided in the WGII TAR Chapter 5 reference list.

4.2. Agriculture and Food Security
The response of crop yields to climate change varies widely,
depending on the species, cultivar, soil conditions, treatment
of CO2 direct effects, and other locational factors. It is
established with medium confidence that a few degrees of
projected warming will lead to general increases in temperate
crop yields, with some regional variation (Table 5-4). At larger
amounts of projected warming, most temperate crop yield
responses become generally negative. Autonomous agronomic
adaptation ameliorates temperate crop yield loss and improves
gain in most cases (Figure TS-4). In the tropics, where some
crops are near their maximum temperature tolerance and where
dryland agriculture predominates, yields would decrease
generally with even minimal changes in temperature; where
there is a large decrease in rainfall, crop yields would be even
more adversely affected (medium confidence). With autonomous
agronomic adaptation, it is established with medium confidence
that crop yields in the tropics tend to be less adversely affected
by climate change than without adaptation, but they still tend
to remain below baseline levels. Extreme events also will affect
crop yields. Higher minimum temperatures will be beneficial
to some crops, especially in temperate regions, and detrimental
to other crops, especially in low latitudes (high confidence).
Higher maximum temperatures will be generally detrimental
to numerous crops (high confidence). [5.3.3]

Important advances in research since the SAR on the direct
effects of CO2 on crops suggest that beneficial effects may be
greater under certain stressful conditions, including warmer
temperatures and drought. Although these effects are well
established for a few crops under experimental conditions,
knowledge of them is incomplete for suboptimal conditions
of actual farms. Research on agricultural adaptation to climate
change also has made important advances. Inexpensive, farmlevel (autonomous) agronomic adaptations such as altering of
planting dates and cultivar selections have been simulated in
crop models extensively. More expensive, directed adaptations--
such as changing land-use allocations and developing and using
irrigation infrastructure--have been examined in a small but
growing number of linked crop-economic models, integrated
assessment models, and econometric models.
Degradation of soil and water resources is one of the major
future challenges for global agriculture. It is established with
high confidence that those processes are likely to be intensified
by adverse changes in temperature and precipitation. Land use
and management have been shown to have a greater impact on
soil conditions than the indirect effect of climate change; thus,
adaptation has the potential to significantly mitigate these
impacts. A critical research need is to assess whether resource
degradation will significantly increase the risks faced by
vulnerable agricultural and rural populations [5.3.2, 5.3.4, 5.3.6].

249

Climate Change 2001

In the absence of climate change, most global and regional
studies project declining real prices for agricultural commodities.
Confidence in these projections declines farther into the future.
The impacts of climate change on agriculture are estimated to
result in small percentage changes in global income, with positive
changes in more developed regions and smaller or negative
changes in developing regions (low to medium confidence).
The effectiveness of adaptation (agronomic and economic) in
ameliorating the impacts of climate change will vary regionally
and depend a great deal on regional resource endowments,
including stable and effective institutions. [5.3.1, 5.3.5]
Most studies indicate that mean annual temperature increases
of 2.5C or greater would prompt food prices to increase (low
confidence) as a result of slowing in the expansion of global
food capacity relative to growth in global food demand. At
lesser amounts of warming than 2.5C, global impact assessment
models cannot distinguish the climate change signal from other
sources of change. Some recent aggregated studies have
estimated economic impacts on vulnerable populations such
as smallholder producers and poor urban consumers. These
studies indicate that climate change will lower the incomes of
vulnerable populations and increase the absolute number of
people at risk of hunger (low confidence). [5.3.5, 5.3.6]
Without autonomous adaptation, increases in extreme events
are likely to increase heat stress-related livestock deaths,
although winter warming may reduce neonatal deaths at
temperate latitudes (established but incomplete). Strategies
to adapt livestock to physiological stresses of warming are
considered effective; however, adaptation research is hindered
by the lack of experimentation and simulation. [5.3.3]
Confidence in specific numerical estimates of climate change
impacts on production, income, and prices obtained from large,
aggregated, integrated assessment models is considered to be
low because there are several remaining uncertainties. The
models are highly sensitive to some parameters that have been
subjected to sensitivity analysis, yet sensitivity to a large
number of other parameters has not been reported. Other
uncertainties include the magnitude and persistence of effects
of rising atmospheric CO2 on crop yield under realistic farming
conditions; potential changes in crop and animal pest losses;
spatial variability in crop responses to climate change; and
the effects of changes in climate variability and extreme events
on crops and livestock. [Box 5-3]
4.3. Terrestrial and Freshwater Ecosystems
Ecosystems are subject to many pressures, such as land-use
changes, deposition of nutrients and pollutants, harvesting,
grazing by livestock, introduction of exotic species, and natural
climate variability. Climate change constitutes an additional
pressure that could change or endanger these systems. The
impact of climate change on these systems will be influenced

250

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

by land and water management adaptation and interactions
with other pressures. Adaptive capacity is greater for more
intensively managed lands and waters and in production of
marketed goods (e.g., timber production in plantations) than
in less intensively managed lands and nonmarket values of
those lands and waters. [5.1, 5.2]
Populations of many species already are threatened and are
expected to be placed at greater risk by the synergy between the
stresses of changing climate, rendering portions of current habitat
unsuitable, and land-use change that fragments habitats.
Without adaptation, some species that currently are classified
as "critically endangered" will become extinct, and the majority
of those labeled "endangered or vulnerable" will become much
rarer in the 21st century (high confidence). This may have the
greatest impact on the lowest income human societies, which
rely on wildlife for subsistence living. In addition, there is
high confidence that loss or reduction of species would impact
the services provided by wildlife through roles within an
ecosystem (e.g., pollination, natural pest control), recreation
(e.g., sport hunting, wildlife viewing), and cultural and
religious practices of indigenous people. Possible adaptation
methods to reduce risks to species could include establishment
of refuges, parks, and reserves with corridors to allow migration
of species, as well as use of captive breeding and translocation.
However, these options may have limitations of cost. [5.4]
There are now substantial observational and experimental
studies demonstrating the link between change in regional
climate and biological or physical processes in ecosystems.
These include a lengthening of vegetative growing season by
1.2 to 3.6 days per decade in the high northern latitudes (one
factor leading to community composition changes); warming
of lakes and rivers as a result of shortening duration of ice
cover; upward range shifts in alpine herbs; and increased
mortality and range contraction of wildlife as a result of heat
stress. Others include changes in population sizes, body sizes,
and migration times (see TS 2.1 and 7.1, Figure TS-11, and
Table TS-16 for additional information). [5.2.1]
Vegetation distribution models since the SAR suggest that mass
ecosystem or biome movement is most unlikely to occur because
of different climatic tolerance of the species involved, different
migration abilities, and the effects of invading species. Species
composition and dominance will change, resulting in
ecosystem types that may be quite different from those we see
today. These changes will lag the changes in climate by years
to decades to centuries (high confidence). The effects of
changes in disturbances such as fire, blowdown, or pest attacks
on vegetation have not been included in these studies. [5.2]
Recent modeling studies continue to show potential for
significant disruption of ecosystems under climate change
(high confidence). Further development of simple correlative
models that were available at the time of the SAR point to

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

areas where ecosystem disruption and the potential for
ecosystem migration are high. Observational data and newer
dynamic vegetation models linked to transient climate models
are refining the projections. However, the precise outcomes
depend on processes that are too subtle to be fully captured
by current models. [5.2]

is likely to be negative because decomposition initially may
respond more rapidly than production. In these systems, changes
in albedo and energy absorption during winter are likely to
act as a positive feedback to regional warming as a result of
earlier melting of snow and, over decades to centuries, poleward
movement of the treeline. [5.8, 5.9]

Increasing CO2 concentration would increase net primary
productivity (plant growth, litterfall, and mortality) in most
systems, whereas increasing temperature may have positive
or negative effects (high confidence). Experiments on tree
species grown under elevated CO2 over several years show
continued and consistent stimulation of photosynthesis and
little evidence of long-term loss of sensitivity to CO2. However,
changes in net ecosystem productivity (which includes plant
growth, litterfall, mortality, litter decomposition, and soil carbon
dynamics) and net biome productivity (which includes those
effects plus the effects of fire or other disturbances) are less
likely to be positive and may be generally negative. Research
reported since the SAR confirms the view that the largest and
earliest impacts induced by climate change are likely to occur
in boreal forests, through changes in weather-related disturbance
regimes and nutrient cycling. [5.6.1.1, 5.6.3.1]

Most wetland processes are dependent on catchment-level
hydrology; thus, adaptations for projected climate change may
be practically impossible. Arctic and subarctic ombrotrophic
bog communities on permafrost, as well as more southern
depressional wetlands with small catchment areas, are likely
to be most vulnerable to climate change. The increasing speed
of peatland conversion and drainage in southeast Asia is likely
to place these areas at a greatly increased risk of fires and
affect the viability of tropical wetlands. [5.8]

Terrestrial ecosystems appear to be storing increasing amounts
of carbon. At the time of the SAR, this was attributed largely
to increasing plant productivity because of the interaction
among elevated CO2 concentration, increasing temperatures,
and soil moisture changes. Recent results confirm that
productivity gains are occurring but suggest that they are
smaller under field conditions than plant-pot experiments
indicate (medium confidence). Hence, the terrestrial uptake
may be caused more by change in uses and management of
land than by the direct effects of elevated CO2 and climate.
The degree to which terrestrial ecosystems continue to be net
sinks for carbon is uncertain because of the complex
interactions between the aforementioned factors (e.g., arctic
terrestrial ecosystems and wetlands may act as sources and
sinks) (medium confidence).
In arid or semi-arid areas (e.g., rangelands, dry forests/
woodlands) where climate change is likely to decrease
available soil moisture, productivity is expected to decrease.
Increased CO2 concentrations may counteract some of these
losses. However, many of these areas are affected by El Nino/
La Nina, other climatic extremes, and disturbances such as
fire. Changes in the frequencies of these events and disturbances
could lead to loss of productivity thus potential land degradation,
potential loss of stored carbon, or decrease in the rate of carbon
uptake (medium confidence). [5.5]
Some wetlands will be replaced by forests or heathlands, and
those overlying permafrost are likely to be disrupted as a result
of thawing of permafrost (high confidence). The initial net
effect of warming on carbon stores in high-latitude ecosystems

Opportunities for adapting to expected changes in highlatitude and alpine ecosystems are limited because these systems
will respond most strongly to globally induced changes in
climate. Careful management of wildlife resources could
minimize climatic impacts on indigenous peoples. Many highlatitude regions depend strongly on one or a few resources,
such as timber, oil, reindeer, or wages from fighting fires.
Economic diversification would reduce the impacts of large
changes in the availability or economic value of particular
goods and services. High levels of endemism in many alpine
floras and their inability to migrate upward means that these
species are very vulnerable. [5.9]
Contrary to the SAR, global timber market studies that include
adaptations through land and product management suggest
that climate change would increase global timber supply
(medium confidence). At the regional and global scales, the
extent and nature of adaptation will depend primarily on wood
and non-wood product prices, the relative value of substitutes,
the cost of management, and technology. On specific sites,
changes in forest growth and productivity will constrain--
and could limit--choices regarding adaptation strategies (high
confidence). In markets, prices will mediate adaptation through
land and product management. Adaptation in managed forests
will include salvaging dead and dying timber, replanting new
species that are better suited to the new climate, planting
genetically modified species, and intensifying or decreasing
management. Consumers will benefit from lower timber prices;
producers may gain or lose, depending on regional changes in
timber productivity and potential dieback effects. [5.6]
Climate change will lead to poleward movement of the
southern and northern boundaries of fish distributions, loss
of habitat for cold- and coolwater fish, and gain in habitat
for warmwater fish (high confidence). As a class of ecosystems,
inland waters are vulnerable to climatic change and other
pressures owing to their small size and position downstream
from many human activities (high confidence). The most

251

Climate Change 2001

vulnerable elements include reduction and loss of lake and
river ice (very high confidence), loss of habitat for coldwater fish
(very high confidence), increases in extinctions and invasions
of exotics (high confidence), and potential exacerbation of
existing pollution problems such as eutrophication, toxics, acid
rain, and UV-B radiation (medium confidence). [5.7]
4.4. Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems
Global climate change will result in increases in sea-surface
temperature (SST) and sea level; decreases in sea-ice cover;
and changes in salinity, wave climate, and ocean circulation.
Some of these changes already are taking place. Changes in
oceans are expected to have important feedback effects on
global climate and on the climate of the immediate coastal
area (see TAR WGI). They also would have profound impacts
on the biological production of oceans, including fish
production. For instance, changes in global water circulation
and vertical mixing will affect the distribution of biogenic
elements and the efficiency of CO2 uptake by the ocean;
changes in upwelling rates would have major impacts on
coastal fish production and coastal climates. [6.3]
If warm events associated with El Ninos increase in frequency,
plankton biomass and fish larvae abundance would decline
and adversely impact fish, marine mammals, seabirds, and
ocean biodiversity (high confidence). In addition to El NinoSouthern Oscillation (ENSO) variability, the persistence of
multi-year climate-ocean regimes and switches from one
regime to another have been recognized since the SAR.
Changes in recruitment patterns of fish populations have been
linked to such switches. Fluctuations in fish abundance are
increasingly regarded as biological responses to medium-term
climate fluctuations in addition to overfishing and other
anthropogenic factors. Similarly, survival of marine mammals
and seabirds also is affected by interannual and longer term
variability in several oceanographic and atmospheric
properties and processes, especially in high latitudes. [6.3.4]
Growing recognition of the role of the climate-ocean system
in the management of fish stocks is leading to new adaptive
strategies that are based on the determination of acceptable
removable percentages of fish and stock resilience. Another
consequence of the recognition of climate-related changes in
the distribution of marine fish populations suggests that the
sustainability of many nations' fisheries will depend on
adaptations that increase flexibility in bilateral and multilateral
fishing agreements, coupled with international stock
assessments and management plans. Creating sustainable
fisheries also depends on understanding synergies between
climate-related impacts on fisheries and factors such as harvest
pressure and habitat conditions. [6.3.4, 6.6.4]
Adaptation by expansion of marine aquaculture may partly
compensate for potential reductions in ocean fish catch. Marine

252

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

aquaculture production has more than doubled since 1990,
and in 1997 represented approximately 30% of total commercial
fish and shellfish production for human consumption.
However, future aquaculture productivity may be limited by
ocean stocks of herring, anchovies, and other species that are
used to provide fishmeal and fish oils to feed cultured species,
which may be negatively impacted by climate change.
Decreases in dissolved oxygen levels associated with increased
seawater temperatures and enrichment of organic matter
creates conditions for the spread of diseases in wild and
aquaculture fisheries, as well as outbreaks of algal blooms in
coastal areas. Pollution and habitat destruction that can
accompany aquaculture also may place limits on its expansion
and on the survival success of wild stocks. [6.3.5]
Many coastal areas already are experiencing increased levels
of sea flooding, accelerated coastal erosion, and seawater
intrusion into freshwater sources; these processes will be
exacerbated by climate change and sea-level rise. Sea-level
rise in particular has contributed to erosion of sandy and gravel
beaches and barriers; loss of coastal dunes and wetlands; and
drainage problems in many low-lying, mid-latitude coastal
areas. Highly diverse and productive coastal ecosystems,
coastal settlements, and island states will continue to be
exposed to pressures whose impacts are expected to be largely
negative and potentially disastrous in some instances. [6.4]
Low-latitude tropical and subtropical coastlines, particularly
in areas where there is significant human population pressure,
are highly susceptible to climate change impacts. These
impacts will exacerbate many present-day problems. For
instance, human activities have increased land subsidence in
many deltaic regions by increasing subsurface water withdrawals,
draining wetland soils, and reducing or cutting off riverine
sediment loads. Problems of inundation, salinization of potable
groundwater, and coastal erosion will all be accelerated with
global sea-level rise superimposed on local submergence.
Especially at risk are large delta regions of Asia and small
islands whose vulnerability was recognized more than a decade
ago and continues to increase. [6.4.3, 6.5.3]
High-latitude (polar) coastlines also are susceptible to climate
warming impacts, although these impacts have been less
studied. Except on rock-dominated or rapidly emerging coasts,
a combination of accelerated sea-level rise, more energetic
wave climate with reduced sea-ice cover, and increased ground
temperatures that promote thaw of permafrost and ground ice
(with consequent volume loss in coastal landforms) will have
severe impacts on settlements and infrastructure and will result
in rapid coastal retreat. [6.4.6]
Coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs and atolls, salt marshes
and mangrove forests, and submergered aquatic vegetation
will be impacted by sea-level rise, warming SSTs, and any
changes in storm frequency and intensity. Impacts of sea-level

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

rise on mangroves and salt marshes will depend on the rate of
rise relative to vertical accretion and space for horizontal
migration, which can be limited by human development in
coastal areas. Healthy coral reefs are likely to be able to keep
up with sea-level rise, but this is less certain for reefs degraded
by coral bleaching, UV-B radiation, pollution, and other
stresses. Episodes of coral bleaching over the past 20 years
have been associated with several causes, including increased
ocean temperatures. Future sea-surface warming would
increase stress on coral reefs and result in increased frequency
of marine diseases (high confidence). Changes in ocean
chemistry resulting from higher CO2 levels may have a negative
impact on coral reef development and health, which would
have a detrimental effect on coastal fisheries and on social
and economic uses of reef resources. [6.4.4, 6.4.5]
Few studies have examined potential changes in prevailing
ocean wave heights and directions and storm waves and surges
as a consequence of climate change. Such changes can be
expected to have serious impacts on natural and humanmodified coasts because they will be superimposed on a higher
sea level than at present.
Vulnerabilities have been documented for a variety of coastal
settings, initially by using a common methodology developed
in the early 1990s. These and subsequent studies have
confirmed the spatial and temporal variability of coastal
vulnerability at national and regional levels. Within the
common methodology, three coastal adaptation strategies have
been identified: protect, accommodate, and retreat. Since the
SAR, adaptation strategies for coastal zones have shifted in
emphasis away from hard protection structures (e.g., seawalls,
groins) toward soft protection measures (e.g., beach
nourishment), managed retreat, and enhanced resilience of
biophysical and socioeconomic systems, including the use of
flood insurance to spread financial risk. [6.6.1, 6.6.2]
Integrated assessments of coastal zones and marine ecosystems
and better understanding of their interaction with human
development and multi-year climate variability could lead to
improvements in sustainable development and management.
Adaptation options for coastal and marine management are
most effective when they are incorporated with policies in other
areas, such as disaster mitigation plans and land-use plans.
4.5. Human Settlements, Energy, and Industry
Human settlements are integrators of many of the climate
impacts initially felt in other sectors and differ from each other
in geographic location, size, economic circumstances, and
political and institutional capacity. As a consequence, it is
difficult to make blanket statements concerning the importance
of climate or climate change that will not have numerous
exceptions. However, classifying human settlements by
considering pathways by which climate may affect them, size

WGII Technical Summary

or other obvious physical considerations, and adaptive
capacities (wealth, education of the populace, technological
and institutional capacity) helps to explain some of the
differences in expected impacts. [7.2]
Human settlements are affected by climate in one of three major
ways:
1) Economic sectors that support the settlement are affected
because of changes in productive capacity (e.g., in
agriculture or fisheries) or changes in market demand for
goods and services produced there (including demand from
people living nearby and from tourism). The importance
of this impact depends in part on whether the settlement is
rural--which generally means that it is dependent on one
or two resource-based industries--or urban, in which case
there usually (but not always) is a broader array of
alternative resources. It also depends on the adaptive
capacity of the settlement. [7.1]
2) Some aspects of physical infrastructure (including energy
transmission and distribution systems), buildings, urban
services (including transportation systems), and specific
industries (such as agroindustry, tourism, and construction)
may be directly affected. For example, buildings and
infrastructure in deltaic areas may be affected by coastal
and river flooding; urban energy demand may increase or
decrease as a result of changed balances in space heating
and space cooling; and coastal and mountain tourism may be
affected by changed seasonal temperature and precipitation
patterns and sea-level rise. Concentration of population
and infrastructure in urban areas can mean higher numbers
of persons and higher value of physical capital at risk,
although there also are many economies of scale and
proximity in ensuring well-managed infrastructure and
service provision. When these factors are combined with
other prevention measures, risks can be reduced considerably.
However, some larger urban centers in Africa, Asia, Latin
America, and the Caribbean, as well as smaller settlements
(including villages and small urban centers), often have
less wealth, political power, and institutional capacity to
reduce risks in this way. [7.1]
3) Population may be directly affected through extreme
weather, changes in health status, or migration. Extreme
weather episodes may lead to changes in deaths, injuries,
or illness. For example, health status may improve as a
result of reduced cold stress or deteriorate as a result of
increased heat stress and disease. Population movements
caused by climate changes may affect the size and
characteristics of settlement populations, which in turn
changes the demand for urban services. The problems are
somewhat different in the largest population centers (e.g.,
those of more than 1 million population) and mid-sized to
small-sized regional centers. The former are more likely
to be destinations for migrants from rural areas and smaller
settlements and cross-border areas, but larger settlements

253

254

IPCC Third Assessment Report

M-H

M

M-H

M-H

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

Tropical cyclone L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L

Fires

Agriculture/
forestry/fisheries
productivity
L-M

L

Water shortage

Hail, windstorm L-M

L-M

Sea-level rise

Heat/cold waves L-M

L

Water quality

Air pollution

Permafrost
melting

Heat islands

-

L-M

L

L-M

L-M

L-M

M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

-

L-M

L

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

L

L

-

L

L-M

L-M

L

L-M

M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L

L

-

L

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

M-H

M-H

M-H

M-H

-

-

L

-

L

L

M

L-M

L

L-M

L

L-M

L-M

M-H

M

M-H

M-H

L-M

L-M

M-H

M-H

M

M-H

M

-

L-M

L

L-M

L-M

L

L-M

L

L-M

L-M

M

L-M

-

M-H

L-M

L-M

L-M

M

M-H

L-M

M-H

M

M-H

Low
Capacity

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L-M

L

L-M

L

M

High
Capacity

L-M

L-M

M-H

M

L-M

M

M

M-H

L-M

M-H

L-M

M-H

Low
Capacity

Urban 1+ M
Urban <1 M
(Effects on Populations) (Effects on Populations)

***

****

***

***

**

* (***for urban)

*** (** for urban)

*** (**** for urban)

**** (** for
resource-dependent)

***

***

****

Confidencec

Values in cells in the table were assigned by authors on the basis of direct evidence in the literature or inference from impacts shown in other cells. Typeface indicates source of rating: Boldface
indicates direct evidence or study; italic indicates direct inference from similar impacts; regular typeface indicates logical conclusion from settlement type, but cannot be directly corroborated from a study
or inferred from similar impacts.
b
Impacts ratings: Low (L) = impacts are barely discernible or easily overcome; moderate (M) = impacts are clearly noticeable, although not disruptive, and may require significant expense or difficulty
in adapting; high (H) = impacts are clearly disruptive and may not be overcome or adaptation is so costly that it is disruptive (impacts generally based on 2xCO2 scenarios or studies describing impact
of current weather events, but have been placed in context of the IPCC transient scenarios for mid- to late 21st century). Note that "Urban 1+ M" and "Urban <1 M" refer to populations above and
below 1 million, respectively.
c
See Section 1.4 of Technical Summary for key to confidence-level rankings.

L

L

M-H

a

Coastal-Riverine-Steeplands
(Effects on Buildings and Infrastructure)

Urban, Urban, Rural,
Rural,
Urban, Urban, Rural,
Rural,
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
Low
High
High
Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity Capacity

Resource-Dependent
(Effects on Resources)

Type of Settlement, Importance Rating, and Reference

L-M

Flooding,
landslides

Impact Type

Table TS-3: Impacts of climate change on human settlements, by impact type and settlement type (impact mechanism). a,b

Climate Change 2001
Synthesis Report

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

generally have much greater command over national
resource. Thus, smaller settlements actually may be more
vulnerable. Informal settlements surrounding large and
medium-size cities in the developing world remain a cause
for concern because they exhibit several current health and
environmental hazards that could be exacerbated by global
warming and have limited command over resources. [7.1]
Table TS-3 classifies several types of climate-caused environmental
changes discussed in the climate and human settlement
literatures. The table features three general types of settlements,
each based on one of the three major mechanisms by which
climate affects settlements. The impacts correspond to the
mechanism of the effect. Thus, a given settlement may be
affected positively by effects of climate change on its resource
base (e.g., more agricultural production) and negatively by
effects on its infrastructure (e.g., more frequent flooding of its
water works and overload of its electrical system). Different types
of settlements may experience these effects in different relative
intensities (e.g., noncoastal settlements do not directly experience
impacts through sea-level rise); the impacts are ranked from
overall highest to lowest importance. Most settlement effects
literature is based on 2xCO2 scenarios or studies describing
the impact of current weather events (analogs) but has been
placed in context of the IPCC transient scenarios. [7.1]
Climate change has the potential to create local and regional
conditions that involve water deficits and surpluses, sometimes
seasonally in the same geographic locations. The most widespread
serious potential impacts are flooding, landslides, mudslides,
and avalanches driven by projected increases in rainfall
intensity and sea-level rise. A growing literature suggests that
a very wide variety of settlements in nearly every climate zone
may be affected (established but incomplete). Riverine and
coastal settlements are believed to be particularly at risk, but
urban flooding could be a problem anywhere storm drains,
water supply, and waste management systems are not designed
with enough capacity or sophistication (including conventional
hardening and more advanced system design) to avoid being
overwhelmed. The next most serious threats are tropical cyclones
(hurricanes or typhoons), which may increase in peak intensity
in a warmer world. Tropical cyclones combine the effects of
heavy rainfall, high winds, and storm surge in coastal areas
and can be disruptive far inland, but they are not as universal
in location as floods and landslides. Tens of millions of people
live in the settlements potentially flooded. For example,
estimates of the mean annual number of people who would be
flooded by coastal storm surges increase several-fold (by 75
million to 200 million people, depending on adaptive responses)
for mid-range scenarios of a 40-cm sea-level rise by the 2080s
relative to scenarios with no sea-level rise. Potential damages
to infrastructure in coastal areas from sea-level rise have been
estimated to be tens of billions of dollars for individual
countries such as Egypt, Poland, and Vietnam. In the middle
of Table TS-3 are effects such as heat or cold waves, which

WGII Technical Summary

can be disruptive to the resource base (e.g., agriculture), human
health, and demand for heating and cooling energy.
Environmental impacts such as reduced air and water quality
also are included. Windstorms, water shortages, and fire also
are expected to be moderately important in many regions. At
the lower end are effects such as permafrost melting and heat
island effects--which, although important locally, may not
apply to as wide a variety of settlements or hold less importance
once adaptation is taken into account. [7.2, 7.3]
Global warming is expected to result in increases in energy
demand for spacing cooling and in decreased energy use for
space heating. Increases in heat waves add to cooling energy
demand, and decreases in cold waves reduce heating energy
demand. The projected net effect on annual energy consumption
is scenario- and location-specific. Adapting human settlements,
energy systems, and industry to climate change provides
challenges for the design and operation of settlements (in some
cases) during more severe weather and opportunities to take
advantage (in other cases) of more benign weather. For
instance, transmission systems of electric systems are known to
be adversely affected by extreme events such as tropical cyclones,
tornadoes, and ice storms. The existence of local capacity to
limit environmental hazards or their health consequences in
any settlement generally implies local capacity to adapt to
climate change, unless adaptation implies particularly expensive
infrastructure investment. Adaptation to warmer climate will
require local tuning of settlements to a changing environment,
not just warmer temperatures. Urban experts are unanimous
that successful environmental adaptation cannot occur without
locally based, technically and institutionally competent, and
politically supported leadership that have good access to
national-level resources. [7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5]
Possible adaptation options involve planning of settlements and
their infrastructure, placement of industrial facilities, and making
similar long-lived decisions to reduce the adverse effects of
events that are of low (but increasing) probability and high
(and perhaps rising) consequences. Many specific conventional
and advanced techniques can contribute to better environmental
planning and management, including market-based tools for
pollution control, demand management and waste reduction,
mixed-use zoning and transport planning (with appropriate
provision for pedestrians and cyclists), environmental impact
assessments, capacity studies, strategic environmental plans,
environmental audit procedures, and state-of-the-environment
reports. Many cities have used a combination of these strategies
in developing "Local Agenda 21s." Many Local Agenda 21s
deal with a list of urban problems that could closely interact
with climate change in the future. [7.2, 7.5]
4.6. Insurance and Other Financial Services
The financial services sector--broadly defined as private and
public institutions that offer insurance and disaster relief,

255

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

banking, and asset management services--is a unique indicator
of potential socioeconomic impacts of climate change because
it is sensitive to climate change and it integrates effects on
other sectors. The sector is a key agent of adaptation (e.g., through
support of building codes and, to a limited extent, land-use
planning), and financial services represent risk-spreading
mechanisms through which the costs of weather-related events
are distributed among other sectors and throughout society.
However, insurance, whether provided by public or private
entities, also can encourage complacency and maladaptation
by fostering development in at-risk areas such as U.S.
floodplains or coastal zones. The effects of climate change on
the financial services sector are likely to manifest primarily
through changes in spatial distribution, frequencies, and
intensities of extreme weather events (Table TS-4). [8.1, 8.2,
15.2.7]

significant and increasing efforts at fortifying infrastructure
and enhancing disaster preparedness. These efforts dampen
to an unknown degree the observed rise in loss costs, although
the literature attempting to separate natural from human driving
forces has not quantified this effect. As a measure of increasing
insurance industry vulnerability, the ratio of global property/
casualty insurance premiums to weather-related losses--an
important indicator of adaptive capacity--fell by a factor of
three between 1985 and 1999. [8.3]
Part of the observed upward trend in historical disaster losses is
linked to socioeconomic factors--such as population growth,
increased wealth, and urbanization in vulnerable areas--and
part is linked to climatic factors such as observed changes in
precipitation, flooding, and drought events. Precise attribution
is complex, and there are differences in the balance of these
two causes by region and by type of event. Many of the
observed trends in weather-related losses are consistent with
what would be expected under climate change. Notably, the
growth rate in human-induced and non-weather-related losses
has been far lower than that of weather-related events. [8.2.2]

The costs of extreme weather events have exhibited a rapid
upward trend in recent decades. Yearly global economic losses
from large events increased from US$3.9 billion yr-1 in the
1950s to US$40 billion yr-1 in the 1990s (all 1999 US$,
uncorrected for purchasing power parity). Approximately onequarter of the losses occurred in developing countries. The
insured portion of these losses rose from a negligible level to
US$9.2 billion annually during the same period. Including
events of all sizes doubles these loss totals (see Figure TS-5).
The costs of weather events have risen rapidly, despite

Recent history has shown that weather-related losses can stress
insurance companies to the point of impaired profitability,
consumer price increases, withdrawal of coverage, and
elevated demand for publicly funded compensation and relief.
Increased uncertainty will increase the vulnerability of the

70000
Decade Comparison (losses in US$ billion, 1999 values)

60000

Losses (US$ million)

1950-59

50000
40000

Number
Weather-Related
13
Non-Weather-Related 7
Economic Losses
38.7
Insured Losses
0/unknown

Economic
Insured

30000

1960-69

1970-79

1980-89

1990-99

Factor
90s:50s

Factor
90s:60s

16
11
50.8
6.7

29
18
74.5
10.8

44
19
118.4
21.6

72
17
399
91.9

5.5
2.4
10.3
--

4.5
1.5
7.9
13.6

Economic Trend
Insured Trend

20000
10000
0
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975
Year

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure TS-5: The costs of catastrophic weather events have exhibited a rapid upward trend in recent decades. Yearly economic losses from
large events increased 10.3-fold from US$4 billion yr-1 in the 1950s to US$40 billion yr-1 in the 1990s (all in 1999 US$). The insured portion
of these losses rose from a negligible level to US$9.2 billion annually during the same period, and the ratio of premiums to catastrophe
losses fell by two-thirds. Notably, costs are larger by a factor of 2 when losses from ordinary, noncatastrophic weather-related events are
included. The numbers generally include "captive" self-insurers but not the less-formal types of self-insurance.

256

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-4: Extreme climate-related phenomena and their effects on the insurance industry: observed changes and projected
changes during 21st century (after Table 3-10; see also Table 8-1).
Observed
Changes
Changes in Extreme
Climate Phenomena

Projected
Changes
Likelihood

Type of Event
Relevant to
Insurance
Sector

Sensitive
Relevant
Sensitive Sectors/ Insurance
Time Scale Activities
Branches

Temperature Extremes
Higher maximum
temperatures, more hot
days and heat wavesb
over nearly all land
areas

Higher (increasing)
minimum temperatures,
fewer cold days, frost
days, and cold wavesb
over nearly all land
areas

Likelya (mixed Very likelya
trends for heat
waves in
several regions)

Very likelya
Very likelya
(cold waves not
treated by
WGI)

Heat wave

Dailyweekly
maximum

Electric reliability, Health, life,
human settlements property,
business
interruption

Heat wave,
droughts

Monthlyseasonal
maximum

Forests (tree health),
natural resources, Health, crop,
agriculture, water business
resources, electricity interruption
demand and
reliability, industry,
health, tourism

Frost, frost
heave

Dailymonthly
minimum

Agriculture,
energy demand,
health, transport,
human settlements

Health, crop,
property,
business
interruption,
vehicle

Flash flood

Hourlydaily
maximum

Human
settlements

Property,
flood, vehicle,
business
interruption,
life, health

Flood,
inundation,
mudslide

Weeklymonthly
maximum

Agriculture, forests,
transport, water
quality, human
settlements, tourism

Property, flood,
crop, marine,
business
interruption

Summer
drought, land
subsidence,
wildfire

Monthlyseasonal
minimum

Forests (tree
health), natural
resources,
agriculture, water
resources,
(hydro)energy
supply, human
settlements

Crop,
property,
health

Forests, agriculture,
energy distribution
and reliability,
human settlements,
mortality, tourism

Property,
crop, vehicle,
aviation, life,
business
interruption

Rainfall/Precipitation Extremes
More intense
precipitation events

Likelya over
Very likelya
many Northern over many
Hemisphere mid- areas
to high-latitude
land areas

Increased summer
drying and associated
risk of drought

Likelya in a few Likelya over
areas
most midlatitude
continental
interiors (lack
of consistent
projections in
other areas)

Increased intensity of
mid-latitude stormsc

Medium
likelihooda of
increase in
Northern
Hemisphere,
decrease in
Southern
Hemisphere

Intensified droughts
Inconclusive
and floods associated information
with El Nino events in
many different regions
(see also droughts and
extreme precipitation
events)

Little
Snowstorm, ice Hourlyagreement
storm,
weekly
among current avalanche
models

Likelya

Hailstorm

Hourly

Agriculture,
property

Crop, vehicle,
property, aviation

Drought and
floods

Various

Forests (tree health),
natural resources,
agriculture, water
resources,
(hydro)energy
supply, human
settlements

Property,
flood,
vehicle,
crop, marine,
business
interruption,
life, health

257

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-4 (continued)
Observed
Changes
Changes in Extreme
Climate Phenomena

Projected
Changes
Likelihood

Type of Event
Relevant to
Insurance
Sector

Sensitive
Relevant
Sensitive Sectors/ Insurance
Time Scale Activities
Branches

Wind Extremes
Increased intensity of
mid-latitude stormsb

No compelling
evidence for
change

Little
Mid-latitude
windstorm
agreement
among current
models

Tornadoes

Increase in tropical
cyclone peak wind
intensities, mean and
peak precipitation
intensitiesc

Wind extremes Likelya over
not observed in some areas
the few analyses
available;
insufficient data
for precipitation

Hourlydaily

Forests, electricity
distribution and
reliability, human
settlements

Property,
vehicle,
aviation,
marine,
business
interruption,
life

Hourly

Forests, electricity
distribution and
reliability, human
settlements

Property,
vehicle,
aviation,
marine,
business
interruption

Forests, electricity
distribution and
reliability, human
settlements,
agriculture

Property,
vehicle,
aviation,
marine,
business
interruption,
life

Tropical
Hourlystorms,
weekly
including
cyclones,
hurricanes, and
typhoons

Other Extremes
Refer to entries above Refer to relevant Refer to
Lightning
for higher temperatures, entries above
relevant
entries above
increased tropical and
mid-latitude storms

Instantaneous

Electricity
distribution and
reliability, human
settlements,
wildfire

Life, property,
vehicle,
aviation,
marine,
business
interruption

Refer to entries above Refer to relevant Refer to
Tidal surge
for increased tropical entries above
relevant
(associated
entries above with onshore
cyclones, Asian summer
monsoon, and intensity
gales), coastal
of mid-latitude storms
inundation

Daily

Coastal zone
infrastructure,
agriculture and
industry, tourism

Life, marine,
property,
crop

Seasonal

Agriculture,
Crop,
human settlements property,
health, life

Increased Asian
summer monsoon
precipitation
variability

Not treated by
WGI

Likelya

Flood and
drought

a

Likelihood refers to judgmental estimates of confidence used by Working Group I: very likely (90-99% chance); likely (66-90% chance). Unless
otherwise stated, information on climate phenomena is taken from Working Group I's Summary for Policymakers and Technical Summary.
These likelihoods refer to observed and projected changes in extreme climate phenomena and likelihood shown in first three columns of table.
b
Information from Working Group I, Technical Summary, Section F.5.
c
Changes in regional distribution of tropical cyclones are possible but have not been established.

insurance and government sectors and complicate adaptation
and disaster relief efforts under climate change. [8.3, 15.2.7]
The financial services sector as a whole is expected to be
able to cope with the impacts of future climate change,
although the historic record shows that low-probability, high-

258

IPCC Third Assessment Report

impact events or multiple closely spaced events severely affect
parts of the sector, especially if adaptive capacity happens to
be simultaneously depleted by nonclimate factors (e.g., adverse
market conditions that can deplete insurer loss reserves by
eroding the value of securities and other insurer assets). There
is high confidence that climate change and anticipated changes

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

in weather-related events that are perceived to be linked to
climate change would increase actuarial uncertainty in risk
assessment and thus in the functioning of insurance markets.
Such developments would place upward pressure on premiums
and/or could cause certain risks to be reclassified as
uninsurable, with subsequent withdrawal of coverage. This,
in turn, would place increased pressure on government-based
insurance and relief systems, which already are showing strain
in many regions and are attempting to limit their exposures
(e.g., by raising deductibles and/or placing caps on maximum
claims payable).
Trends toward increasing firm size, diversification, and
integration of insurance with other financial services, as well
as improved tools to transfer risk, all potentially contribute to
robustness. However, the property/casualty insurance and
reinsurance segments have greater sensitivity, and individual
companies already have experienced catastrophe-related
bankruptcies triggered by weather events. Under some conditions
and in some regions, the banking industry as a provider of
loans also may be vulnerable to climate change. In many cases,
however, the banking sector transfers risk back to insurers,
who often purchase their debt products. [8.3, 8.4, 15.2.7]

WGII Technical Summary

limited. Thus, increased uncertainty could constrain development.
Conversely, more extensive penetration of or access to insurance
and disaster preparedness/recovery resources would increase
the ability of developing countries to adapt to climate change.
More widespread introduction of microfinancing schemes and
development banking also could be an effective mechanism
to help developing countries and communities adapt. [8.3]
This assessment of financial services has identified some areas
of improved knowledge and has corroborated and further
augmented conclusions reached in the SAR. It also has
highlighted many areas where greater understanding is needed--
in particular, better analysis of economic losses to determine
their causation, assessment of financial resources involved in
dealing with climate change damage and adaptation, evaluation
of alternative methods to generate such resources, deeper
investigation of the sector's vulnerability and resilience to a
range of extreme weather event scenarios, and more research
into how the sector (private and public elements) could
innovate to meet the potential increase in demand for
adaptation funding in developed and developing countries, to
spread and reduce risks from climate change. [8.7]
4.7. Human Health

Adaptation2 to climate change presents complex challenges,
as well as opportunities, for the financial services sector.
Regulatory involvement in pricing, tax treatment of reserves,
and the (in)ability of firms to withdraw from at-risk markets
are examples of factors that influence the resilience of the
sector. Management of climate-related risk varies by country
and region. Usually it is a mixture of commercial and public
arrangements and self-insurance. In the face of climate change,
the relative role of each can be expected to change. Some
potential response options offer co-benefits that support
sustainable development and climate change mitigation
objectives (e.g., energy-efficiency measures that also make
buildings more resilient to natural disasters, in addition to
helping the sector adapt to climate changes). [8.3.4, 8.4.2]
The effects of climate change are expected to be greatest in
developing countries (especially those that rely on primary
production as a major source of income) in terms of loss of
life, effects on investment, and effects on the economy. Damages
from natural disasters have been as high as half of the gross
domestic product (GDP) in one case. Weather disasters set
back development, particularly when funds are redirected from
development projects to disaster-recovery efforts. [8.5]
Equity issues and development constraints would arise if
weather-related risks become uninsurable, insurance prices
increase, or the availability of insurance or financing becomes
2

The term "mitigation" often is used in the insurance and financial
services sectors in much the same way as the term "adaptation" is used
in the climate research and policy communities.

Global climate change will have diverse impacts on human
health--some positive, most negative. Changes in the frequencies
of extreme heat and cold, the frequencies of floods and droughts,
and the profile of local air pollution and aeroallergens would
affect population health directly. Other health impacts would
result from the impacts of climate change on ecological and
social systems. These impacts would include changes in
infectious disease occurrence, local food production and
undernutrition, and various health consequences of population
displacement and economic disruption.
There is little published evidence that changes in population
health status actually have occurred in response to observed
trends in climate over recent decades. A recurring difficulty
in identifying such impacts is that the causation of most human
health disorders is multifactorial, and the "background"
socioeconomic, demographic, and environmental context
changes significantly over time.
Studies of the health impacts associated with interannual
climate variability (particularly those related to the El Nino
cycle) have provided new evidence of human health sensitivity
to climate, particularly for mosquito-borne diseases. The
combination of existing research-based knowledge, resultant
theoretical understandings, and the output of predictive
modeling leads to several conclusions about the future impacts
of climate change on human population health.
If heat waves increase in frequency and intensity, the risk of
death and serious illness would increase, principally in older

259

Climate Change 2001

age groups and the urban poor (high confidence). The effects
of an increase in heat waves often would be exacerbated by
increased humidity and urban air pollution. The greatest
increases in thermal stress are forecast for mid- to high-latitude
(temperate) cities, especially in populations with nonadapted
architecture and limited air conditioning. Modeling of heat
wave impacts in urban populations, allowing for acclimatization,
suggests that a number of U.S. cities would experience, on
average, several hundred extra deaths each summer. Although
the impact of climate change on thermal stress-related mortality
in developing country cities may be significant, there has been
little research in such populations. Warmer winters and fewer
cold spells will decrease cold-related mortality in many temperate
countries (high confidence). Limited evidence indicates that
in at least some temperate countries, reduced winter deaths
would outnumber increased summer deaths (medium
confidence). [9.4]
Any increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme events
such as storms, floods, droughts, and cyclones would adversely
impact human health through a variety of pathways. These
natural hazards can cause direct loss of life and injury and can
affect health indirectly through loss of shelter, population
displacement, contamination of water supplies, loss of food
production (leading to hunger and malnutrition), increased risk
of infectious disease epidemics (including diarrheal and
respiratory disease), and damage to infrastructure for provision
of health services (very high confidence). If cyclones were to
increase regionally, devastating impacts often would occur,
particularly in densely settled populations with inadequate
resources. Over recent years, major climate-related disasters
have had major adverse effects on human health, including
floods in China, Bangladesh, Europe, Venezuela, and
Mozambique, as well as Hurricane Mitch, which devastated
Central America. [9.5]
Climate change will decrease air quality in urban areas with
air pollution problems (medium confidence). An increase in
temperature (and, in some models, ultraviolet radiation)
increases the formation of ground-level ozone, a pollutant with
well-established adverse effects on respiratory health. Effects
of climate change on other air pollutants are less well
established. [9.6]
Higher temperatures, changes in precipitation, and changes
in climate variability would alter the geographic ranges and
seasonality of transmission of vector-borne infectious
diseases-- extending the range and season for some infectious
diseases and contracting them for others. Vector-borne
infectious diseases are transmitted by blood-feeding organisms
such as mosquitoes and ticks. Such organisms depend on the
complex interaction of climate and other ecological factors
for survival. Currently, 40% of the world population lives in
areas with malaria. In areas with limited or deteriorating public
health infrastructure, increased temperatures will tend to

260

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

expand the geographic range of malaria transmission to higher
altitudes (high to medium confidence) and higher latitudes
(medium to low confidence). Higher temperatures, in
combination with conducive patterns of rainfall and surface
water, will extend the transmission season in some locations
(high confidence). Changes in climate, including changes in
climate variability, would affect many other vector-borne
infections (such as dengue, leishmansiasis, various types of
mosquito-borne encephalitis, Lyme disease, and tick-borne
encephalitis) at the margins of their current distributions
(medium/high confidence). For some vector-borne diseases
in some locations, climate change will decrease transmission
via reductions in rainfall or temperatures that are too high for
transmission (medium confidence). A range of mathematical
models indicate, with high consistency, that climate change
scenarios over the coming century would cause a small net
increase in the proportion of the world's population living in
regions of potential transmission of malaria and dengue
(medium to high confidence). A change in climatic conditions
will increase the incidence of various types of water- and foodborne infectious diseases. [9.7]
Climate change may cause changes in the marine environment
that would alter risks of biotoxin poisoning from human
consumption of fish and shellfish. Biotoxins associated with
warmer waters, such as ciguatera in tropical waters, could extend
their range to higher latitudes (low confidence). Higher SSTs also
would increase the occurrence of toxic algal blooms (medium
confidence), which have complex relationships with human
poisoning and are ecologically and economically damaging.
Changes in surface water quantity and quality will affect the
incidence of diarrheal diseases (medium confidence). [9.8]
Changes in food supply resulting from climate change could
affect the nutrition and health of the poor in some regions of
the world. Studies of climate change impacts on food
production indicate that, globally, impacts could be positive
or negative, but the risk of reduced food yields is greatest in
developing countries--where 790 million people are estimated
to be undernourished at present. Populations in isolated areas
with poor access to markets will be particularly vulnerable to
local decreases or disruptions in food supply. Undernourishment
is a fundamental cause of stunted physical and intellectual
development in children, low productivity in adults, and
susceptibility to infectious disease. Climate change would
increase the number of undernourished people in the
developing world (medium confidence), particularly in the
tropics. [9.9, 5.3]
In some settings, the impacts of climate change may cause social
disruption, economic decline, and population displacement that
would affect human health. Health impacts associated with
population displacement resulting from natural disasters or
environmental degradation are substantial (high confidence).
[9.10]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-5: Options for adaptation to reduce health impacts of climate change.
Educational Advisory

Health Outcome

Legislative

Technical

Thermal stress

- Building guidelines

- Housing, public buildings, - Early warning
systems
urban planning to reduce
heat island effects, air
conditioning

Extreme weather - Planning laws
events
- Building guidelines
- Forced migration
- Economic incentives
for building

- Urban planning
- Storm shelters

Air quality

- Improved public transport, - Pollution warnings
catalytic converters,
smoke stacks

- Emission controls
- Traffic restrictions

- Early warning
systems

Cultural and Behavioral
- Clothing, siesta

- Use of storm shelters

- Carpooling

Vector-borne
diseases

- Vector control
- Vaccination, impregnated
bednets
- Sustainable surveillance,
prevention and control
programs

- Health education

- Water storage practices

Water-borne
diseases

- Watershed protection - Genetic/molecular
screening of pathogens
laws
- Improved water treatment
- Water quality
(e.g., filters)
regulation
- Improved sanitation (e.g.,
latrines)

- Boil water alerts

- Washing hands and
other hygiene behavior
- Use of pit latrines

For each anticipated adverse health impact there is a range
of social, institutional, technological, and behavioral
adaptation options to lessen that impact (see Table TS-5).
Overall, the adverse health impacts of climate change will be
greatest in vulnerable lower income populations, predominately
within tropical/subtropical countries. There is a basic and general
need for public health infrastructure (programs, services,
surveillance systems) to be strengthened and maintained. The
ability of affected communities to adapt to risks to health also
depends on social, environmental, political, and economic
circumstances. [9.11]

5. Regional Analysis
The vulnerability of human populations and natural systems
to climate change differs substantially across regions and
across populations within regions. Regional differences in
baseline climate and expected climate change give rise to
different exposures to climate stimuli across regions. The
natural and social systems of different regions have varied
characteristics, resources, and institutions and are subject to
varied pressures that give rise to differences in sensitivity and
adaptive capacity. From these differences emerge different key
concerns for each of the major regions of the world. Even
within regions, however, impacts, adaptive capacity, and

vulnerability will vary. Because available studies have not
employed a common set of climate scenarios and methods
and because of uncertainties regarding the sensitivities and
adaptability of natural and social systems, assessment of
regional vulnerabilities is necessarily qualitative.
5.1. Africa
Africa is highly vulnerable to climate change. Impacts of
particular concern to Africa are related to water resources,
food production, human health, desertification, and coastal
zones, especially in relation to extreme events. A synergy of
land-use and climate change will exacerbate desertification.
Selected key impacts in Africa are highlighted in Figure TS-6.
5.1.1. Water Resources
Water resources are a key area of vulnerability in Africa,
affecting water supply for household use, agriculture, and
industry. In shared river basins, regional cooperation protocols
minimize adverse impacts and potential for conflicts. Trends
in regional per capita water availability in Africa over the past
half century show that water availability has diminished by
75%. Although the past 2 decades have experienced reductions
in river flows, especially in sub-Saharan West Africa, the trend
mainly reflects the impact of population growth--which, for

261

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Egypt/Cairo/The Nile: Coastal areas
threatened by sea-level rise; Nile
river basin sensitive to climate, with
regional implications

North Atlantic Oscillation a key factor in
international climate vulnerability, with
impacts on fisheries industries

Horn of Africa heavily affected by
recurrent droughts

Rainfall variability modulated
by vegetation dynamics, surface
properties in the Sahel; empirical
evidence of species changes

Important commercial
agriculture adapted to
bimodal rainfall; shifts
in rainfall patterns
would have farreaching impacts

High proportion of population concentrated in coastal
areas in West African cities such as Lagos and Banjul,
thus especially vulnerable to sea-level rise

East African Great Lakes and
reservoirs respond to climate
variability with pronounced
changes in storage

Regional climate modeling experiments show
deforestation in Central Africa will impact
climate in distant south (teleconnections)

Coastal marine fishery likely to
be negatively affected by
changes in Bangwuela current

Floods in 1999 severely affected coastal
population and infrastructure, with longlasting economic and development impacts;
adaptation and recovery very costly and
beyond the means of African countries

Long-lasting impacts of drought on national
economies for SADC region

Complete loss or displacement of
Succulent Karoo biome projected
under climate change, and many
species losses in other biomes

Intensity of extreme events increased significantly
over South Africa; biome shifts will favor
horticulture over plantation forestry; malaria risk
areas projected to expand southward

Figure TS-6: Selected key impacts for Africa.

most countries, quadrupled in the same period. Population
growth and degradation of water quality are significant threats
to water security in many parts of Africa, and the combination
of continued population increases and global warming impacts
is likely to accentuate water scarcity in subhumid regions of
Africa.
Africa is the continent with the lowest conversion factor of
precipitation to runoff, averaging 15%. Although the equatorial
region and coastal areas of eastern and southern Africa are
humid, the rest of the continent is dry subhumid to arid. The
dominant impact of global warming will be a reduction in soil
moisture in subhumid zones and a reduction in runoff. Current
trends in major river basins indicate decreasing runoff of about
17% over the past decade.

262

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Most of Africa has invested significantly in hydroelectric power
facilities to underpin economic development. Reservoir storage
shows marked sensitivity to variations in runoff and periods
of drought. Lake storage and major dams have reached critical
levels, threatening industrial activity. Model results and some
reservoirs and lakes indicate that global warming will increase
the frequency of such low storage as a result of flooding or
drought conditions that are related to ENSO. [10.2.1]
5.1.2. Food Security
There is wide consensus that climate change will worsen food
security, mainly through increased extremes and temporal/
spatial shifts. The continent already experiences a major deficit
in food production in many areas, and potential declines in

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

soil moisture will be an added burden. Food-insecure countries
are at a greater risk of adverse impacts of climate change.
Inland and marine fisheries provide a significant contribution
to protein intake in many African countries. As a result of
water stress and land degradation, inland fisheries will be
rendered more vulnerable to episodic drought and habitat
destruction. Ocean warming is likely to impact coastal marine
fisheries. [10.2.2]

5.1.6. Desertification

5.1.3. Natural Resource Management and Biodiversity

5.1.7. Adaptive Capacity

Irreversible losses of biodiversity could be accelerated with
climate change. Climate change is expected to lead to drastic
shifts of biodiversity-rich biomes such as the Succulent Karoo
in South Africa and many losses in species in other biomes.
Changes in the frequency, intensity, and extent of vegetation
fires and habitat modification from land-use change may negate
natural adaptive processes and lead to extinctions. Changes
in ecosystems will affect water supply, fuelwood, and other
services. [10.2.3.2]

Given the diversity of constraints facing many nations, the
overall capacity for Africa to adapt to climate change currently
is very low. National action plans that incorporate long-term
changes and pursue "no regrets" strategies could increase the
adaptive capacity of the region. Seasonal forecasting--for
example, linking SSTs to outbreaks of major diseases--is a
promising adaptive strategy that will help save lives. Current
technologies and approaches, especially in agriculture and
water, are unlikely to be adequate to meet projected demands,
and increased climate variability will be an additional stress.
It is unlikely that African countries on their own will have
sufficient resources to respond effectively.

5.1.4. Human Health
Changes in temperature and rainfall will have many negative
impacts on human health. Temperature increases will extend
disease vector habitats. Where sanitary infrastructure is
inadequate, droughts and flooding will result in increased
frequency of water-borne diseases. Increased rainfall could
lead to more frequent outbreaks of Rift Valley fever. Poor
sanitation in urban locations and increased temperatures of
coastal waters could aggravate cholera epidemics. [10.2.4.1.1,
10.2.4.4]
5.1.5. Settlements and Infrastructure
Although the basic infrastructure for development--transport,
housing, and services--is inadequate in many instances, it
nevertheless represents substantial investment by governments.
An increase in the frequency of damaging floods, heat waves,
dust storms, hurricanes, and other extreme events could
degrade the integrity of such critical infrastructures at rates
the economies may not be able to tolerate, leading to a serious
deterioration of social, health, and economic services delivery
systems. This condition will greatly compromise general
human welfare. [10.2.5.3]
Sea-level rise, coastal erosion, saltwater intrusion, and
flooding will have significant impacts for African communities
and economies. Most of Africa's largest cities are along coasts
and are highly vulnerable to extreme events, sea-level rise,
and coastal erosion because of inadequate physical planning
and escalating urban drift. Rapid unplanned expansion is likely
to predispose large populations to infectious diseases from
climate-related factors such as flooding. [10.2.5.2]

Alteration of spatial and temporal patterns in temperature,
rainfall, solar radiation, and winds from a changing climate
will exacerbate desertification. Desertification is a critical
threat to sustainable resource management in arid, semi-arid,
and dry subhumid regions of Africa, undermining food and
water security. [10.2.6]

Climate change also offers some opportunities. The processes
of adapting to global climate change, including technology
transfer and carbon sequestration, offer new development
pathways that could take advantage of Africa's resources and
human potential. Regional cooperation in science, resource
management, and development already are increasing, and
access to international markets will diversify economies and
increase food security.
This assessment of vulnerability to climate change is marked
by uncertainty. The diversity of African climates, high rainfall
variability, and a very sparse observational network make
predictions of future climate change difficult at the subregional
and local level. Underlying exposure and vulnerability to
climatic changes are well established. Sensitivity to climatic
variations is established but incomplete. However, uncertainty
over future conditions means that there is low confidence in
projected costs of climate change. This assessment can create
the framework for individual states to begin to construct
methodologies for estimating such costs, based on their
individual circumstances.
5.2. Asia
Climate change will impose significant stress on resources
throughout the Asian region. Asia has more than 60% of the
world's population; natural resources already are under stress,
and the resilience of most sectors in Asia to climate change is
poor. Many countries are socioeconomically dependent on
natural resources such as water, forests, grassland and rangeland,
and fisheries. The magnitude of changes in climate variables

263

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-6: Sensitivity of selected Asian regions to climate change.
Change in Climatic
Elements and SeaLevel Rise

Impacts
Vulnerable Region

Primary Change

Primary

Secondary

0.5-2C
(10- to 45-cm sealevel rise)

Bangladesh
Sundarbans

- Inundation of about
15% (~750 km2)
- Increase in salinity

- Loss of plant species
- Loss of wildlife

- Economic loss
- Exacerbated insecurity
and loss of employment

4C
(+10% rainfall)

Siberian permafrosts - Reduction in
continuous permafrost
- Shift in southern limit
of Siberian permafrost
by ~100-200 km
northward

- Change in rock strength - Effects on construction
- Change in bearing
industries
capacity
- Effects on mining
- Change in compressibility industry
of frozen rocks
- Effects on agricultural
- Thermal erosion
development

>3C
(>+20% rainfall)

Water resources in
Kazakhstan

- Increase in winter floods - Risk to life and property
- Decrease in summer flows - Summer water stress

~2C
Bangladesh
(-5 to 10% rainfall; lowlands
45-cm sea-level rise)

- Change in runoff

- About 23-29% increase - Change in flood depth
in extent of inundation category
- Change in monsoon rice
cropping pattern

- Risk to life and property
- Increased health
problems
- Reduction in rice yield

Table TS-7: Vulnerability of key sectors to impacts of climate change for select subregions in Asia. Key to confidence-level
rankings is provided in Section 1.4 of Technical Summary.
Food and
Fiber

Biodiversity

Water
Resources

Coastal
Ecosystems

Human
Health

Settlements

Slightly
resilient
****

Highly
vulnerable
***

Slightly
resilient
***

Slightly
resilient
**

Moderately
vulnerable
**

Slightly or not
vulnerable
***

- Central Asia

Highly
vulnerable
****

Moderately
vulnerable
**

Highly
vulnerable
****

Moderately
vulnerable
**

Moderately
vulnerable
***

Moderately
vulnerable
***

- Tibetan Plateau

Slightly or not Highly
vulnerable
vulnerable
***
**

Moderately
vulnerable
**

Not applicable No information No information

Temperate Asia

Highly
vulnerable
****

Moderately
vulnerable
***

Highly
vulnerable
****

Highly
vulnerable
****

Highly
vulnerable
***

Highly
vulnerable
****

- South Asia

Highly
vulnerable
****

Highly
vulnerable
***

Highly
vulnerable
****

Highly
vulnerable
****

Moderately
vulnerable
***

Highly
vulnerable
***

- Southeast Asia

Highly
vulnerable
****

Highly
vulnerable
***

Highly
vulnerable
****

Highly
vulnerable
****

Moderately
vulnerable
***

Highly
vulnerable
***

Regions
Boreal Asia

Arid and Semi-Arid Asia

Tropical Asia

would differ significantly across Asian subregions and countries.
The climate change sensitivity of a few vulnerable sectors in Asia
and the impacts of these limits are presented in Table TS-6.

264

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The region's vulnerability to climate change is captured in
Table TS-7 for selected categories of regions/issues.

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

5.2.1. Agriculture and Food Security
Food insecurity appears to be the primary concern for Asia.
Crop production and aquaculture would be threatened by
thermal and water stresses, sea-level rise, increased flooding,
and strong winds associated with intense tropical cyclones
(high confidence). In general, it is expected that areas in midand high latitudes will experience increases in crop yield; yields
in lower latitudes generally will decrease. A longer duration
of the summer season should lead to a northward shift of the
agroecosystem boundary in boreal Asia and favor an overall
increase in agriculture productivity (medium confidence).
Climatic variability and change also will affect scheduling of
the cropping season, as well as the duration of the growing
period of the crop. In China, yields of several major crops are
expected to decline as a result of climate change. Acute water
shortages combined with thermal stress should adversely affect
wheat and, more severely, rice productivity in India even under
the positive effects of elevated CO2 in the future. Crop diseases
such as wheat scab, rice blast, and sheath and culm blight of
rice also could become more widespread in temperate and
tropical regions of Asia if the climate becomes warmer and
wetter. Adaptation measures to reduce the negative effects of
climatic variability may include changing the cropping
calendar to take advantage of the wet period and to avoid the
extreme weather events (e.g., typhoons and strong winds)
during the growing season. [11.2.2.1]
Asia dominates world aquaculture, producing 80% of all
farmed fish, shrimp, and shellfish. Many wild stocks are under
stress as a result of overexploitation, trawling on sea-bottom
habitats, coastal development, and pollution from land-based
activities. Moreover, marine productivity is greatly affected by
plankton shift, such as seasonal shifting of sardine in the Sea
of Japan, in response to temperature changes induced during
ENSO. Storm surges and cyclonic conditions also routinely
lash the coastline, adding sediment loads to coastal waters.
Effective conservation and sustainable management of marine
and inland fisheries are needed at the regional level so that
living aquatic resources can continue to meet regional and
national nutritional needs. [11.2.4.4]
5.2.2. Ecosystems and Biodiversity
Climate change would exacerbate current threats to biodiversity
resulting from land-use/cover change and population pressure
in Asia (medium confidence). Risks to Asia's rich array of living
species are climbing. As many as 1,250 of 15,000 higher plant
species are threatened in India. Similar trends are evident in
China, Malaysia, Myanmar, and Thailand. Many species and
a large population of many other species in Asia are likely to be
exterminated as a result of the synergistic effects of climate
change and habitat fragmentation. In desert ecosystems,
increased frequency of droughts may result in a decline in
local forage around oases, causing mass mortality among local

WGII Technical Summary

fauna and threatening their existence. With a 1-m rise in sea
level, the Sundarbans (the largest mangrove ecosystems) of
Bangladesh will completely disappear. [11.2.1, 11.2.1.6]
Permafrost degradation resulting from global warming would
increase the vulnerability of many climate-dependent sectors
affecting the economy in boreal Asia (medium confidence).
Pronounced warming in high latitudes of the northern hemisphere
could lead to thinning or disappearance of permafrost in
locations where it now exists. Large-scale shrinkage of the
permafrost region in boreal Asia is likely. Poleward movement
of the southern boundary of the sporadic zone also is likely in
Mongolia and northeast China. The boundary between continuous
and discontinuous (intermittent or seasonal) permafrost areas
on the Tibetan Plateau is likely to shift toward the center of
the plateau along the eastern and western margins. [11.2.1.5]
The frequency of forest fires is expected to increase in boreal
Asia (medium confidence). Warmer surface air temperatures,
particularly during summer, may create favorable conditions
for thunderstorms and associated lightening, which could
trigger forest fires in boreal forests more often. Forest fire is
expected to occur more frequently in northern parts of boreal
Asia as a result of global warming. [11.2.1.3]
5.2.3. Water Resources
Freshwater availability is expected to be highly vulnerable to
anticipated climate change (high confidence). Surface runoff
increases during winter and summer periods would be
pronounced in boreal Asia (medium confidence). Countries
in which water use is more than 20% of total potential water
resources available are expected to experience severe water
stress during drought periods. Surface runoff is expected to
decrease drastically in arid and semi-arid Asia under projected
climate change scenarios. Climate change is likely to change
streamflow volume, as well as the temporal distribution of
streamflows throughout the year. With a 2C increase in air
temperature accompanied by a 5-10% decline in precipitation
during summer, surface runoff in Kazakhstan would be
substantially reduced, causing serious implications for
agriculture and livestocks. Water would be a scarce commodity
in many south and southeast Asian countries, particularly where
reservoir facilities to store water for irrigation are minimal.
Growing populations and concentration of populations in urban
areas will exert increasing pressures on water availability and
water quality. [11.2.3.1]
5.2.4. Extreme Weather Events
Developing countries of temperate and tropical Asia already
are quite vulnerable to extreme climate events such as typhoons/
cyclones, droughts, and floods. Climate change and variability
would exacerbate these vulnerabilities (high confidence).
Extreme weather events are known to cause adverse effects in

265

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-8: Potential land loss and population exposed in Asian countries for selected magnitudes of sea-level rise, assuming
no adaptation.
Potential Land Loss
Country
Bangladesh
India
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Pakistan
Vietnam

Population Exposed

Sea-Level Rise
(cm)

(km2)

(%)

(million)

(%)

45
100
100
60
50
100
20
100

15,668
29,846
5,763
34,000
1,412
7,000
1,700
40,000

10.9
20.7
0.4
1.9
0.4
2.1
0.2
12.1

5.50
14.80
7.10
2.00
2.90
>0.05
n.a.0
17.10

5.0
13.5
0.8
1.1
2.3
>0.3
n.a.
23.1

widely separated areas of Asia. There is some evidence of
increases in the intensity or frequency of some of these extreme
events on regional scales throughout the 20th century.
[11.1.2.2, 11.1.2.3, 11.4.1]

reduce the impacts of disasters associated with more extreme
weather events on economic and social structures of countries
in temperate and tropical Asia. [11.3.2]
5.2.5. Deltas and Coastal Zones

Increased precipitation intensity, particularly during the
summer monsoon, could increase flood-prone areas in
temperate and tropical Asia. There is potential for drier
conditions in arid and semi-arid Asia during summer, which
could lead to more severe droughts (medium confidence).
Many countries in temperate and tropical Asia have experienced
severe droughts and floods frequently in the 20th century. Flash
floods are likely to become more frequent in many regions of
temperate and tropical Asia in the future. A decrease in return
period for extreme precipitation events and the possibility of
more frequent floods in parts of India, Nepal, and Bangladesh
is projected. [11.1.3.3, 11.2.2.2, 11.1.2.3, 11.4.1]
Conversion of forestland to cropland and pasture already is a
prime force driving forest loss in tropical and temperate Asian
countries. With more frequent floods and droughts, these
actions will have far-reaching implications for the environment
(e.g., soil erosion, loss of soil fertility, loss of genetic variability
in crops, and depletion of water resources). [11.1.4.1]
Tropical cyclones and storm surges continue to take a heavy
toll on life and property in India and Bangladesh. An increase
in the intensity of cyclones combined with sea-level rise would
result in more loss of life and property in low-lying coastal
areas in cyclone-prone countries of Asia (medium confidence).
The expected increase in the frequency and intensity of climatic
extremes will have significant potential effects on crop growth
and agricultural production, as well as major economic and
environmental implications (e.g., tourism, transportation).
[11.2.4.5, 11.2.6.3, 11.3]
A wide range of precautionary measures at regional and
national levels, including awareness and acceptance of risk
factors among regional communities, is warranted to avert or

266

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The large deltas and low-lying coastal areas of Asia would
be inundated by sea-level rise (high confidence). Climaterelated stresses in coastal areas include loss and salinization
of agricultural land as a result of change in sea level and
changing frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones.
Estimates of potential land loss resulting from sea-level rise
and risk to population displacement provided in Table TS-8
demonstrate the scale of the issue for major low-lying regions
of coastal Asia. Currently, coastal erosion of muddy coastlines
in Asia is not a result of sea-level rise; it is triggered largely
by annual river-borne suspended sediments transported into
the ocean by human activities and delta evolution. These
actions could exacerbate the impacts of climate change in
coastal regions of Asia. [11.2.4.2]
5.2.6. Human Health
Warmer and wetter conditions would increase the potential
for higher incidence of heat-related and infectious diseases
in tropical and temperate Asia (medium confidence). The rise
in surface air temperature and changes in precipitation in Asia
will have adverse effects on human health. Although warming
would result in a reduction in wintertime deaths in temperate
countries, there could be greater frequency and duration of
heat stress, especially in megalopolises during summer. Global
warming also will increase the incidence of respiratory and
cardiovascular diseases in parts of arid and semi-arid Asia
and temperate and tropical Asia. Changes in environmental
temperature and precipitation could expand vector-borne
diseases into temperate and arid Asia. The spread of vectorborne diseases into more northern latitudes may pose a serious
threat to human health. Warmer SSTs along Asian coastlines
would support higher phytoplankton blooms. These blooms are

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

habitats for infectious bacterial diseases. Water-borne diseases--
including cholera and the suite of diarrheal diseases caused by
organisms such as giardia, salmonella, and cryptosporidium--
could become more common in many countries of south Asia
in warmer climate. [11.2.5.1, 11.2.5.2, 11.2.5.4]
5.2.7. Adaptive Capacity
Adaptation to climate change in Asian countries depends on
the affordability of adaptive measures, access to technology,
and biophysical constraints such as land and water resource
availability, soil characteristics, genetic diversity for crop
breeding (e.g., crucial development of heat-resistant rice
cultivars), and topography. Most developing countries of Asia
are faced with increasing population, spread of urbanization,
lack of adequate water resources, and environmental pollution,
which hinder socioeconomic activities. These countries will
have to individually and collectively evaluate the tradeoffs
between climate change actions and nearer term needs (such
as hunger, air and water pollution, energy demand). Coping
strategies would have to be developed for three crucial sectors:
land resources, water resources, and food productivity.
Adaptation measures that are designed to anticipate the
potential effects of climate change can help offset many of the
negative effects. [11.3.1]
5.3. Australia and New Zealand
The Australia/New Zealand region spans the tropics to midlatitudes and has varied climates and ecosystems, including
deserts, rainforests, coral reefs, and alpine areas. The climate
is strongly influenced by the surrounding oceans. Australia has
significant vulnerability to the drying trend projected over much
of the country for the next 50-100 years (Figure TS-3) because
substantial agricultural areas currently are adversely affected
by periodic droughts, and there already are large areas of arid
and semi-arid land. New Zealand--a smaller, more mountainous
country with a generally more temperate, maritime climate--
may be more resilient to climate changes than Australia, although
considerable vulnerability remains (medium confidence).
Table TS-9 shows key vulnerabilities and adaptability to
climate change impacts for Australia and New Zealand. [12.9.5]
Comprehensive cross-sectoral estimates of net climate change
impact costs for various GHG emission scenarios and different
societal scenarios are not yet available. Confidence remains
very low in the IPCC Special Report on Regional Impacts of
Climate Change estimate for Australia and New Zealand of
-1.2 to -3.8% of GDP for an equivalent doubling of CO2
concentrations. This estimate did not account for many of the
effects and adaptations currently identified. [12.9]
Extreme events are a major source of current climate impacts,
and changes in extreme events are expected to dominate the
impacts of climate change. Return periods for heavy rains, floods,

WGII Technical Summary

and sea-level surges of a given magnitude at particular locations
would be modified by possible increases in intensity of tropical
cyclones and heavy rain events and changes in the locationspecific frequency of tropical cyclones. Scenarios of climate
change that are based on recent coupled atmosphere-ocean
(A-O) models suggest that large areas of mainland Australia
will experience significant decreases in rainfall during the 21st
century. The ENSO phenomenon leads to floods and prolonged
droughts, especially in inland Australia and parts of New
Zealand. The region would be sensitive to a change towards a
more El Nino-like mean state. [12.1.5]
Before stabilization of GHG concentrations, the north-south
temperature gradient in mid-southern latitudes is expected to
increase (medium to high confidence), strengthening the
westerlies and the associated west-to-east gradient of rainfall
across Tasmania and New Zealand. Following stabilization of
GHG concentrations, these trends would be reversed (medium
confidence). [12.1.5.1]
Climate change will add to existing stresses on achievement
of sustainable land use and conservation of terrestrial and
aquatic biodiversity. These stresses include invasion by exotic
animal and plant species, degradation and fragmentation of
natural ecosystems through agricultural and urban development,
dryland salinization (Australia), removal of forest cover
(Australia and New Zealand), and competition for scarce water
resources. Within both countries, economically and socially
disadvantaged groups of people, especially indigenous peoples,
are particularly vulnerable to stresses on health and living
conditions induced by climate change. Major exacerbating
problems include rapid population and infrastructure growth
in vulnerable coastal areas, inappropriate use of water resources,
and complex institutional arrangements. [12.3.2, 12.3.3,
12.4.1, 12.4.2, 12.6.4, 12.8.5]
5.3.1. Water Resources
Water resources already are stressed in some areas and therefore
are highly vulnerable, especially with respect to salinization
(parts of Australia) and competition for water supply between
agriculture, power generation, urban areas, and environmental
flows (high confidence). Increased evaporation and possible
decreases in rainfall in many areas would adversely affect water
supply, agriculture, and the survival and reproduction of key
species in parts of Australia and New Zealand (medium
confidence). [12.3.1, 12.3.2, 12.4.6, 12.5.2, 12.5.3, 12.5.6]
5.3.2. Ecosystems
A warming of 1C would threaten the survival of species that
currently are growing near the upper limit of their temperature
range, notably in marginal alpine regions and in the southwest
of Western Australia. Species that are unable to migrate or relocate
because of land clearing, soil differences, or topography could

267

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-9: Main areas of vulnerability and adaptability to climate change impacts in Australia and New Zealand. Degree of
confidence that tabulated impacts will occur is indicated by stars in second column (see Section 1.4 of Technical Summary
for key to confidence-level rankings). Confidence levels, and assessments of vulnerability and adaptability, are based on
information reviewed in Chapter 12, and assume continuation of present population and investment growth patterns.
Sector

Impact

Hydrology and - Irrigation and metropolitan
water supply
supply constraints, and
increased salinization--****

Terrestrial
ecosystems

Aquatic
ecosystems

Coastal
ecosystems

Agriculture,
grazing, and
forestry

268

Vulnerability Adaptation

Adaptability

Section

High in
some areas

Medium

12.3.1,
12.3.2

- Planning, water allocation,
and pricing

- Saltwater intrusion into some
island and coastal aquifers--
****

High in
- Alternative water supplies,
limited areas retreat

Low

12.3.3

- Increased salinization of
dryland farms and some
streams (Australia)--***

High

Low

12.3.3

- Biodiversity loss notably in
fragmented regions, Australian
alpine areas, and southwest of
WA--****

Medium to - Landscape management;
high in some little possible in alpine
areas
areas

Medium to
low

12.4.2,
12.4.4,
12.4.8

- Increased risk of fires--***

Medium

- Land management, fire
protection

Medium

12.1.5.3,
12.5.4,
12.5.10

- Weed invasion--***

Medium

- Landscape management

Medium

12.4.3

- Salinization of some coastal
freshwater wetlands--***

High

- Physical intervention

Low

12.4.7

- River and inland wetland
ecosystem changes--***

Medium

- Change water allocations

Low

12.4.5,
12.4.6

- Eutrophication--***

Medium in
inland Aus.
waters

- Change water allocations,
reduce nutrient inflows

Medium to
low

12.3.4

- Coral bleaching, especially
Great Barrier Reef--****

High

- Seed coral?

Low

12.4.7

- More toxic algal blooms?--*

Unknown

--

--

12.4.7

- Reduced productivity, increased
stress on rural communities if
droughts increase, increased
forest fire risk--***

Locationdependent,
worsens
with time

- Management and policy
changes, fire prevention,
seasonal forecasts

Medium

12.5.2,
12.5.3,
12.5.4

- Changes in global markets due High, but
- Marketing, planning, niche
to climate changes elsewhere-- sign uncertain and fuel crops, carbon
***, but sign uncertain
trading

Medium

12.5.9

- Increased spread of pests and
diseases--****

Medium

12.5.7

Medium

- Changes in land-use
practices

- Exclusion, spraying

- Increased CO2 initially increases Changes
productivity but offset by
with time
climate changes later--**

- Change farm practices,
change industry

Horticulture

- Mixed impacts (+ and -),
depends on species and
location--****

Low overall

- Relocate

High

12.5.3

Fish

- Recruitment changes (some
species)--**

Unknown
net effect

- Monitoring, management

--

12.5.5

IPCC Third Assessment Report

12.5.3,
12.5.4

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-9 (continued)
Sector

Impact

Vulnerability Adaptation

Adaptability

Section

Settlements
and industry

- Increased impacts of flood,
storm, storm surge, sea-level
rise--***

High in
some places

- Zoning, disaster planning

Moderate

12.6.1,
12.6.4

Human health

- Expansion and spread of
vector-borne diseases--****

High

- Quarantine, eradication, or
control

Moderate to
high

12.7.1,
12.7.4

- Increased photochemical air
pollution--****

Moderate
- Emission controls
(some cities)

High

12.7.1

become endangered or extinct. Other Australian ecosystems
that are particularly vulnerable include coral reefs and arid
and semi-arid habitats. Freshwater wetlands in coastal zones
in Australia and New Zealand are vulnerable, and some New
Zealand ecosystems are vulnerable to accelerated spread of
weeds. [12.4.2, 12.4.3, 12.4.4, 12.4.5, 12.4.7]

intensity rainfall would increase flood damages to settlements
and infrastructure (medium confidence). [12.1.5.1, 12.1.5.3,
12.6.1, 12.6.4]
There is high confidence that projected climate changes will
enhance the spread of some disease vectors, thereby increasing

5.3.3. Food Production

Australian and New Zealand fisheries are influenced by the
extent and location of nutrient upwellings governed by
prevailing winds and boundary currents. In addition, ENSO
influences recruitment of some fish species and the incidence
of toxic algal blooms. [12.5.5]

50

Yield Response (%)

a) current planting dates

40
30
20
10
0
-10
0

Marked trends toward greater population and investment in
exposed regions are increasing vulnerability to tropical cyclones
and storm surges. Thus, projected increases in tropical cyclone
intensity and possible changes in their location-specific
frequency, along with sea-level rise, would have major impacts--
notably, increased storm-surge heights for a given return period
(medium to high confidence). Increased frequency of high-

4

b) optimal planting dates

40
30
20
10
0
-10

5.3.4. Settlements, Industry, and Human Health

1
2
3
Temperature Increase (C)

50

Yield Response (%)

Agricultural activities are particularly vulnerable to regional
reductions in rainfall in southwest and inland Australia (medium
confidence). Drought frequency and consequent stresses on
agriculture are likely to increase in parts of Australia and New
Zealand as a result of higher temperatures and El Nino changes
(medium confidence). Enhanced plant growth and water-use
efficiency (WUE) resulting from CO2 increases may provide initial
benefits that offset any negative impacts from climate change
(medium confidence), although the balance is expected to become
negative with warmings in excess of 2-4C and associated
rainfall changes (medium confidence). This is illustrated in
Figure TS-7 for wheat production in Australia, for a range of
climate change scenarios. Reliance on exports of agricultural and
forest products makes the region very sensitive to changes in
production and commodity prices that are induced by changes
in climate elsewhere. [12.5.2, 12.5.3, 12.5.6, 12.5.9, 12.8.7]

0

20%

1
2
3
Temperature Increase (C)
0%

4

-20%

Figure TS-7: Percentage change in average annual total Australian
wheat yield for CO2 (levels of 700 ppm) and a range of changes in
temperature and rainfall: a) current planting dates, and b) optimal
planting dates. Yield response is shown for rainfall changes of +20%
(white), 0 (light blue), and -20% (dark blue), for warmings of 0-4C.

269

Climate Change 2001

the potential for disease outbreaks such as mosquito-borne
Ross River virus and Murray Valley encephalitis, despite existing
biosecurity and health services. [12.7.1]
5.3.5. Key Adaptation Options
Key adaptation options include improved WUE and effective
trading mechanisms for water; more appropriate land-use
policies; provision of climate information and seasonal forecasts
to land users to help them manage for climate variability and
change; improved crop cultivars; revised engineering standards
and zoning for infrastructure development; and improved
biosecurity and health services. However, many natural
ecosystems in Australia and New Zealand have only a limited
capacity to adapt, and many managed systems will face limits
on adaptation imposed by cost, acceptability, and other factors.
[12.3.2, 12.3.3, 12.5.6, 12.7.4, 12.8.4, 12.8.5]
5.4. Europe
Present-day weather conditions affect natural, social, and
economic systems in Europe in ways that reveal sensitivities
and vulnerabilities to climate change in these systems. Climate
change may aggravate such effects (very high confidence).
Vulnerability to climate change in Europe differs substantially
between subregions. Southern Europe and the European Arctic
are more vulnerable than other parts of Europe. More-marginal
and less-wealthy areas will be less able to adapt, which leads to
important equity implications (very high confidence). Findings
in the TAR relating to key vulnerabilities in Europe are broadly
consistent with those expressed in the IPCC Special Report on
Regional Impacts of Climate Change and the SAR, but are more
specific about subregional effects and include new information
concerning adaptive capacity. [13.1.1, 13.1.4, 13.4]
5.4.1. Water Resources
Water resources and their management in Europe are under
pressure now, and these pressures are likely to be exacerbated
by climate change (high confidence). Flood hazard is likely
to increase across much of Europe--except where snowmelt
peak has been reduced--and the risk of water shortage is
projected to increase, particularly in southern Europe (medium
to high confidence). Climate change is likely to widen water
resource differences between northern and southern Europe
(high confidence). Half of Europe's alpine glaciers could
disappear by the end of the 21st century. [13.2.1]

Synthesis Report

ecosystems is likely to increase (also as a result of nitrogen
deposition), but increases in decomposition resulting from
increasing temperature may negate any additional carbon
storage. Diversity in nature reserves is under threat from rapid
change. Loss of important habitats (wetlands, tundra, and
isolated habitats) would threaten some species (including rare/
endemic species and migratory birds). Faunal shifts as a result
of ecosystem changes are expected in marine, aquatic, and
terrestrial ecosystems (high confidence; established but
incomplete evidence). [13.2.1.4, 13.2.2.1, 13.2.2.3-5]
Soil properties will deteriorate under warmer and drier climate
scenarios in southern Europe. The magnitude of this effect
will vary markedly between geographic locations and may be
modified by changes in precipitation (medium confidence;
established but incomplete evidence). [13.2.1.2]
In mountain regions, higher temperatures will lead to an
upward shift of biotic zones. There will be a redistribution of
species with, in some instances, a threat of extinction (high
confidence). [13.2.1.4]
Timber harvest will increase in commercial forests in northern
Europe (medium confidence; established but incomplete
evidence), although forest pests and disease may increase.
Reductions are likely in the Mediterranean, with increased
drought and fire risk (high confidence; well-established
evidence). [13.2.2.1]
5.4.3. Agriculture and Food Security
Agricultural yields will increase for most crops as a result of
increasing atmospheric CO2 concentration. This increase in
yields would be counteracted by the risk of water shortage in
southern and eastern Europe and by shortening of the duration
of growth in many grain crops because of increasing
temperature. Northern Europe is likely to experience overall
positive effects, whereas some agricultural production systems
in southern Europe may be threatened (medium confidence;
established but incomplete evidence).
Changes in fisheries and aquaculture production resulting from
climate change embrace faunal shifts that affect freshwater
and marine fish and shellfish biodiversity. These changes will
be aggravated by unsustainable exploitation levels and
environmental change (high confidence).
5.4.4. Human Settlements and Financial Services

5.4.2. Ecosystems
Natural ecosystems will change as a result of increasing
temperature and atmospheric concentration of CO2. Permafrost
will decline; trees and shrubs will encroach into current
northern tundra; and broad-leaved trees may encroach into
current coniferous forest areas. Net primary productivity in

270

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The insurance industry faces potentially costly climate change
impacts through the medium of property damage, but there is
great scope for adaptive measures if initiatives are taken soon
(high confidence). Transport, energy, and other industries will
face changing demand and market opportunities. The
concentration of industry on the coast exposes it to sea-level

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-10: Estimates of flood exposure and incidence for Europe's coasts in 1990 and the 2080s. Estimates of flood
incidence are highly sensitive to assumed protection standard and should be interpreted in indicative terms only (former
Soviet Union excluded).
Flood Incidence

Region

1990
Exposed
Population
(millions)

1990
Average Number of People
Experiencing Flooding
(thousands yr-1)

2080s
Increase due to Sea-Level
Rise, Assuming No Adaptation
(%)

Atlantic Coast
Baltic Coast
Mediterranean Coast

19.0
01.4
04.1

19
01
03

050 to 9,000
000 to 3,000
260 to 12,000

rise and extreme events, necessitating protection or removal
(high confidence). [13.2.4]
Recreational preferences are likely to change with higher
temperatures. Heat waves are likely to reduce the traditional
peak summer demand at Mediterranean holiday destinations.
Less-reliable snow conditions will impact adversely on winter
tourism (medium confidence). [13.2.4.4]
The risk of flooding, erosion, and wetland loss in coastal areas
will increase substantially, with implications for human settlement,
industry, tourism, agriculture, and coastal natural habitats.
Southern Europe appears to be more vulnerable to these changes,
although the North Sea coast already has a high exposure to
flooding (high confidence). Table TS-10 provides estimates
of flood exposure and risk for Europe's coasts. [13.2.1.3]
5.4.5. Human Health
A range of risks is posed for human health through increased
exposure to heat episodes (exacerbated by air pollution in
urban areas), extension of some vector-borne diseases, and
coastal and riverine flooding. Cold-related risks will be reduced
(medium confidence; competing explanations). [13.2.5]
5.4.6. Adaptive Capacity
The adaptation potential of socioeconomic systems in Europe
is relatively high because of economic conditions [high gross
national product (GNP) and stable growth], a stable population
(with the capacity to move within the region), and welldeveloped political, institutional, and technological support
systems. However, the adaptation potential for natural systems
generally is low (very high confidence). [13.3]
5.5. Latin America

in climate normally is associated with phenomena that already
produce impacts with important socioeconomic and
environmental consequences that could be exacerbated by
global warming and its associated weather and climate changes.
Variations in precipitation have a strong effect on runoff and
streamflow, which are simultaneously affected by melting of
glaciers and snow. Precipitation variations and their sign depend
on the geographical subregion under consideration. Temperature
in Latin America also varies among subregions. Although these
variations might depend on the origin and quality of the source
data as well as on the record periods used for studies and
analyses, some of these variations could be attributed to a
climate change condition (low confidence). [14.1.2.1]
ENSO is responsible for a large part of the climate variability
at interannual scales in Latin America (high confidence). The
region is vulnerable to El Nino, with impacts varying across
the continent. For example, El Nino is associated with dry
conditions in northeast Brazil, northern Amazonia, the
Peruvian-Bolivian Altiplano, and the Pacific coast of Central
America. The most severe droughts in Mexico in recent
decades have occurred during El Nino years, whereas southern
Brazil and northwestern Peru have exhibited anomalously wet
conditions. La Nina is associated with heavy precipitation and
flooding in Colombia and drought in southern Brazil. If El
Nino or La Nina were to increase, Latin America would be
exposed to these conditions more often. [14.1.2]
Some subregions of Latin America frequently experience
extreme events, and these extraordinary combinations of
hydrological and climatic conditions historically have produced
disasters in Latin America. Tropical cyclones and associated
heavy rain, flooding, and landslides are very common in
Central America and southern Mexico. In northwestern South
America and northeastern Brazil, many of the extremes that
occur are strongly related to El Nino. [14.1.2]

There is ample evidence of climate variability at a wide range
of time scales all over Latin America, from intraseasonal to
long-term. In many subregions of Latin America, this variability

271

Climate Change 2001

5.5.1. Water Resources
It has been well established that glaciers in Latin America
have receded in the past several decades. Warming in high
mountain regions could lead to disappearance of significant
snow and ice surface (medium confidence), which could affect
mountain sport and tourist activities. Because these areas
contribute to river streamflow, this trend also would reduce
water availability for irrigation, hydropower generation, and
navigation. [14.2.4]
5.5.2. Ecosystems
It is well established that Latin America accounts for one of
the Earth's largest concentrations of biodiversity, and the
impacts of climate change can be expected to increase the risk
of biodiversity loss (high confidence). Observed population
declines in frogs and small mammals in Central America can
be related to regional climate change. The remaining Amazonian
forest is threatened by the combination of human disturbance,
increases in fire frequency and scale, and decreased
precipitation from evapotranspiration loss, global warming,
and El Nino. Neotropical seasonally dry forest should be
considered severely threatened in Mesoamerica.
Tree mortality increases under dry conditions that prevail near
newly formed edges in Amazonian forests. Edges, which affect
an increasingly large portion of the forest because of increased
deforestation, would be especially susceptible to the effects
of reduced rainfall. In Mexico, nearly 50% of the deciduous
tropical forest would be affected. Heavy rain during the 19971998 ENSO event generated drastic changes in dry ecosystems
of northern Peru's coastal zone. Global warming would expand
the area suitable for tropical forests as equilibrium vegetation
types. However, the forces driving deforestation make it unlikely
that tropical forests will be permitted to occupy these increased
areas. Land-use change interacts with climate through positivefeedback processes that accelerate loss of humid tropical
forests. [14.2.1]
5.5.3. Sea-Level Rise
Sea-level rise will affect mangrove ecosystems by eliminating
their present habitats and creating new tidally inundated areas
to which some mangrove species may shift. This also would affect
the region's fisheries because most commercial shellfish and
finfish use mangroves for nurseries and refuge. Coastal inundation
that stems from sea-level rise and riverine and flatland flooding
would affect water availability and agricultural land, exacerbating
socioeconomic and health problems in these areas. [14.2.3]
5.5.4. Agriculture
Studies in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Uruguay--
based on GCMs and crop models--project decreased yields

272

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

for numerous crops (e.g., maize, wheat, barley, grapes) even
when the direct effects of CO2 fertilization and implementation
of moderate adaptation measures at the farm level are
considered (high confidence). Predicted increases in
temperature will reduce crops yields in the region by
shortening the crop cycle. Over the past 40 years, the
contribution of agriculture to the GDP of Latin American
countries has been on the order of 10%. Agriculture remains a
key sector in the regional economy because it employs 30-40%
of the economically active population. It also is very important
for the food security of the poorest sectors of the population.
Subsistence farming could be severely threatened in some parts
of Latin America, including northeastern Brazil.
It is established but incomplete that climate change would
reduce silvicultural yields because lack of water often limits
growth during the dry season, which is expected to become
longer and more intense in many parts of Latin America. Table
TS-11 summarizes studies undertaken on the region for
different crops and management conditions, all under rainfed
conditions; most of these results predict negative impacts,
particularly for maize. [14.2.2]
5.5.5. Human Health
The scale of health impacts from climate change in Latin
America would depend primarily on the size, density, location,
and wealth of populations. Exposure to heat or cold waves
has impacts on mortality rates in risk groups in the region
(medium confidence).
Increases in temperature would affect human health in polluted
cities such as Mexico City and Santiago, Chile. It is well
established that ENSO causes changes in disease vector
populations and in the incidence of water-borne diseases in
Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, and Venezuela. Studies in
Peru and Cuba indicate that increases in temperature and
precipitation would change the geographical distribution of
infectious diseases such as cholera and meningitis (high
confidence), although there is speculation about what the
changes in patterns of diseases would be in different places. It
is well established that extreme events tend to increase death
and morbidity rates (injuries, infectious diseases, social
problems, and damage to sanitary infrastructure), as shown in
Central America with Hurricane Mitch in 1998, heavy rains
in Mexico and Venezuela in 1999, and in Chile and Argentina
in 2000. [14.2.5]
5.6. North America
North America will experience both positive and negative
climate change impacts (high confidence). Varying impacts on
ecosystems and human settlements will exacerbate subregional
differences in climate-sensitive resource production and
vulnerability to extreme events. Opportunities and challenges

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-11: Assessments of climate change impacts on annual crops in Latin America.
Studya

Climate Scenario

Scope

Crop

Yield Impact (%)

Downing, 1992

+3C
-25% precipitation

Norte Chico, Chile

Wheat
Maize
Potato
Grapes

decrease
increase
increase
decrease

Baethgen, 1994

GISS, GFDL, UKMO

Uruguay

Wheat
Barley

-30
-40 to -30

de Siqueira et al., 1994 GISS, GFDL, UKMO

Brazil

Wheat
Maize
Soybeans

-50 to -15
-25 to -2
-10 to +40

Liverman and O'Brien, GFDL, GISS
1991

Tlaltizapan, Mexico

Maize

-20
-24
-61

Liverman et al., 1994

Mexico

Maize

-61 to -6

Sala and Paruelo, 1994 GISS, GFDL, UKMO

Argentina

Maize

-36 to -17

Baethgen and Magrin,
1995

UKMO

Argentina
Uruguay
(9 sites)

Wheat

-5 to -10

Conde et al., 1997a

CCCM, GFDL

Mexico
(7 sites)

Maize

increase-decrease

Magrin et al., 1997a

GISS, UKMO, GFDL, Argentina
(43 sites)
MPI

Maize
Wheat
Sunflower
Soybean

-16 to +2
-8 to +7
-8 to +13
-22 to +21

Hofstadter et al., 1997

Incremental

Barley

-10b
-8 to +5c
-15d
-13 to +10c

GISS, GFDL, UKMO

Uruguay

Maize
a

See WGII TAR Chapter 14 reference list for complete source information.
For 1C increase.
c
Change of -20 to +20% in precipitation.
d
For 2C increase.
b

to adaptation will arise, frequently involving multiple stresses
(Table TS-12). Some innovative adaptation strategies are being
tested as a response to current climate-related challenges (e.g.,
water banks), but few cases have examined how these strategies
could be implemented as regional climates continue to change.
Shifting patterns in temperature, precipitation, disease vectors,
and water availability will require adaptive responses--
including, for example, investments in storm protection and
water supply infrastructure, as well as community health
services. [15.3.2, 15.4]
5.6.1. Communities and Urban Infrastructure
Potential changes in the frequency, severity, and duration of
extreme events are among the most important risks associated

with climate change in North America. Potential impacts of
climate change on cities include fewer periods of extreme winter
cold; increased frequency of extreme heat; rising sea levels and
risk of storm surge; and changes in timing, frequency, and severity
of flooding associated with storms and precipitation extremes.
These events--particularly increased heat waves and changes
in extreme events--will be accompanied by effects on health.
Communities can reduce their vulnerability to adverse impacts
through investments in adaptive infrastructure, which can be
expensive. Rural, poor, and indigenous communities may not
be able to make such investments. Furthermore, infrastructure
investment decisions are based on a variety of needs beyond
climate change, including population growth and aging of
existing systems. [15.2.5]

273

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-12: Climate change adaptation issues in North American subregions. Some unique issues for certain locations also
are indicated.
North American
Subregions
Development Context
Most or all
subregions

- Changing commodity markets
- Intensive water resources development
over large areas--domestic and
transboundary
- Lengthy entitlement/land claim/treaty
agreements--domestic and
transboundary
- Urban expansion
- Transportation expansion

- Role of water/environmental markets
- Changing design and operations of water and energy systems
- New technology/practices in agriculture and forestry
- Protection of threatened ecosystems or adaptation to new
landscapes
- Increased role for summer (warm weather) tourism
- Risks to water quality from extreme events
- Managing community health for changing risk factors
- Changing roles of public emergency assistance and private
insurance

Arctic border

- Winter transport system
- Indigenous lifestyles

- Design for changing permafrost and ice conditions
- Role of two economies and co-management bodies

Coastal regions

- Declines in some commercial marine
resources (cod, salmon)
- Intensive coastal zone development

- Aquaculture, habitat protection, fleet reductions
- Coastal zone planning in high demand areas

Great Lakes

- Sensitivity to lake level fluctuations

- Managing for reduction in mean levels without increased
shoreline encroachment

5.6.2. Water Resources and Aquatic Ecosystems
Uncertain changes in precipitation lead to little agreement
regarding changes in total annual runoff across North America.
Modeled impacts of increased temperatures on lake evaporation
lead to consistent projections of reduced lake levels and outflows
for the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence system under most scenarios
(medium confidence). Increased incidence of heavy precipitation
events will result in greater sediment and non-point-source
pollutant loadings to watercourses (medium confidence). In
addition, in regions where seasonal snowmelt is an important
aspect of the annual hydrologic regime (e.g., California,
Columbia River Basin), warmer temperatures are likely to result
in a seasonal shift in runoff, with a larger proportion of total
runoff occurring in winter, together with possible reductions
in summer flows (high confidence). This could adversely affect
the availability and quality of water for instream and out-ofstream water uses during the summer (medium confidence).
Figure TS-8 shows possible impacts. [15.2.1]
Adaptive responses to such seasonal runoff changes include
altered management of artificial storage capacity, increased
reliance on coordinated management of groundwater and
surface water supplies, and voluntary water transfers between
various water users. Such actions could reduce the impacts of
reduced summer flows on water users, but it may be difficult or
impossible to offset adverse impacts on many aquatic ecosystems,
and it may not be possible to continue to provide current levels
of reliability and quality for all water users. Some regions (e.g.,
the western United States) are likely to see increased market
transfers of available water supplies from irrigated agriculture

274

Climate Change Adaptation Options and Challenges

IPCC Third Assessment Report

to urban and other relatively highly valued uses. Such reallocations
raise social priority questions and entail adjustment costs that
will depend on the institutions in place.
5.6.3. Marine Fisheries
Climate-related variations in marine/coastal environments are
now recognized as playing an important role in determining
the productivity of several North American fisheries in the Pacific,
North Atlantic, Bering Sea, and Gulf of Mexico regions. There
are complex links between climatic variations and changes in
processes that influence the productivity and spatial distribution
of marine fish populations (high confidence), as well as
uncertainties linked to future commercial fishing patterns.
Recent experience with Pacific salmon and Atlantic cod suggests
that sustainable fisheries management will require timely and
accurate scientific information on environmental conditions
affecting fish stocks, as well as institutional and operational
flexibility to respond quickly to such information. [15.2.3.3]
5.6.4. Agriculture
Small to moderate climate change will not imperil food and
fiber production (high confidence). There will be strong regional
production effects, with some areas suffering significant loss
of comparative advantage to other regions (medium confidence).
Overall, this results in a small net effect. The agricultural
welfare of consumers and producers would increase with
modest warming. However, the benefit would decline at an
increasing rate--possibly becoming a net loss--with further
warming. There is potential for increased drought in the U.S.

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

I.

WGII Technical Summary

Alaska, Yukon, and Coastal British Columbia
Lightly settled/water-abundant region;
potential ecological, hydropower, and flood impacts:
* Increased spring flood risks
* Glacial retreat/disappearance in south, advance
in north; impacts on flows, stream ecology
* Increased stress on salmon, other fish species
* Flooding of coastal wetlands
* Changes in estuary salinity/ecology

V.

Sub-Arctic and Arctic
Sparse population (many dependent on natural systems); winter ice cover important feature of
hydrologic cycle:
* Thinner ice cover, 1- to 3-month increase in ice-free season, increased extent of open water
* Increased lake-level variability, possible complete drying of some delta lakes
* Changes in aquatic ecology and species distribution as a result of warmer temperatures and
longer growing season

VI.

I
II.

Pacific Coast States (USA)
Large and rapidly growing population; water
abundance decreases north to south; intensive
irrigated agriculture; massive water-control
infrastructure; heavy reliance on hydropower;
endangered species issues; increasing
competition for water:
* More winter rainfall/less snowfall--earlier
seasonal peak in runoff, increased
fall/winter flooding, decreased summer
water supply
* Possible increases in annual runoff in
Sierra Nevada and Cascades
* Possible summer salinity increase in San
Francisco Bay and Sacramento/San
Joaquin Delta
* Changes in lake and stream ecology--
warmwater species benefitting; damage
to coldwater species (e.g., trout and
salmon)

V

VIII
VII

II

III

VI

IV

IX

VII. Great Lakes
Heavily populated and industrialized region; variations in lake
levels/flows now affect hydropower, shipping, shoreline structures:
* Possible precipitation increases coupled with reduced runoff
and lake-level declines
* Reduced hydropower production; reduced channel depths for
shipping
* Decreases in lake ice extent--some years w/out ice cover
* Changes in phytoplankton/zooplankton biomass, northward
migration of fish species, possible extirpations of coldwater
species

VIII. Northeast USA and Eastern Canada
Large, mostly urban population--generally adequate water supplies, large
number of small dams, but limited total reservoir capacity; heavily populated
floodplains:
* Decreased snow cover amount and duration
* Possible large reductions in streamflow
* Accelerated coastal erosion, saline intrusion into coastal aquifers
* Changes in magnitude, timing of ice freeze-up/break-up, with impacts on
spring flooding
* Possible elimination of bog ecosystems
* Shifts in fish species distributions, migration patterns

III. Rocky Mountains (USA and Canada)
Lightly populated in north, rapid population growth in south;
irrigated agriculture, recreation, urban expansion increasingly
competing for water; headwaters area for other regions:
* Rise in snow line in winter-spring, possible increases in snowfall,
earlier snowmelt, more frequent rain on snow--changes in
seasonal streamflow, possible reductions in summer streamflow,
reduced summer soil moisture
* Stream temperature changes affecting species composition;
increased isolation of coldwater stream fish

IX.
IV.

Midwest USA and Canadian Prairies
Agricultural heartland--mostly rainfed, with some
areas relying heavily on irrigation:
* Annual streamflow decreasing/increasing; possible
large declines in summer streamflow
* Increasing likelihood of severe droughts
* Possible increasing aridity in semi-arid zones
* Increases or decreases in irrigation demand and
water availability--uncertain impacts on farmsector income, groundwater levels, streamflows,
and water quality

Southwest
Rapid population growth, dependence on limited
groundwater and surface water supplies, water
quality concerns in border region, endangered species
concerns, vulnerability to flash flooding:
* Possible changes in snowpacks and runoff
* Possible declines in groundwater recharge--
reduced water supplies
* Increased water temperatures--further stress on
aquatic species
* Increased frequency of intense precipitation
events--increased risk of flash floods

Southeast, Gulf, and Mid-Atlantic USA
Increasing population--especially in coastal areas, water quality/non-point
source pollution problems, stress on aquatic ecosystems:
* Heavily populated coastal floodplains at risk to flooding from extreme
precipitation events, hurricanes
* Possible lower base flows, larger peak flows, longer droughts
* Possible precipitation increase--possible increases or decreases in runoff/river
discharge, increased flow variability
* Major expansion of northern Gulf of Mexico hypoxic zone possible--other
impacts on coastal systems related to changes in precipitation/non-point
source pollutant loading
* Changes in estuary systems and wetland extent, biotic processes, species
distribution

Figure TS-8: Possible water resources impacts in North America.

275

Climate Change 2001

Great Plains/Canadian Prairies and opportunities for a limited
northward shift in production areas in Canada.
Increased production from direct physiological effects of CO2,
and farm- and agricultural market-level adjustments (e.g.,
behavioral, economic, and institutional) are projected to offset
losses. Economic studies that include farm- and agricultural
market-level adjustments indicate that the negative effects of
climate change on agriculture probably have been overestimated
by studies that do not account for these adjustments (medium
confidence). However, the ability of farmers to adapt their input
and output choices is difficult to forecast and will depend on
market and institutional signals. [15.2.3.1]

Insured losses in North America (59% of the global total) are
increasing with affluence and as populations continue to move
into vulnerable areas. Insurer vulnerability to these changes
varies considerably by region.
Recent extreme events have led to several responses by insurers,
including increased attention to building codes and disaster
preparedness. Insurers' practices traditionally have been based
primarily on historic climatic experience; only recently have they
begun to use models to predict future climate-related losses, so
the potential for surprise is real. Governments play a key role as
insurers or providers of disaster relief, especially in cases in
which the private sector deems risks to be uninsurable. [15.2.7]

5.6.5. Forests and Protected Areas

5.7. Polar Regions

Climate change is expected to increase the areal extent and
productivity of forests over the next 50-100 years (medium
confidence). However, climate change is likely to cause changes
in the nature and extent of several "disturbance factors" (e.g.,
fire, insect outbreaks) (medium confidence). Extreme or longterm climate change scenarios indicate the possibility of
widespread forest decline (low confidence).

Climate change in the polar region is expected to be among
the greatest of any region on Earth. Twentieth century data for
the Arctic show a warming trend of as much as 5C over
extensive land areas (very high confidence), while precipitation
has increased (low confidence). There are some areas of cooling
in eastern Canada. The extent of sea ice has decreased by 2.9%
per decade, and it has thinned over the 1978-1996 period (high
confidence). There has been a statistically significant decrease
in spring snow extent over Eurasia since 1915 (high confidence).
The area underlain by permafrost has been reduced and has
warmed (very high confidence). The layer of seasonally thawed
ground above permafrost has thickened in some areas, and new
areas of extensive permafrost thawing have developed. In the
Antarctic, a marked warming trend is evident in the Antarctic
Peninsula, with spectacular loss of ice shelves (high confidence).
The extent of higher terrestrial vegetation on the Antarctic
Peninsula is increasing (very high confidence). Elsewhere,
warming is less definitive. There has been no significant change
in the Antarctic sea ice since 1973, although it apparently
retreated by more than 3 of latitude between the mid-1950s
and the early 1970s (medium confidence). [16.1.3.2.]

There is strong evidence that climate change can lead to the
loss of specific ecosystem types--such as high alpine areas
and specific coastal (e.g., salt marshes) and inland (e.g., prairie
"potholes") wetland types (high confidence). There is moderate
potential for adaptation to prevent these losses by planning
conservation programs to identify and protect particularly
threatened ecosystems. Lands that are managed for timber
production are likely to be less susceptible to climate change
than unmanaged forests because of the potential for adaptive
management. [15.2.2]
5.6.6. Human Health
Vector-borne diseases, including malaria and dengue fever,
may expand their ranges in the United States and may develop
in Canada. Tick-borne Lyme disease also may see its range
expanded in Canada. However, socioeconomic factors such as
public health measures will play a large role in determining the
existence or extent of such infections. Diseases associated with
water may increase with warming of air and water temperatures,
combined with heavy runoff events from agricultural and urban
surfaces. Increased frequency of convective storms could lead
to more cases of thunderstorm-associated asthma. [15.2.4]
5.6.7. Public and Private Insurance Systems
Inflation-corrected catastrophe losses have increased eight-fold
in North America over the past 3 decades (high confidence).
The exposures and surpluses of private insurers (especially
property insurers) and reinsurers have been growing, and
weather-related profit losses and insolvencies have been observed.

276

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

The Arctic is extremely vulnerable to climate change, and major
physical, ecological, and economic impacts are expected to
appear rapidly. A variety of feedback mechanisms will cause
an amplified response, with consequent impacts on other systems
and people. There will be different species compositions on
land and sea, poleward shifts in species assemblages, and severe
disruptions for communities of people who lead traditional
lifestyles. In developed areas of the Arctic and where the
permafrost is ice-rich, special attention will be required to
mitigate the detrimental impacts of thawing, such as severe
damage to buildings and transport infrastructure (very high
confidence). There also will be beneficial consequences of
climatic warming, such as reduced demand for heating energy.
Substantial loss of sea ice in the Arctic Ocean will be favorable
for opening of Arctic sea routes and ecotourism, which may
have large implications for trade and for local communities.
[16.2.5.3, 16.2.7.1, 16.2.8.1, 16.2.8.2]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

In the Antarctic, projected climate change will generate impacts
that will be realized slowly (high confidence). Because the
impacts will occur over a long period, however, they will continue
long after GHG emissions have stabilized. For example, there
will be slow but steady impacts on ice sheets and circulation
patterns of the global ocean, which will be irreversible for many
centuries into the future and will cause changes elsewhere in
the world, including a rise of sea level. Further substantial
loss of ice shelves is expected around the Antarctic Peninsula.
Warmer temperatures and reduced sea-ice extent are likely to
produce long-term changes in the physical oceanography and
ecology of the Southern Ocean, with intensified biological
activity and increased growth rates of fish. [16.2.3.4, 16.2.4.2]
Polar regions contain important drivers of climate change.
The Southern Ocean's uptake of carbon is projected to reduce
substantially as a result of complex physical and biological
processes. GHG emissions from tundra caused by changes in
water content, decomposition of exposed peat, and thawing
of permafrost are expected to increase. Reductions in the extent
of highly reflective snow and ice will magnify warming (very
high confidence). Freshening of waters from increased Arctic
runoff and increased rainfall, melt of Antarctic ice shelves,
and reduced sea-ice formation will slow the thermohaline
circulations of the North Atlantic and Southern Oceans and
reduce the ventilation of deep ocean waters. [16.3.1]
Adaptation to climate change will occur in natural polar
ecosystems, mainly through migration and changing mixes
of species. Some species may become threatened (e.g., walrus,
seals, and polar bears), whereas others may flourish (e.g.,
caribou and fish). Although such changes may be disruptive
to many local ecological systems and particular species, the
possibility remains that predicted climate change eventually
may increase the overall productivity of natural systems in
polar regions. [16.3.2]
For indigenous communities who follow traditional lifestyles,
opportunities for adaptation to climate change are limited
(very high confidence). Changes in sea ice, seasonality of snow,
habitat, and diversity of food species will affect hunting and
gathering practices and could threaten longstanding traditions
and ways of life. Technologically developed communities are
likely to adapt quite readily to climate change by adopting
altered modes of transport and by increased investment to take
advantage of new commercial and trade opportunities. [16.3.2]
5.8. Small Island States
Climate change and sea-level rise pose a serious threat to the
small island states, which span the ocean regions of the Pacific,
Indian, and Atlantic Oceans as well as the Caribbean and
Mediterranean Seas. Characteristics of small island states that
increase their vulnerability include their small physical size
relative to large expanses of ocean; limited natural resources;

WGII Technical Summary

relative isolation; extreme openness of small economies that
are highly sensitive to external shocks and highly prone to natural
disasters and other extreme events; rapidly growing populations
with high densities; poorly developed infrastructure; and
limited funds, human resources, and skills. These characteristics
limit the capacity of small island states to mitigate and adapt
to future climate change and sea-level rise. [17.1.2]
Many small island states already are experiencing the effects of
current large interannual variations in oceanic and atmospheric
conditions. As a result, the most significant and more immediate
consequences for small island states are likely to be related to
changes in rainfall regimes, soil moisture budgets, prevailing
winds (speed and direction), short-term variations in regional
and local sea levels, and patterns of wave action. These changes
are manifest in past and present trends of climate and climate
variability, with an upward trend in average temperature by as
much as 0.1C per decade and sea-level rise of 2 mm yr-1 in
the tropical ocean regions in which most of the small island
states are located. Analysis of observational data from various
regions indicates an increase in surface air temperature that
has been greater than global rates of warming, particularly in
the Pacific Ocean and Caribbean Sea. Much of the variability
in the rainfall record of the Pacific and Caribbean islands
appears to be closely related to the onset of ENSO. However,
part of the variability also may be attributable to shifts in the
Intertropical and South Pacific Convergence Zone, whose
influence on rainfall variability patterns must be better
understood. The interpretation of current sea-level trends also
is constrained by limitations of observational records,
particularly from geodetic-controlled tide gauges. [17.1.3]
5.8.1. Equity and Sustainable Development
Although the contribution of small island states to global
emissions of GHG is insignificant, projected impacts of climate
change and sea-level rise on these states are likely to be
serious. The impacts will be felt for many generations because
of small island states' low adaptive capacity, high sensitivity
to external shocks, and high vulnerability to natural disasters.
Adaptation to these changing conditions will be extremely
difficult for most small island states to accomplish in a
sustainable manner. [17.2.1]
5.8.2. Coastal Zone
Much of the coastal change currently experienced in small
island states is attributed to human activities on the coast.
Projected sea-level rise of 5 mm yr-1 over the next 100 years,
superimposed on further coastal development, will have
negative impacts on the coasts (high confidence). This in turn
will increase the vulnerability of coastal environments by
reducing natural resilience and increasing the cost of adaptation.
Given that severity will vary regionally, the most serious
considerations for some small island states will be whether

277

Climate Change 2001

they will have adequate potential to adapt to sea-level rise
within their own national boundaries. [17.2.2.1, 17.2.3]
5.8.3. Ecosystems and Biodiversity
Projected future climate change and sea-level rise will affect
shifts in species composition and competition. It is estimated
that one of every three known threatened plants are island
endemics while 23% of bird species found on islands are
threatened. [17.2.5]
Coral reefs, mangroves, and seagrass beds that often rely on
stable environmental conditions will be adversely affected by
rising air and sea temperature and sea levels (medium
confidence). Episodic warming of the sea surface has resulted in
greatly stressed coral populations that are subject to widespread
coral bleaching. Mangroves, which are common on lowenergy, nutrient/sediment-rich coasts and embayments in the
tropics, have been altered by human activities. Changes in sea
levels are likely to affect landward and alongshore migration
of remnants of mangrove forests that provide protection for
coasts and other resources. An increase in SST would adversely
affect seagrass communities, which already are under stress
from land-based pollution and runoff. Changes in these systems
are likely to negatively affect fishery populations that depend
on them for habitat and breeding grounds. [17.2.4]
5.8.4. Water Resources, Agriculture, and Fisheries
Water resources and agriculture are of critical concern because
most small island states possess limited arable land and water
resources. Communities rely on rainwater from catchments
and a limited freshwater lens. In addition, arable farming,
especially on low islands and atolls, is concentrated at or near
the coast. Changes in the height of the water table and soil
salinization as a consequence of sea-level rise would be stressful
for many staple crops, such as taro.
Although fishing is largely artisinal or small-scale commercial,
it is an important activity on most small islands and makes a
significant contribution to the protein intake of island inhabitants.
Many breeding grounds and habitats for fish and shellfish--
such as mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, and salt ponds--
will face increasing threats from likely impacts of projected
climate change. Water resources, agriculture, and fisheries
already are sensitive to currently observed variability in oceanic
and atmospheric conditions in many small island states, and
the impacts are likely to be exacerbated by future climate and
sea-level change (high confidence). [17.2.6, 17.2.8.1]
5.8.5. Human Health, Settlement, Infrastructure and
Tourism
Several human systems are likely to be affected by projected
changes in climate and sea levels in many small island states.

278

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Human health is a major concern given that many tropical
islands are experiencing high incidences of vector- and waterborne diseases that are attributable to changes in temperature
and rainfall, which may be linked to the ENSO phenomenon,
droughts, and floods. Climate extremes also create a huge burden
on some areas of human welfare, and these burdens are likely
to increase in the future. Almost all settlements, socioeconomic
infrastructure, and activities such as tourism are located at or
near coastal areas in small island states. Tourism provides a
major source of revenue and employment for many small island
states (Table TS-13). Changes in temperature and rainfall
regimes, as well as loss of beaches, could devastate the
economies of many small island states (high confidence).
Because these areas are very vulnerable to future climate
change and sea-level rise, it is important to protect and nourish
beaches and sites by implementing programs that constitute
wise use resources. Integrated coastal management has been
identified as one approach that would be useful for many small
island states for a sustainable tourism industry. [17.2.7, 17.2.9]
5.8.6. Sociocultural and Traditional Assets
Certain traditional island assets (good and services) also will
be at risk from climate change and sea-level rise. These assets
include subsistence and traditional technologies (skills and
knowledge) and cohesive community structures that, in the
past, have helped to buttress the resilience of these islands to
various forms of shock. Sea-level rise and climate changes,
combined with other environmental stresses, already have
destroyed unique cultural and spiritual sites, traditional heritage
assets, and important coastal protected areas in many Pacific
island states. [17.2.10]

6. Adaptation, Sustainable Development,
and Equity
Adaptation to climate change has the potential to substantially
reduce many of the adverse impacts of climate change and
enhance beneficial impacts, though neither without cost nor
without leaving residual damage. In natural systems,
adaptation is reactive, whereas in human systems it also can
be anticipatory. Figure TS-9 presents types and examples of
adaptation to climate change. Experience with adaptation to
climate variability and extremes shows that in the private and
public sectors there are constraints to achieving the potential
of adaptation. The adoption and effectiveness of private, or
market-driven, adaptations in sectors and regions are limited
by other forces, institutional conditions, and various sources
of market failure. There is little evidence to suggest that private
adaptations will be employed to offset climate change damages
in natural environments. In some instances, adaptation
measures may have inadvertent consequences, including
environmental damage. The ecological, social, and economic
costs of relying on reactive, autonomous adaptation to the

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-13: Estimates of flood exposure and incidence for Europe's coasts in 1990 and the 2080s. Estimates of flood
incidence are highly sensitive to assumed protection standard and should be interpreted in indicative terms only (former
Soviet Union excluded).
Tourist Receiptsb
Country

Number of Tourists
(000s)a

Tourists as % of
Populationa

as % of GNP

as % of Exports

Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Cape Verde
Comoros
Cuba
Cyprus
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Fiji
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Maldives
Malta
Mauritius
Papua New Guinea
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent
Samoa
Seychelles
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Vanuatu

232
1618
472
45
26
1153
2088
65
2211
359
111
149
1192
366
1111
536
66
88
248
65
68
130
7198
16
324
49

364
586
182
11
5
11
281
98
28
45
116
2
46
131
295
46
2
211
165
55
31
167
209
4
29
27

63
42
39
12
11
9
24
16
14
19
27
4
32
95
23
16
2
31
41
24
20
35
6
3
4
19

74
76
56
37
48
n/a
49
33
30
29
61
51
40
68
29
27
3
64
67
46
49
52
4
4
8
41

Data on tourist inflows and ratio to population pertain to 1997.
Data for tourist receipts pertain to 1997 for the Bahamas, Cape Verde, Jamaica, the Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Samoa, Seychelles, Singapore,
and Solomon Islands; 1996 for Antigua and Barbuda, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Grenada, Haiti, Papua New Guinea, St. Lucia,
and St. Vincent; 1995 for Barbados, Comoros, Cyprus, Trinidad and Tobago, and Vanuatu; and 1994 for St. Kitts and Nevis.

Anticipatory

Reactive
* Changes in length of
growing season
* Changes in ecosystem
composition
* Wetland migration

Private

Planned anticipatory adaptation has the potential to reduce
vulnerability and realize opportunities associated with climate
change, regardless of autonomous adaptation. Adaptation
facilitated by public agencies is an important part of societal
response to climate change. Implementation of adaptation
policies, programs, and measures usually will have immediate
and future benefits. Adaptations to current climate and climaterelated risks (e.g., recurring droughts, storms, floods, and other
extremes) generally are consistent with adaptation to changing
and changed climatic conditions. Adaptation measures are
likely to be implemented only if they are consistent with or

integrated with decisions or programs that address nonclimatic
stresses. Vulnerabilities associated with climate change are
rarely experienced independently of nonclimatic conditions.
Impacts of climatic stimuli are felt via economic or social stresses,

* Purchase of insurance
* Construction of houses on
stilts
* Redesign of oil rigs

* Changes in farm practices
* Changes in insurance
premiums
* Purchase of air-conditioning

Public

cumulative effects of climate change are substantial. Many of
these costs can be avoided through planned, anticipatory
adaptation. Designed appropriately, many adaptation strategies
could provide multiple benefits in the near and longer terms.
However, there are limits on their implementation and
effectiveness. Enhancement of adaptive capacity reduces the
vulnerability of sectors and regions to climate change, including
variability and extremes, and thereby promotes sustainable
development and equity. [18.2.4, 18.3.4]

Natural
Systems

b

Human
Systems

a

* Early-warning systems
* New building codes, design
standards
* Incentives for relocation

* Compensatory payments,
subsidies
* Enforcement of building
codes
* Beach nourishment

Figure TS-9: Types of adaptation to climate change, including
examples.

279

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Values of +X*
Climatic
Attribute Xpc
(or Effect) -X*

Xcc

Time (yr)
pre-climate change

Frequency/
Probability
of Occurrences
(e.g., years)

changed climate
(unchanged variance)

-X* Xpc Xcc +X*

Values of Climatic
Attribute (X)
Trend in mean value of X (20-yr running mean)
Xpc

= Mean value of climatic attribute (X) at start of time
series (pre-climate change)

Xcc

= Mean value of climatic attribute (X) at end of time
series (climate change)

+X* =

Upper critical value of X for system of interest:
values < -X* are problematic and considered
"extreme" or beyond "damage threshold"

-X* =

Lower critical value of X for system of interest:
values < -X* are problematic and considered
"extreme" or beyond "damage threshold"
Coping range or zone of minimal hazard potential for
system of interest
Probability of "extreme" events (i.e., climatic attribute
values > +X*)

Figure TS-10: Climate change, variability, extremes, and coping
range.

and adaptations to climate (by individuals, communities, and
governments) are evaluated and undertaken in light of these
conditions. The costs of adaptation often are marginal to other
management or development costs. To be effective, climate
change adaptation must consider nonclimatic stresses and be
consistent with existing policy criteria, development objectives,
and management structures. [18.3.5, 18.4]
The key features of climate change for vulnerability and
adaptation are related to variability and extremes, not simply
changed average conditions (Figure TS-10). Societies and
economies have been making adaptations to climate for
centuries. Most sectors, regions, and communities are reasonably
adaptable to changes in average conditions, particularly if the
changes are gradual. However, losses from climatic variations
and extremes are substantial and, in some sectors, increasing.
These losses indicate that autonomous adaptation has not been
sufficient to offset damages associated with temporal variations
in climatic conditions. Communities therefore are more

280

IPCC Third Assessment Report

vulnerable and less adaptable to changes in the frequency and/
or magnitude of conditions other than average, especially
extremes, which are inherent in climate change. The degree
to which future adaptations are successful in offsetting adverse
impacts of climate change will be determined by success in
adapting to climate change, variability, and extremes. [18.2.2]
6.1. Adaptive Capacity
The capacity to adapt varies considerably among regions,
countries, and socioeconomic groups and will vary over time.
Table TS-14 summarizes adaptation measures and capacities
by sector, and Table TS-15 provides this information for each
region covered by the TAR. The most vulnerable regions and
communities are highly exposed to hazardous climate change
effects and have limited adaptive capacity. The ability to adapt
and cope with climate change impacts is a function of wealth,
scientific and technical knowledge, information, skills,
infrastructure, institutions, and equity. Countries with limited
economic resources, low levels of technology, poor information
and skills, poor infrastructure, unstable or weak institutions,
and inequitable empowerment and access to resources have
little capacity to adapt and are highly vulnerable. Groups and
regions with adaptive capacity that is limited along any of
these dimensions are more vulnerable to climate change
damages, just as they are more vulnerable to other stresses.
[18.5, 18.7]
6.2. Development, Sustainability, and Equity
Activities required for enhancement of adaptive capacity are
essentially equivalent to those promoting sustainable
development. Enhancement of adaptive capacity is a necessary
condition for reducing vulnerability, particularly for the most
vulnerable regions, nations, and socioeconomic groups. Many
sectors and regions that are vulnerable to climate change also
are under pressure from forces such as population growth and
resource depletion. Climate adaptation and sustainability goals
can be jointly advanced by changes in policies that lessen
pressure on resources, improve management of environmental
risks, and enhance adaptive capacity. Climate adaptation and
equity goals can be jointly pursued through initiatives that
promote the welfare of the poorest members of society--for
example, by improving food security, facilitating access to
safe water and health care, and providing shelter and access
to other resources. Development decisions, activities, and
programs play important roles in modifying the adaptive
capacity of communities and regions, yet they tend not to take
into account risks associated with climate variability and change.
Inclusion of climatic risks in the design and implementation of
development initiatives is necessary to reduce vulnerability
and enhance sustainability. [18.6.1]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-14: Adaptation and adaptive capacity in sectors (key findings from Chapters 4 through 9).
Sector

Key Findings

Water Resources - Water managers have experience with adapting to change. Many techniques exist to assess and
implement adaptive options. However, the pervasiveness of climate change may preclude some
traditional adaptive strategies, and available adaptations often are not used.
- Adaptation can involve management on the supply side (e.g., altering infrastructure or institutional
arrangements) and on the demand side (changing demand or risk reduction). Numerous no-regret
policies exist, which will generate net social benefits regardless of climate change.
- Climate change is just one of numerous pressures facing water managers. Nowhere are water management
decisions taken solely to cope with climate change, although it is increasingly considered for future
resource management. Some vulnerabilities are outside the conventional responsibility of water managers.
- Estimates of the economic costs of climate change impacts on water resources depend strongly on
assumptions made about adaptation. Economically optimum adaptation may be prevented by
constraints associated with uncertainty, institutions, and equity.
- Extreme events often are catalysts for change in water management, by exposing vulnerabilities and
raising awareness of climate risks. Climate change modifies indicators of extremes and variability,
complicating adaptation decisions.
- Ability to adapt is affected by institutional capacity, wealth, management philosophy, planning time
scale, organizational and legal framework, technology, and population mobility.
- Water managers need research and management tools aimed at adapting to uncertainty and change,
rather than improving climate scenarios.
Ecosystems and
Their Services

- Adaptation to loss of some ecosystem services may be possible, especially in managed ecosystems.
However, adaptation to losses in wild ecosystems and biodiversity may be difficult or impossible.
- There is considerable capacity for adaptation in agriculture, including crop changes and resource
substitutions, but adaptation to evolving climate change and interannual variability is uncertain.
- Adaptations in agriculture are possible, but they will not happen without considerable transition costs
and equilibrium (or residual) costs.
- Greater adverse impacts are expected in areas where resource endowments are poorest and the ability
of farmers to adapt is most limited.
- In many countries where rangelands are important, lack of infrastructure and investment in resource
management limit options for adaptation.
- Commercial forestry is adaptable, reflecting a history of long-term management decisions under
uncertainty. Adaptations are expected in land-use management (species-selection silviculture) and
product management (processing-marketing).
- Adaptation in developed countries will fare better, while developing countries and countries in
transition, especially in the tropics and subtropics, will fare worse.

Coastal Zones

- Without adaptations, the consequences of global warming and sea-level rise would be disastrous.
- Coastal adaptation entails more than just selecting one of the technical options to respond to sea-level
rise (strategies can aim to protect, accommodate, or retreat). It is a complex and iterative process
rather than a simple choice.
- Adaptation options are more acceptable and effective when they are incorporated into coastal zone
management, disaster mitigation programs, land-use planning, and sustainable development strategies.
- Adaptation choices will be conditioned by existing policies and development objectives, requiring
researchers and policymakers to work toward a commonly acceptable framework for adaptation.
- The adaptive capacity of coastal systems to perturbations is related to coastal resilience, which has
morphological, ecological, and socioeconomic components. Enhancing resilience--including the technical,
institutional, economic, and cultural capability to cope with impacts--is a particularly appropriate
adaptive strategy given future uncertainties and the desire to maintain development opportunities.
- Coastal communities and marine-based economic sectors with low exposure or high adaptive capacity
will be least affected. Communities with lower economic resources, poorer infrastructure, lessdeveloped communications and transportation systems, and weak social support systems have less
access to adaptation options and are more vulnerable.

Human
Settlements,
Energy, and
Industry

- Larger and more costly impacts of climate change occur through changed probabilities of extreme
weather events that overwhelm the design resiliency of human systems.
- Many adaptation options are available to reduce the vulnerability of settlements. However, urban
managers, especially in developing countries, have so little capacity to deal with current problems
(housing, sanitation, water, and power) that dealing with climate change risks is beyond their means.
- Lack of financial resources, weak institutions, and inadequate or inappropriate planning are major
barriers to adaptation in human settlements.
- Successful environmental adaptation cannot occur without locally based, technically competent, and
politically supported leadership.
- Uncertainty with respect to capacity and the will to respond hinder assessment of adaptation and
vulnerability.

281

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-14 (continued)
Sector

Key Findings

Insurance and
Other Financial
Services

- Adaptation in financial and insurance services in the short term is likely to be to changing frequencies
and intensities of extreme weather events.
- Increasing risk could lead to a greater volume of traditional business and development of new financial
risk management products, but increased variability of loss events would heighten actuarial uncertainty.
- Financial services firms have adaptability to external shocks, but there is little evidence that climate
change is being incorporated into investment decisions.
- The adaptive capacity of the financial sector is influenced by regulatory involvement, the ability of
firms to withdraw from at-risk markets, and fiscal policy regarding catastrophe reserves.
- Adaptation will involve changes in the roles of private and public insurance. Changes in the timing,
intensity, frequency, and/or spatial distribution of climate-related losses will generate increased
demand on already overburdened government insurance and disaster assistance programs.
- Developing countries seeking to adapt in a timely manner face particular difficulties, including limited
availability of capital, poor access to technology, and absence of government programs.
- Insurers' adaptations include raising prices, non-renewal of policies, cessation of new policies,
limiting maximum claims, and raising deductibles--actions that can seriously affect investment in
developing countries.
- Developed countries generally have greater adaptive capacity, including technology and economic
means to bear costs.

Human Health

- Adaptation involves changes in society, institutions, technology, or behavior to reduce potential
negative impacts or increase positive ones. There are numerous adaptation options, which may occur
at the population, community, or personal levels.
- The most important and cost-effective adaptation measure is to rebuild public health infrastructure--
which, in much of the world, has declined in recent years. Many diseases and health problems that
may be exacerbated by climate change can be effectively prevented with adequate financial and
human public health resources, including training, surveillance and emergency response, and
prevention and control programs.
- Adaptation effectiveness will depend on timing. "Primary" prevention aims to reduce risks before
cases occur, whereas "secondary" interventions are designed to prevent further cases.
- Determinants of adaptive capacity to climate-related threats include level of material resources,
effectiveness of governance and civil institutions, quality of public health infrastructure, and
preexisting burden of disease.
- Capacity to adapt also will depend on research to understand associations between climate, weather,
extreme events, and vector-borne diseases.

7. Global Issues and Synthesis
7.1. Detection of Climate Change Impacts
Observational evidence indicates that climate changes in the
20th century already have affected a diverse set of physical and
biological systems. Examples of observed changes with linkages
to climate include shrinkage of glaciers; thawing of permafrost;
shifts in ice freeze and break-up dates on rivers and lakes; increases
in rainfall and rainfall intensity in most mid- and high latitudes
of the Northern Hemisphere; lengthening of growing seasons;
and earlier flowering dates of trees, emergence of insects, and
egg-laying in birds. Statistically significant associations between
changes in regional climate and observed changes in physical
and biological systems have been documented in freshwater,
terrestrial, and marine environments on all continents. [19.2]
The presence of multiple causal factors (e.g., land-use change,
pollution) makes attribution of many observed impacts to
regional climate change a complex challenge. Nevertheless,
studies of systems subjected to significant regional climate

282

IPCC Third Assessment Report

change--and with known sensitivities to that change--find
changes that are consistent with well-established relationships
between climate and physical or biological processes (e.g.,
shifts in the energy balance of glaciers, shifts in the ranges of
animals and plants when temperatures exceed physiological
thresholds) in about 80% of biological cases and about 99%
of physical cases. Table TS-16 shows ~450 changes in processes
or species that have been associated with regional temperature
changes. Figure TS-11 illustrates locations at which studies
have documented regional temperature change impacts. These
consistencies enhance our confidence in the associations
between changes in regional climate and observed changes in
physical and biological systems. Based on observed changes,
there is high confidence that 20th century climate changes have
had a discernible impact on many physical and biological
systems. Changes in biota and physical systems observed in
the 20th century indicate that these systems are sensitive to
climatic changes that are small relative to changes that have
been projected for the 21st century. High sensitivity of
biological systems to long-term climatic change also is
demonstrated by paleorecords. [19.2.2.]

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

WGII Technical Summary

Table TS-15: Adaptation and capacity in regions (key findings from Chapters 10 through 17).
Sector

Key Findings

Africa

- Adaptive measures would enhance flexibility and have net benefits in water resources (irrigation and
water reuse, aquifer and groundwater management, desalinization), agriculture (crop changes,
technology, irrigation, husbandry), and forestry (regeneration of local species, energy-efficient cook
stoves, sustainable community management).
- Without adaptation, climate change will reduce the wildlife reserve network significantly by altering
ecosystems and causing species' emigrations and extinctions. This represents an important ecological
and economic vulnerability in Africa.
- A risk-sharing approach between countries will strengthen adaptation strategies, including disaster
management, risk communication, emergency evacuation, and cooperative water resource management.
- Most countries in Africa are particularly vulnerable to climate change because of limited adaptive
capacity as a result of widespread poverty, recurrent droughts, inequitable land distribution, and
dependence on rainfed agriculture.
- Enhancement of adaptive capacity requires local empowerment in decisionmaking and incorporation
of climate adaptation within broader sustainable development strategies.

Asia

- Priority areas for adaptation are land and water resources, food productivity, and disaster
preparedness and planning, particularly for poorer, resource-dependent countries.
- Adaptations already are required to deal with vulnerabilities associated with climate variability, in
human health, coastal settlements, infrastructure, and food security. Resilience of most sectors in Asia
to climate change is very poor. Expansion of irrigation will be difficult and costly in many countries.
- For many developing countries in Asia, climate change is only one of a host of problems to deal with,
including nearer term needs such as hunger, water supply and pollution, and energy. Resources
available for adaptation to climate are limited. Adaptation responses are closely linked to
development activities, which should be considered in evaluating adaptation options.
- Early signs of climate change already have been observed and may become more prominent over 1 or
2 decades. If this time is not used to design and implement adaptations, it may be too late to avoid
upheavals. Long-term adaptation requires anticipatory actions.
- A wide range of precautionary measures are available at the regional and national level to reduce
economic and social impacts of disasters. These strategies include awareness-building and expansion
of the insurance industry.
- Development of effective adaptation strategies requires local involvement, inclusion of community
perceptions, and recognition of multiple stresses on sustainable management of resources.
- Adaptive capacities vary between countries, depending on social structure, culture, economic capacity,
and level of environmental disruptions. Limiting factors include poor resource and infrastructure
bases, poverty and disparities in income, weak institutions, and limited technology.
- The challenge in Asia lies in identifying opportunities to facilitate sustainable development with
strategies that make climate-sensitive sectors resilient to climate variability.
- Adaptation strategies would benefit from taking a more systems-oriented approach, emphasizing
multiple interactive stresses, with less dependence on climate scenarios.

Australia and
New Zealand

- Adaptations are needed to manage risks from climatic variability and extremes. Pastoral economies
and communities have considerable adaptability but are vulnerable to any increase in the frequency or
duration of droughts.
- Adaptation options include water management, land-use practices and policies, engineering standards
for infrastructure, and health services.
- Adaptations will be viable only if they are compatible with the broader ecological and socioeconomic
environment, have net social and economic benefits, and are taken up by stakeholders.
- Adaptation responses may be constrained by conflicting short- and long-term planning horizons.
- Poorer communities, including many indigenous settlements, are particularly vulnerable to climaterelated hazards and stresses on health because they often are in exposed areas and have less adequate
housing, health care, and other resources for adaptation.

Europe

- Adaptation potential in socioeconomic systems is relatively high because strong economic conditions,
stable population (with capacity to migrate), and well-developed political, institutional, and
technological support systems.
- The response of human activities and the natural environment to current weather perturbations
provides a guide to critical sensitivities under future climate change.
- Adaptation in forests requires long-term planning; it is unlikely that adaptation measures will be put in
place in a timely manner.
- Farm-level analyses show that if adaptation is fully implemented large reductions in adverse impacts
are possible.
- Adaptation for natural systems generally is low.
- More marginal and less wealthy areas will be less able to adapt; thus, without appropriate policies of
response, climate change may lead to greater inequities.

283

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-15 (continued)
Sector

Key Findings

Latin America

- Adaptation measures have potential to reduce climate-related losses in agriculture and forestry.
- There are opportunities for adapting to water shortages and flooding through water resource management.
- Adaptation measures in the fishery sector include changing species captured and increasing prices to
reduce losses.

North America

- Strain on social and economic systems from rapid climate and sea-level changes will increase the need
for explicit adaptation strategies. In some cases, adaptation may yield net benefits, especially if
climate change is slow.
- Stakeholders in most sectors believe that technology is available to adapt, although at some social and
economic cost.
- Adaptation is expected to be more successful in agriculture and forestry. However, adaptations for water,
health, food, energy, and cities are likely to require substantial institutional and infrastructure changes.
- In the water sector, adaptations to seasonal runoff changes include storage, conjunctive supply
management, and transfer. It may not be possible to continue current high levels of reliability of water
supply, especially with transfers to high-valued uses. Adaptive measures such as "water markets" may
lead to concerns about accessibility and conflicts over allocation priorities.
- Adaptations such as levees and dams often are successful in managing most variations in weather but
can increase vulnerability to the most extreme events.
- There is moderate potential for adaptation through conservation programs that protect particularly
threatened ecosystems, such as high alpines and wetlands. It may be difficult or impossible to offset
adverse impacts on aquatic systems.

Polar Regions

- Adaptation will occur in natural polar ecosystems through migration and changing mixes of species.
Species such as walrus, seals, and polar bears will be threatened; while others, such as fish, may flourish.
- Potential for adaptation is limited in indigenous communities that follow traditional lifestyles.
- Technologically developed communities are likely to adapt quite readily, although the high capital
investment required may result in costs in maintaining lifestyles.
- Adaptation depends on technological advances, institutional arrangements, availability of financing,
and information exchange.

Small Island
States

- The need for adaptation has become increasingly urgent, even if swift implementation of global
agreements to reduce future emissions occurs.
- Most adaptation will be carried out by people and communities that inhabit island countries; support
from governments is essential for implementing adaptive measures.
- Progress will require integration of appropriate risk-reduction strategies with other sectoral policy
initiatives in areas such as sustainable development planning, disaster prevention and management,
integrated coastal zone management, and health care planning.
- Strategies for adaptation to sea-level rise are retreat, accommodate, and protect. Measures such as
retreat to higher ground, raising of the land, and use of building set-backs appear to have little
practical utility, especially when hindered by limited physical size.
- Measures for reducing the severity of health threats include health education programs, health care
facilities, sewerage and solid waste management, and disaster preparedness plans.
- Islanders have developed some capacity to adapt by application of traditional knowledge, locally
appropriate technology, and customary practice. Overall adaptive capacity is low, however, because of
the physical size of nations, limited access to capital and technology, shortage of human resource
skills, lack of tenure security, overcrowding, and limited access to resources for construction.
- Many small islands require external financial, technical, and other assistance to adapt. Adaptive
capacity may be enhanced by regional cooperation and pooling of limited resources.

Signals of regional climate change impacts are expected to be
clearer in physical and biotic systems than in social and
economic systems, which are simultaneously undergoing many
complex non-climate-related stresses, such as population
growth and urbanization. Preliminary indications suggest that
some social and economic systems have been affected in part by
20th century regional climate changes (e.g., increased damages
by floods and droughts in some locations, with apparent increases
in insurance impacts). Coincident or alternative explanations
for such observed regional impacts result in only low to medium

284

IPCC Third Assessment Report

confidence about determining whether climate change is
affecting these systems. [19.2.2.4]
7.2. Five Reasons for Concern
Some of the current knowledge about climate change impacts,
vulnerability, and adaptation is synthesized here along five
reasons for concern: unique and threatened systems, global
aggregate impacts, distribution of impacts, extreme weather events,
and large-scale singular events. Consideration of these reasons

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

Hydrology
and Glaciers

Sea Ice

WGII Technical Summary

Animals

Plants

Studies covering
Large Areas

Studies using
Remote Sensing

Figure TS-11: Locations at which systematic long-term studies meet stringent criteria documenting recent temperature-related regional
climate change impacts on physical and biological systems. Hydrology, glacial retreat, and sea-ice data represent decadal to century trends.
Terrestrial and marine ecosystem data represent trends of at least 2 decades. Remote-sensing studies cover large areas. Data are for single
or multiple impacts that are consistent with known mechanisms of physical/biological system responses to observed regional temperaturerelated changes. For reported impacts spanning large areas, a representative location on the map was selected.

for concern contribute to understanding of vulnerabilities and
potential benefits associated with human-induced climate change
that can aid deliberations by policymakers of what could constitute
dangerous interference with the climate system in the context of
Article 2 of the UNFCCC. No single dimension is paramount.
Figure TS-12 presents qualitative findings about climate change
impacts related to the reasons for concern. At a small increase
in global mean temperature,3 some of the reasons for concern
show the potential for negative impacts, whereas others show
little adverse impact or risk. At higher temperature increases,
all lines of evidence show a potential for adverse impacts,
3

Intervals of global mean temperature increase of 0-2, 2-3, and >3C
relative to 1990 are labeled small, moderate, and large, respectively. The
relatively large range for the "small" designation results because the
literature does adequately address a warming of 1-2C. These magnitudes
of change in global mean temperature should be taken as an approximate
indicator of when impacts might occur; they are not intended to define
absolute thresholds or to describe all relevant aspects of climate change
impacts, such as rate of change in climate and changes in precipitation,
extreme climate events, or lagged (latent) effects such as rising sea levels.

with impacts in each reason for concern becoming more
negative at increasing temperatures. There is high confidence
in this general relationship between impacts and temperature
change, but confidence generally is low in estimates of
temperature change thresholds at which different categories
of impacts would happen. [19.8]
7.2.1. Unique and Threatened Systems
Small increases in global average temperature may cause significant
and irreversible damage to some systems and species, including
possible local, regional, or global loss. Some plant and animal
species, natural systems, and human settlements are highly
sensitive to climate and are likely to be adversely affected by
climate changes associated with scenarios of <1C mean global
warming. Adverse impacts to species and systems would become
more numerous and more serious for climatic changes that would
accompany a global mean warming of 1-2C and are highly
likely to become even more numerous and serious at higher
temperatures. The greater the rate and magnitude of temperature
and other climatic changes, the greater the likelihood that critical

285

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-16: Processes and species found in studies to be associated with regional temperature change.a

Region

Glaciers, Snow
Cover/Melt,
Lake/Stream Iceb Vegetation

Invertebrates

Amphibians
and Reptiles

Birds

Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Australia
Europe
North America
Latin America

01
03
14
01
29
36
03

00
02
00
00
04
04
00

--
02
--
--
13
32
--

--
00
--
--
01
11
--

--
--
--
--
46
--
--

--
--
--
--
1
--
--

--
--
--
--
07
--
22

--
--
--
--
0
--
0

--
002
--
--
258
017
015

--
00
--
--
92
04
00

--
--
--
--
07
03
--

--
--
--
--
0
0
--

Total

87

10

47

12

46

1

29

0

292

96

10

0

Mammals

a

The columns represent the number of species and processes in each region that were found in each particular study to be associated with regional
temperature change. For inclusion in the table, each study needed to show that the species or process was changing over time and that the regional
temperature was changing over time; most studies also found a significant association between how the temperature and species or processes
were changing. The first number indicates the number of species or processes changing in the manner predicted with global warming. The second
number is the number of species or processes changing in a manner opposite to that predicted with a warming planet. Empty cells indicate that
no studies were found for this region and category.
b
Sea ice not included.

Very Low

Positive or Negative Market Impacts;
Majority of People Adversely Affected

Net Negative in
All Metrics

Negative for Some Regions

-0.6

Aggregate Impacts

Distribution
of Impacts

Negative for Most Regions

Increase

Large Increase

Risks from Extreme
Climate Events

Risks to Some

Risks to Many

Risks to Unique and
Threatened Systems

0
Past

Risks from Future
Large-Scale
Discontinuities

Higher

1

2

3

4

5

Future
Increase in Global Mean Temperature after 1990 (C)

Figure TS-12: Impacts of or risks from climate change, by reason for concern. Each row corresponds to a reason for concern, and shades
correspond to severity of impact or risk. White means no or virtually neutral impact or risk, yellow means somewhat negative impacts or low
risks, and red means more negative impacts or higher risks. Global-averaged temperatures in the 20th century increased by 0.6C and led
to some impacts. Impacts are plotted against increases in global mean temperature after 1990. This figure addresses only how impacts or
risks change as thresholds of increase in global mean temperature are crossed, not how impacts or risks change at different rates of change
in climate. These temperatures should be taken as approximate indications of impacts, not as absolute thresholds.

thresholds of systems would be surpassed. Many of these
threatened systems are at risk from climate change because
they face nonclimate pressures such as those related to human
land use, land-use change, and pollution. [19.3]

286

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Species that may be threatened with local or global extinction
by changes in climate that may accompany a small mean global
temperature increase include critically endangered species
generally, species with small ranges and low population densities,

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

species with restricted habitat requirements, and species for which
suitable habitat is patchy in distribution, particularly if under
pressure from human land-use and land-cover change. Examples
of species that may be threatened by small changes include forest
birds in Tanzania, the Resplendent Quetzal in Central America,
the mountain gorilla in Africa, amphibians that are endemic
to cloud forests of the neotropics, the spectacled bear of the
Andes, the Bengal tiger and other species that are endemic to
the Sundarban wetlands, and rainfall-sensitive plant species that
are endemic to the Cape Floral Kingdom of South Africa. Natural
systems that may be threatened include coral reefs, mangroves,
and other coastal wetlands; montane ecosystems that are restricted
to the upper 200-300 m of mountainous areas; prairie wetlands;
remnant native grasslands; coldwater and some coolwater fish
habitat; ecosystems overlying permafrost; and ice edge ecosystems
that provide habitat for polar bears and penguins. Human
settlements that may be placed at serious risk by changes in
climate and sea level that may be associated with medium to
large mean warming include some settlements of low-lying
coastal areas and islands, floodplains, and hillsides--particularly
those of low socioeconomic status such as squatter and other
informal settlements. Other potentially threatened settlements
include traditional peoples that are highly dependent on natural
resources that are sensitive to climate change. [19.3]
7.2.2. Aggregate Impacts
With a small temperature increase, aggregate market-sector
impacts could amount to plus or minus a few percent of world
GDP (medium confidence); aggregate nonmarket impacts
could be negative (low confidence). The small net impacts
are mainly the result of the fact that developed economies,
many of which could have positive impacts, contribute the
majority of global production. Applying more weight to impacts
in poorer countries to reflect equity concerns, however, can
result in net aggregate impacts that are negative even at medium
warming. It also is possible that a majority of people will be
negatively affected by climate change scenarios in this range,
even if the net aggregate monetary impact is positive. With
medium to higher temperature increases, benefits tend to decrease
and damages increase, so the net change in global economic
welfare becomes negative--and increasingly negative with
greater warming (medium confidence). Some sectors, such as
coastal and water resources, could have negative impacts in
developed and developing countries. Other sectors, such as
agriculture and human health, could have net positive impacts in
some countries and net negative impacts in other countries. [19.5]
Results are sensitive to assumptions about changes in regional
climate, levels of development, adaptive capacity, rates of
change, valuation of impacts, and methods used for aggregating
losses and gains, including the choice of discount rate. In
addition, these studies do not consider potentially important
factors such as changes in extreme events, advantageous and
complementary responses to the threat of non-climate-driven

WGII Technical Summary

extreme events, rapid change in regional climate (e.g., resulting
from changes in ocean circulation), compounding effects of
multiple stresses, or conflicting or complementary reaction to
those stresses. Because these factors have yet to be accounted for
in estimates of aggregate impacts and estimates do not include
all possible categories of impacts, particularly nonmarket impacts,
estimates of aggregate economic welfare impacts of climate
change are considered to be incomplete. Given the uncertainties
about aggregate estimates, the possibility of negative effects
at a small increase in temperature cannot be excluded. [19.5]
7.2.3. Distribution of Impacts
Developing countries tend to be more vulnerable to climate
change than developed countries (high confidence). Developing
countries are expected to suffer more adverse impacts than
developed countries (medium confidence). A small temperature
increase would have net negative impacts on market sectors
in many developing countries (medium confidence) and net
positive impacts on market sectors in many developed countries
(medium confidence). The different results are attributable
partly to differences in exposures and sensitivities (e.g., present
temperatures are below optimal in mid- and high latitudes for
many crops but at or above optimal in low latitudes) and partly
to lesser adaptive capacity in developing countries relative to
developed countries. At a medium temperature increase, net
positive impacts would start to turn negative and negative
impacts would be exacerbated (high confidence). The results
of these studies do not fully take into account nonmarket
impacts of climate change such as impacts on natural systems,
which may be sensitive to small amounts of warming.
Particularly vulnerable regions include deltaic regions, low-lying
small island states, and many arid regions where droughts and
water availability are problematic even without climate change.
Within regions or countries, impacts are expected to fall most
heavily, in relative terms, on impoverished persons. The poorest
members of society can be inferred to be most vulnerable to
climate change because of their lack of resources with which
to cope and adapt to impacts, but few studies have explicitly
examined the distribution of impacts on the poor relative to
other segments of society. [19.4]
Impacts on unmanaged systems are likely to increase in severity
with time, but impacts on managed systems could increase or
decrease through the 21st century. The distribution of impacts
over the 21st century is influenced by several factors. As GHG
concentrations increase, the magnitude of exposure to change
in climate stimuli also would increase. Nonclimate pressures
on natural and social systems, which increase the vulnerability
of systems, also may grow through time as a result of population
growth and increased demands for land, water, public
infrastructure, and other resources. Increased population, incomes,
and wealth also mean that more people and human-made
resources potentially would be exposed to climate change,
which would tend to increase market-sector damages in absolute

287

Climate Change 2001

dollar terms; this has been the case historically. Counteracting
these tendencies are factors such as increased wealth and
technology and improved institutions, which can raise adaptive
capacity and reduce vulnerability to climate change. [8, 19.4]
Whether impacts and vulnerability increase or decrease with
time is likely to depend in part on the rates of climate change
and development and may differ for managed and unmanaged
systems. The more rapid the rate of climate change, the greater
would be future exposure to potentially adverse changes and
the greater the potential for exceeding system thresholds. The
more rapid the rate of development, the more resources would
be exposed to climate change in the future--but so too would
the adaptive capacity of future societies. The benefits of
increased adaptive capacity are likely to be greater for intensively
managed systems than for systems that presently are unmanaged
or lightly managed. For this reason, and because of the possibility
that nonclimate pressures on natural systems may increase in
the future, the vulnerability of natural systems is expected to
increase with time (medium confidence). [19.4.2, 19.4.3]
Future development paths, sustainable or otherwise, will shape
future vulnerability to climate change, and climate change
impacts may affect prospects for sustainable development in
different parts of the world. Climate change is one of many
stresses that confront human and natural systems. The severity
of many of these stresses will be determined in part by the
development paths followed by human societies; paths that
generate lesser stresses are expected to lessen the vulnerability
of human and natural systems to climate change. Development
also can influence future vulnerability by enhancing adaptive
capacity through accumulation of wealth, technology,
information, skills, and appropriate infrastructure; development
of effective institutions; and advancement of equity. Climate
change impacts could affect prospects for sustainable
development by changing the capacity to produce food and
fiber, the supply and quality of water, and human health and
by diverting financial and human resources to adaptation. [18]

The impacts of extreme events often are large locally and could
strongly affect specific sectors and regions. Increases in
extreme events can cause critical design or natural thresholds
to be exceeded, beyond which the magnitude of impacts
increases rapidly (high confidence). Multiple nonextreme
consecutive events also can be problematic because they can
lessen adaptive capacity by depleting reserves of insurance
and reinsurance companies. [8, 19.6.3.1]
An increase in the frequency and magnitude of extreme events
would have adverse effects throughout sectors and regions.
Agriculture and water resources may be particularly vulnerable
to changes in hydrological and temperature extremes. Coastal
infrastructure and ecosystems may be adversely affected by
changes in the occurrence of tropical cyclones and storm
surges. Heat-related mortality is likely to increase with higher
temperatures; cold-related mortality is likely to decrease.
Floods may lead to the spread of water-related and vectorborne diseases, particularly in developing countries. Many of
the monetary damages from extreme events will have
repercussions on a broad scale of financial institutions, from
insurers and reinsurers to investors, banks, and disaster relief
funds. Changes in the statistics of extreme events have
implications for the design criteria of engineering applications
(e.g., levee banks, bridges, building design, and zoning), which
are based on estimates of return periods, and for assessment
of the economic performance and viability of particular
enterprises that are affected by weather. [19.6.3.1]
7.2.5. Large-Scale Singular Events

Many climatic impacts are related to extreme weather events,
and the same will hold for the impacts of climate change. The
large damage potential of extreme events arises from their
severity, suddenness, and unpredictability, which makes them
difficult to adapt to. Development patterns can increase
vulnerability to extreme events. For example, large development
along coastal regions increases exposure to storm surges and
tropical cyclones, increasing vulnerability.

Human-induced climate change has the potential to trigger
large-scale changes in Earth systems that could have severe
consequences at regional or global scales. The probabilities
of triggering such events are poorly understood but should
not be ignored, given the severity of their consequences. Events
of this type that might be triggered include complete or partial
shutdown of the North Atlantic and Antarctic Deep Water
formation, disintegration of the West Antarctic and Greenland
Ice Sheets, and major perturbations of biosphere-regulated
carbon dynamics. Determining the timing and probability of
occurrence of large-scale discontinuities is difficult because
these events are triggered by complex interactions between
components of the climate system. The actual discontinuous
impact could lag the trigger by decades to centuries. These
triggers are sensitive to the magnitude and rate of climate
change. Large temperature increases have the potential to lead
to large-scale discontinuities in the climate system (medium
confidence).

The frequency and magnitude of many extreme climate events
increase even with a small temperature increase and will
become greater at higher temperatures (high confidence).
Extreme events include, for example, floods, soil moisture
deficits, tropical cyclones, storms, high temperatures, and fires.

These discontinuities could cause severe impacts on the
regional and even global scale, but indepth impact analyses
are still lacking. Several climate model simulations show
complete shutdown of the North Atlantic thermohaline
circulation with high warming. Although complete shutdown

7.2.4. Extreme Weather Events

288

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability

may take several centuries to occur, regional shutdown of
convection and significant weakening of the thermohaline
circulation may take place within the next century. If this were
to occur, it could lead to a rapid regional climate change in
the North Atlantic region, with major societal and ecosystem
impacts. Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet would lead
to a global sea-level rise of several meters, which may be very
difficult to adapt to. Although the disintegration might take
many hundreds of years, this process could be triggered
irreversibly in the next century. The relative magnitude of
feedback processes involved in cycling of carbon through the
oceans and the terrestrial biosphere is shown to be distorted
by increasing temperatures. Saturation and decline of the net
sink effect of the terrestrial biosphere--which is projected to
occur over the next century--in step with similar processes,
could lead to dominance of positive feedbacks over negative
ones and strong amplification of the warming trend. [19.6.3.2]

8. Information Needs
Although progress has been made, considerable gaps in
knowledge remain regarding exposure, sensitivity, adaptability,
and vulnerability of physical, ecological, and social systems
to climate change. Advances in these areas are priorities for
advancing understanding of potential consequences of climate
change for human society and the natural world, as well as to
support analyses of possible responses.
Exposure. Advances in methods for projecting exposures to
climate stimuli and other nonclimate stresses at finer spatial
scales are needed to improve understanding of potential
consequences of climate change, including regional differences,
and stimuli to which systems may need to adapt. Work in this
area should draw on results from research on system sensitivity,
adaptability, and vulnerability to identify the types of climate
stimuli and nonclimate stresses that affect systems most. This
research is particularly needed in developing countries, many
of which lack historical data, adequate monitoring systems,
and research and development capabilities. Developing local
capacity in environmental assessment and management will
increase investment effectiveness. Methods of investigating
possible changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme
climate events, climate variability, and large-scale, abrupt
changes in the Earth system such as slowing or shutdown of
thermohaline circulation of oceans are priorities. Work also is
needed to advance understanding of how social and economic
factors influence the exposures of different populations.
Sensitivity. Sensitivity to climate stimuli is still poorly
quantified for many natural and human systems. Responses
of systems to climate change are expected to include strong
nonlinearities, discontinuous or abrupt responses, time-varying
responses, and complex interactions with other systems.
However, quantification of the curvature, thresholds, and

WGII Technical Summary

interactions of system responses is poorly developed for many
systems. Work is needed to develop and improve processbased, dynamic models of natural, social, and economic
systems; to estimate model parameters of system responses to
climate variables; and to validate model simulation results.
This work should include use of observational evidence, paleoobservations where applicable, and long-term monitoring of
systems and forces acting on them. Continued efforts to detect
impacts of observed climate change is a priority for further
investigation that can provide empirical information for
understanding of system sensitivity to climate change
Adaptability. Progress has been made in the investigation of
adaptive measures and adaptive capacity. However, work is
needed to better understand the applicability of adaptation
experiences with climate variability to climate change, to use
this information to develop empirically based estimates of the
effectiveness and costs of adaptation, and to develop predictive
models of adaptive behavior that take into account decision
making under uncertainty. Work also is needed to better
understand the determinants of adaptive capacity and to use
this information to advance understanding of differences in
adaptive capacity across regions, nations, and socioeconomic
groups, as well as how capacity may change through time.
Advances in these areas are expected to be useful for identifying
successful strategies for enhancing adaptation capacity in ways
that can be complementary to climate change mitigation,
sustainable development, and equity goals.
Vulnerability. Assessments of vulnerability to climate change
are largely qualitative and address the sources and character
of vulnerability. Further work is needed to integrate information
about exposures, sensitivity, and adaptability to provide more
detailed and quantitative information about the potential
impacts of climate change and the relative degree of vulnerability
of different regions, nations, and socioeconomic groups.
Advances will require development and refinement of multiple
measures or indices of vulnerability such as the number or
percentage of persons, species, systems, or land area negatively
or positively affected; changes in productivity of systems; the
monetary value of economic welfare change in absolute and
relative terms; and measures of distributional inequities.
Uncertainty. Large gaps remain in refining and applying methods
for treating uncertainties, particularly with respect to providing
scientific information for decisionmaking. Improvements are
required in ways of expressing the likelihood, confidence, and
range of uncertainty for estimates of outcomes, as well as how
such estimates fit into broader ranges of uncertainty. Methods
for providing "traceable accounts" of how any aggregated
estimate is made from disaggregated information must be
refined. More effort is needed to translate judgments into
probability distributions in integrated assessment models.

289

Climate Change 2001:
Mitigation

Working Group III Summaries

Summary for Policymakers
A Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Technical Summary of the Working Group III Report
A Report accepted by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change but not approved in detail

Part of the Working Group III contribution to the Third Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Contents
Summary for Policymakers

293

Technical Summary

303

1. Scope of the Report
1.1. Background
1.2. Broadening the Context of Climate Change
Mitigation
1.3. Integrating the Various Perspectives

306
306
306
307

2. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Scenarios
308
2.1. Scenarios
308
2.2. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Mitigation Scenarios 308
2.3. Global Futures Scenarios
309
2.4. Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
310
2.5. Review of Post-SRES Mitigation Scenarios
311
3. Technological and Economic Potential of
Mitigation Options
313
3.1. Key Developments in Knowledge about
Technological Options to Mitigate GHG Emissions
in the Period up to 2010-2020 since the Second
Assessment Report
313
3.2. Trends in Energy Use and Associated
314
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
316
3.3. Sectoral Mitigation Technological Options
3.4. The Technological and Economic Potential of
324
Greenhouse Gas Mitigation: Synthesis
4. Technological and Economic Potential of
Options to Enhance, Maintain, and Manage
Biological Carbon Reservoirs and Geoengineering
4.1. Mitigation through Terrestrial Ecosystem and
Land Management
4.2. Social and Economic Considerations
4.3. Mitigation Options
4.4. Criteria for Biological Carbon Mitigation Options
4.5. Economic Costs
4.6. Marine Ecosystem and Geo-engineering
5. Barriers, Opportunities, and Market
Potential of Technologies and Practices
5.1. Introduction
5.2. Sources of Barriers and Opportunities
5.3. Sector- and Technology-specific Barriers and
Opportunities
6. Policies, Measures, and Instruments
6.1. Policy Instruments and Possible Criteria for
their Assessment

325
325
326
327
327
327
327

6.2. National Policies, Measures, and Instruments
6.3. International Policies and Measures
6.4. Implementation of National and International
Policy Instruments

333
334

7. Costing Methodologies
7.1. Conceptual Basis
7.2. Analytical Approaches
7.3. System Boundaries: Project, Sector, and Macro
7.4. Special Issues Relating to Developing Countries
and EITs
7.5. Modelling Approaches to Cost Assessment

335
335
335
336

8. Global, Regional, and National Costs and
Ancillary Benefits
8.1. Introduction
8.2. Gross Costs of GHG Abatement in
Technology-detailed Models
8.3. Costs of Domestic Policy to Mitigate Carbon
Emissions
8.4. Distributional Effects of Carbon Taxes
8.5. Aspects of International Emission Trading
8.6. Ancillary Benefits of Greenhouse Gas Mitigation
8.7. "Spillover" Effects from Actions Taken in
Annex B on Non-Annex B Countries
8.8. Summary of the Main Results for Kyoto Targets
8.9. The Costs of Meeting a Range of Stabilization
Targets
8.10. The Issue of Induced Technological Change
9. Sectoral Costs and Ancillary Benefits of
Mitigation
9.1. Differences between Costs of Climate Change
Mitigation Evaluated Nationally and by Sector
9.2. Selected Specific Sectoral Findings on Costs of
Climate Change Mitigation
9.3. Sectoral Ancillary Benefits of Greenhouse Gas
Mitigation
9.4. The Effects of Mitigation on Sectoral
Competitiveness
9.5. Why the Results of Studies Differ

334

337
337

338
338
338
339
340
340
342
342
343
344
346

346
346
347
349
349
349

332

10. Decision Analytical Frameworks
349
10.1. Scope for and New Developments in Analyses
for Climate Change Decisions
349
10.2. International Regimes and Policy Options
351
10.3. Linkages to National and Local Sustainable
Development Choices
351
10.4. Key Policy-relevant Scientific Questions
352

332

11. Gaps in Knowledge

328
328
328
331

354

Climate Change 2001:
Mitigation

Summary for Policymakers

A Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
This summary, approved in detail at the Sixth Session of IPCC Working Group III (Accra, Ghana, 28 February-3 March 2001),
represents the formally agreed statement of the IPCC concerning climate change mitigation.

Based on a draft prepared by:
Tariq Banuri, Terry Barker, Igor Bashmakov, Kornelis Blok, Daniel Bouille, Renate Christ, Ogunlade Davidson, Jae Edmonds,
Ken Gregory, Michael Grubb, Kirsten Halsnaes, Tom Heller, Jean-Charles Hourcade, Catrinus Jepma, Pekka Kauppi, Anil
Markandya, Bert Metz, William Moomaw, Jose Roberto Moreira, Tsuneyuki Morita, Nebojsa Nakicenovic, Lynn Price, Richard
Richels, John Robinson, Hans Holger Rogner, Jayant Sathaye, Roger Sedjo, Priyaradshi Shukla, Leena Srivastava, Rob
Swart, Ferenc Toth, John Weyant

Climate Change 2001

Introduction
1. This report assesses the scientific, technological, environmental,
economic and social aspects of the mitigation of climate change.
Research in climate change mitigation1 has continued since
the publication of the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR),
taking into account political changes such as the agreement on
the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1997, and is reported on here.
The Report also draws on a number of IPCC Special Reports,
notably the Special Report on Aviation and the Global Atmosphere,
the Special Report on Methodological and Technological Issues
in Technology Transfer (SRTT), the Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios (SRES), and the Special Report on Land Use, Land
Use Change and Forestry (SRLULUCF).

The Nature of the Mitigation Challenge
2. Climate change2 is a problem with unique characteristics. It
is global, long-term (up to several centuries), and involves complex
interactions between climatic, environmental, economic, political,
institutional, social and technological processes. This may have
significant international and intergenerational implications in
the context of broader societal goals such as equity and sustainable
development. Developing a response to climate change is
characterized by decision-making under uncertainty and risk,
including the possibility of non-linear and/or irreversible
changes (Sections 1.2.5, 1.3, 10.1.2, 10.1.4, 10.4.5).3
3. Alternative development paths4 can result in very different
greenhouse gas emissions. The SRES and the mitigation scenarios
assessed in this report suggest that the type, magnitude, timing
and costs of mitigation depend on different national circumstances
and socio-economic, and technological development paths and
the desired level of greenhouse gas concentration stabilization
in the atmosphere (see Figure SPM-1 for an example for total
CO2 emissions). Development paths leading to low emissions

1

Mitigation is defined here as an anthropogenic intervention to reduce
the sources of greenhouse gases or enhance their sinks.
2
Climate change in IPCC usage refers to any change in climate over
time, whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity.
This usage differs from that in the UNFCCC, where climate change
refers to a change of climate that is attributed directly or indirectly to
human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere
and that is in addition to natural climate variability observed over
comparable time periods.
3
Section numbers refer to WGIII TAR.
4
In this report "alternative development paths" refer to a variety of
possible scenarios for societal values and consumption and production
patterns in all countries, including but not limited to a continuation of
today's trends. These paths do not include additional climate initiatives
which means that no scenarios are included that explicitly assume
implementation of the UNFCCC or the emission targets of the Kyoto
Protocol, but do include assumptions about other policies that influence
greenhouse gas emissions indirectly.

294

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

depend on a wide range of policy choices and require major
policy changes in areas other than climate change (Sections
2.2.2, 2.3.2, 2.4.4, 2.5).
4. Climate change mitigation will both be affected by, and have
impacts on, broader socio-economic policies and trends, such
as those relating to development, sustainability and equity.
Climate mitigation policies may promote sustainable development
when they are consistent with such broader societal objectives.
Some mitigation actions may yield extensive benefits in areas
outside of climate change: for example, they may reduce health
problems; increase employment; reduce negative environmental
impacts (like air pollution); protect and enhance forests, soils
and watersheds; reduce those subsidies and taxes which enhance
greenhouse gas emissions; and induce technological change
and diffusion, contributing to wider goals of sustainable
development. Similarly, development paths that meet sustainable
development objectives may result in lower levels of greenhouse
gas emissions (Sections 1.3, 1.4, 2.2.3, 2.4.4, 2.5, 7.2.2, 8.2.4).
5. Differences in the distribution of technological, natural and
financial resources among and within nations and regions,
and between generations, as well as differences in mitigation
costs, are often key considerations in the analysis of climate
change mitigation options. Much of the debate about the future
differentiation of contributions of countries to mitigation and
related equity issues also considers these circumstances5. The
challenge of addressing climate change raises an important issue
of equity, namely the extent to which the impacts of climate change
or mitigation policies create or exacerbate inequities both within
and across nations and regions. Greenhouse gas stabilization
scenarios assessed in this report (except those where stabilization
occurs without new climate policies, e.g. B1) assume that
developed countries and countries with economies in transition
limit and reduce their greenhouse gas emissions first.6
6. Lower emissions scenarios require different patterns of energy
resource development. Figure SPM-2 compares the cumulative
carbon emissions between 1990 and 2100 for various SRES
scenarios to carbon contained in global fossil fuel reserves and
resources7. This figure shows that there are abundant fossil
fuel resources that will not limit carbon emissions during the
21st century. However, different from the relatively large coal
and unconventional oil and gas deposits, the carbon in proven

5

Approaches to equity have been classified into a variety of categories,
including those based on allocation, outcome, process, rights, liability,
poverty, and opportunity, reflecting the diverse expectations of fairness
used to judge policy processes and the corresponding outcomes (Sections
1.3, 10.2).
6
Emissions from all regions diverge from baselines at some point. Global
emissions diverge earlier and to a greater extent as stabilization levels
are lower or underlying scenarios are higher. Such scenarios are uncertain,
do not provide information on equity implications and how such changes
may be achieved or who may bear any costs incurred.

Mitigation

WGIII Summary for Policymakers

40

40

40

SPM-1a IPCC SRES A1B Scenarios

SPM-1b IPCC SRES A1T Scenarios

Global Anthropogenic Carbon Dioxide Emissions (GtC)

30

SPM-1c IPCC SRES A1FI Scenarios

30

30

20

20

650 10
550
450

A1T 10
650
550
450
0

20

A1FI

A1B
10

0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

0
1990

2090

40

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

1990

40

30

2030

2050

2070

2090

SPM-1f IPCC SRES B2 Scenarios

30

30

20

20

A2
20

2010

40

SPM-1e IPCC SRES B1 Scenarios

SPM-1d IPCC SRES A2 Scenarios

750
650
550
450

B2
750
10

10

B1
550
450

550
0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

10

0
1990

650
550
450
2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

Figure SPM-1: Comparison of reference and stabilization scenarios. The figure is divided into six parts, one for each of the reference
scenario groups from the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES, see Box SPM-1). Each part of the figure shows the range of total
global CO2 emissions (gigatonnes of carbon (GtC)) from all anthropogenic sources for the SRES reference scenario group (shaded in grey)
and the ranges for the various mitigation scenarios assessed in the TAR leading to stabilization of CO2 concentrations at various levels
(shaded in colour). Scenarios are presented for the A1 family subdivided into three groups (the balanced A1B group (Figure SPM-1a), nonfossil fuel A1T (Figure SPM-1b) and the fossil intensive A1FI (Figure SPM-1c)) with stabilization of CO2 concentrations at 450, 550, 650 and
750 ppmv; for the A2 group with stabilization at 550 and 750 ppmv in Figure SPM-1d, the B1 group with stabilization at 450 and 550 ppmv
in Figure SPM-1e, and the B2 group with stabilization at 450, 550 and 650 ppmv in Figure SPM-1f. The literature is not available to assess
1000 ppmv stabilization scenarios. The figure illustrates that the lower the stabilization level and the higher the baseline emissions, the wider
the gap. The difference between emissions in different scenario groups can be as large as the gap between reference and stabilization
scenarios within one scenario group. The dotted lines depict the boundaries of the ranges where they overlap.

conventional oil and gas reserves, or in conventional oil resources,
is much less than the cumulative carbon emissions associated
with stabilization of carbon dioxide at levels of 450 ppmv or higher
(the reference to a particular concentration level does not imply an
agreed-upon desirability of stabilization at this level). These resource
data may imply a change in the energy mix and the introduction
of new sources of energy during the 21st century. The choice
of energy mix and associated investment will determine whether,

7

Reserves are those occurrences that are identified and measured as
economically and technically recoverable with current technologies and
prices. Resources are those occurrences with less certain geological
and/or economic characteristics, but which are considered potentially
recoverable with foreseeable technological and economic developments.
The resource base includes both categories. On top of that, there are
additional quantities with unknown certainty of occurrence and/or with
unknown or no economic significance in the foreseeable future, referred
to as "additional occurrences" (SAR, Working Group II). Examples of
unconventional fossil fuel resources include tar sands, shale oil, other heavy
oil, coal bed methane, deep geopressured gas, gas in acquifers, etc.

and if so, at what level and cost, greenhouse concentrations can
be stabilized. Currently most such investment is directed towards
discovering and developing more conventional and unconventional
fossil resources (Sections 2.5.1, 2.5.2, 3.8.3, 8.4).

Options to Limit or Reduce Greenhouse
Gas Emissions and Enhance Sinks
7. Significant technical progress relevant to greenhouse gas
emissions reduction has been made since the SAR in 1995
and has been faster than anticipated. Advances are taking place
in a wide range of technologies at different stages of development,
e.g., the market introduction of wind turbines, the rapid elimination
of industrial by-product gases such as N2O from adipic acid
production and perfluorocarbons from aluminium production,
efficient hybrid engine cars, the advancement of fuel cell
technology, and the demonstration of underground carbon dioxide
storage. Technological options for emissions reduction include

295

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Box SPM-1. The Emissions Scenarios of the IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)
A1. The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world
of very rapid economic growth, global population that peaks
in mid-century and declines thereafter, and the rapid introduction
of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes
are convergence among regions, capacity building and increased
cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction
in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario
family develops into three groups that describe alternative
directions of technological change in the energy system. The
three A1 groups are distinguished by their technological
emphasis: fossil intensive (A1FI), non-fossil energy sources
(A1T), or a balance across all sources (A1B) (where balanced
is defined as not relying too heavily on one particular energy
source, on the assumption that similar improvement rates
apply to all energy supply and end use technologies).
A2. The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very
heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance
and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across
regions converge very slowly, which results in continuously
increasing population. Economic development is primarily
regionally oriented and per capita economic growth and
technological change more fragmented and slower than other
storylines.
B1. The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent
world with the same global population, that peaks in mid-

improved efficiency of end use devices and energy conversion
technologies, shift to low-carbon and renewable biomass fuels,
zero-emissions technologies, improved energy management,
reduction of industrial by-product and process gas emissions,
and carbon removal and storage (Section 3.1, 4.7).
Table SPM-1 summarizes the results from many sectoral
studies, largely at the project, national and regional level with
some at the global levels, providing estimates of potential
greenhouse gas emission reductions in the 2010 to 2020
timeframe. Some key findings are:
* Hundreds of technologies and practices for end-use energy
efficiency in buildings, transport and manufacturing industries
account for more than half of this potential (Sections 3.3,
3.4, 3.5).
* At least up to 2020, energy supply and conversion will remain
dominated by relatively cheap and abundant fossil fuels.
Natural gas, where transmission is economically feasible,
will play an important role in emission reduction together
with conversion efficiency improvement, and greater use of
combined cycle and/or co-generation plants (Section 3.8.4).
* Low-carbon energy supply systems can make an important
contribution through biomass from forestry and agricultural

296

IPCC Third Assessment Report

century and declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline, but
with rapid change in economic structures toward a service
and information economy, with reductions in material intensity
and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient technologies.
The emphasis is on global solutions to economic, social and
environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but
without additional climate initiatives.
B2. The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world
in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social
and environmental sustainability. It is a world with continuously
increasing global population, at a rate lower than A2,
intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid
and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and
A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented towards
environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local
and regional levels.
An illustrative scenario was chosen for each of the six scenario
groups A1B, A1FI, A1T, A2, B1 and B2. All should be
considered equally sound.
The SRES scenarios do not include additional climate initiatives,
which means that no scenarios are included that explicitly
assume implementation of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change or the emissions targets of
the Kyoto Protocol.

by-products, municipal and industrial waste to energy,
dedicated biomass plantations, where suitable land and water
are available, landfill methane, wind energy and hydropower,
and through the use and lifetime extension of nuclear power
plants. After 2010, emissions from fossil and/or biomass-fueled
power plants could be reduced substantially through pre- or
post-combustion carbon removal and storage. Environmental,
safety, reliability and proliferation concerns may constrain
the use of some of these technologies (Section 3.8.4).
* In agriculture, methane and nitrous oxide emissions can
be reduced, such as those from livestock enteric fermentation,
rice paddies, nitrogen fertilizer use and animal wastes
(Section 3.6).
* Depending on application, emissions of fluorinated gases
can be minimized through process changes, improved
recovery, recycling and containment, or avoided through
the use of alternative compounds and technologies (Section
3.5 and Chapter 3 Appendix).
The potential emissions reductions found in Table SPM-1 for
sectors were aggregated to provide estimates of global potential
emissions reductions taking account of potential overlaps between
and within sectors and technologies to the extent possible given

Mitigation

WGIII Summary for Policymakers

4000

Historic coal emissions
Historic gas emissions

3500

Historic oil emissions
3000

Unconventional reserves and resources
Conventional resources (upper estimate)

2500

GtC

Conventional reserves
Scenarios

2000
1500
1000
500

00

0

10

RE
W

0

75

RE

W

0

65

55

W

RE

0

RE

W

0

45

RE

FI

35

RE

W

18

W

A2

A1

B
A1

B2

T
A1

8

B1

99

al

s

80

-1

Co

Oi

Ga

l

0

SRES scenarios

Figure SPM-2: Carbon in oil, gas and coal reserves and resources compared with historic fossil fuel carbon emissions 1860-1998, and with
cumulative carbon emissions from a range of SRES scenarios and TAR stabilization scenarios up until 2100. Data for reserves and resources
are shown in the left hand columns (Section 3.8.2). Unconventional oil and gas includes tar sands, shale oil, other heavy oil, coal bed methane,
deep geopressured gas, gas in acquifers, etc. Gas hydrates (clathrates) that amount to an estimated 12,000GtC are not shown. The scenario
columns show both SRES reference scenarios as well as scenarios which lead to stabilization of CO2 concentrations at a range of levels.
Note that if by 2100 cumulative emissions associated with SRES scenarios are equal to or smaller than those for stabilization scenarios, this
does not imply that these scenarios equally lead to stabilization.

the information available in the underlying studies. Half of these
potential emissions reductions may be achieved by 2020 with direct
benefits (energy saved) exceeding direct costs (net capital, operating,
and maintenance costs), and the other half at a net direct cost of
up to US$100/tCeq (at 1998 prices). These cost estimates are
derived using discount rates in the range of 5% to 12%, consistent
with public sector discount rates. Private internal rates of return
vary greatly, and are often significantly higher, affecting the
rate of adoption of these technologies by private entities.
Depending on the emissions scenario this could allow global
emissions to be reduced below 2000 levels in 2010-2020 at
these net direct costs. Realizing these reductions involve
additional implementation costs, which in some cases may be
substantial, the possible need for supporting policies (such as
those described in Paragraph 18), increased research and
development, effective technology transfer and overcoming
other barriers (Paragraph 17). These issues, together with costs
and benefits not included in this evaluation are discussed in
Paragraphs 11, 12 and 13.
The various global, regional, national, sector and project studies
assessed in this report have different scopes and assumptions.

Studies do not exist for every sector and region. The range of
emissions reductions reported in Table SPM-1 reflects the
uncertainties (see Box SPM-2) of the underlying studies on
which they are based (Sections 3.3-3.8)
8. Forests, agricultural lands, and other terrestrial ecosystems
offer significant carbon mitigation potential. Although not
necessarily permanent, conservation and sequestration of
carbon may allow time for other options to be further
developed and implemented. Biological mitigation can occur
by three strategies: (a) conservation of existing carbon pools,
(b) sequestration by increasing the size of carbon pools, and
(c) substitution of sustainably produced biological products,
e.g. wood for energy intensive construction products and
biomass for fossil fuels (Sections 3.6, 4.3). Conservation of
threatened carbon pools may help to avoid emissions, if
leakage can be prevented, and can only become sustainable if
the socio-economic drivers for deforestation and other losses
of carbon pools can be addressed. Sequestration reflects the
biological dynamics of growth, often starting slowly, passing
through a maximum, and then declining over decades to
centuries.

297

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table SPM-1: Estimates of potential global greenhouse gas emission reductions in 2010 and in 2020 (Sections 3.3-3.8 and
Chapter 3 Appendix).

Sector

Historic
emissions
in 1990
(MtCeq /yr)

Historic Ceq
annual
growth rate
over 19901995 (%)

Potential
emission
reductions
in 2010
(MtCeq /yr)

Potential
emission
reductions
in 2020
(MtCeq /yr)

Buildingsa
CO2 only

1,650

1.0

700-750

Most reductions are available at
1,000-1,100 negative net direct costs.

Transport
CO2 only

1,080

2.4

100-300

300-700

Industry
CO2 only
- Energy efficiency

2,300

0.4
300-500

700-900

~200

~600

More than half available at net negative
direct costs.
Costs are uncertain.

~100

~100

N2O emissions reduction costs are
US$0-10/tCeq.

- Material efficiency
Industry
Non-CO2 gases

170

Agricultureb
CO2 only
Non-CO2 gases

210
1,250-2,800 n.a.

Wasteb
CH4 only

240

Montreal Protocol
replacement
applications
Non-CO2 gases

0

Energy supply and
conversionc
CO2 only

(1,620)

Total

6,900-8,400d

1.0

n.a.

1.5

150-300

350-750

~200

~200

~100

50-150

n.a.

350-700

Net direct costs per tonne of carbon
avoided

Most studies indicate net direct
costs less than US$25/tC but two
suggest net direct costs will exceed
US$50/tC.

Most reductions will cost between
US$0-100/tCeq with limited
opportunities for negative net direct
cost options.
About 75% of the savings as methane
recovery from landfills at net negative
direct cost; 25% at a cost of US$20/tCeq.
About half of reductions due to
difference in study baseline and SRES
baseline values. Remaining half of the
reductions available at net direct costs
below $200/tCeq.
Limited net negative direct cost options
exist; many options are available for
less than US$100/tCeq.

1,900-2,600e 3,600-5,050e

a

Buildings include appliances, buildings, and the building shell.
The range for agriculture is mainly caused by large uncertainties about CH4, N2O, and soil-related emissions of CO2. Waste is dominated by
methane landfill and the other sectors could be estimated with more precision as they are dominated by fossil CO2.
c
Included in sector values above. Reductions include electricity generation options only (fuel switching to gas/nuclear, CO2 capture and storage,
improved power station efficiencies, and renewables).
d
Total includes all sectors reviewed in WGIII TAR Chapter 3 for all six gases. It excludes non-energy related sources of CO2 (cement production,
160 Mt C; gas flaring, 60 Mt C; and land-use change, 600-1,400 Mt C) and energy used for conversion of fuels in the end-use sector totals (630
Mt C). If petroleum refining and coke oven gas were added, global year 1990 CO2 emissions of 7,100 Mt C would increase by 12%. Note that
forestry emissions and their carbon sink mitigation options are not included.
e
The baseline SRES scenarios (for six gases included in the Kyoto Protocol) project a range of emissions of 11,500-14,000 Mt Ceq for the year
2010 and of 12,000-16,000 Mt Ceq for the year 2020. The emissions reduction estimates are most compatible with baseline emissions trends in
the SRES B2 scenario. The potential reductions take into account regular turnover of capital stock. They are not limited to cost-effective options,
but exclude options with costs above US$100 t Ceq (except for Montreal Protocol gases) or options that will not be adopted through the use of
generally accepted policies
b

Conservation and sequestration result in higher carbon stocks,
but can lead to higher future carbon emissions if these ecosystems
are severely disturbed by either natural or direct/indirect

298

IPCC Third Assessment Report

human-induced disturbances. Even though natural disturbances
are normally followed by re-sequestration, activities to manage
such disturbances can play an important role in limiting carbon

Mitigation

emissions. Substitution benefits can, in principle, continue
indefinitely. Appropriate management of land for crop, timber
and sustainable bio-energy production, may increase benefits
for climate change mitigation. Taking into account competition
for land use and the SAR and SRLULUCF assessments, the
estimated global potential of biological mitigation options is in
the order of 100GtC (cumulative), although there are substantial
uncertainties associated with this estimate, by 2050, equivalent
to about 10% to 20% of potential fossil fuel emissions during
that period. Realization of this potential depends upon land
and water availability as well as the rates of adoption of
different land management practices. The largest biological
potential for atmospheric carbon mitigation is in subtropical
and tropical regions. Cost estimates reported to date of
biological mitigation vary significantly from US$0.1/tC to about
US$20/tC in several tropical countries and from US$20/tC to
US$100/tC in non-tropical countries. Methods of financial
analysis and carbon accounting have not been comparable.
Moreover, the cost calculations do not cover, in many
instances, inter alia, costs for infrastructure, appropriate
discounting, monitoring, data collection and implementation
costs, opportunity costs of land and maintenance, or other
recurring costs, which are often excluded or overlooked. The
lower end of the ranges are biased downwards, but understanding
and treatment of costs is improving over time. These biological
mitigation options may have social, economic and environmental
benefits beyond reductions in atmospheric CO2, if implemented
appropriately. (e.g., biodiversity, watershed protection,
enhancement of sustainable land management and rural
employment). However, if implemented inappropriately, they
may pose risks of negative impacts (e.g., loss of biodiversity,
community disruption and ground-water pollution). Biological
mitigation options may reduce or increase non-CO2 greenhouse
gas emissions (Sections 4.3, 4.4).

Box SPM-2. Approaches to Estimating Costs and
Benefits, and their Uncertainties
For a variety of factors, significant differences and uncertainties
surround specific quantitative estimates of the costs and
benefits of mitigation options. The SAR described two
categories of approaches to estimating costs and benefits:
bottom-up approaches, which build up from assessments of
specific technologies and sectors, such as those described
in Paragraph 7, and top-down modelling studies, which
proceed from macroeconomic relationships, such as those
discussed in Paragraph 13. These two approaches lead to
differences in the estimates of costs and benefits, which have
been narrowed since the SAR. Even if these differences were
resolved, other uncertainties would remain. The potential
impact of these uncertainties can be usefully assessed by
examining the effect of a change in any given assumption
on the aggregate cost results, provided any correlation between
variables is adequately dealt with.

WGIII Summary for Policymakers

9. There is no single path to a low emission future and countries
and regions will have to choose their own path. Most model
results indicate that known technological options8 could
achieve a broad range of atmospheric CO2 stabilization levels,
such as 550ppmv, 450ppmv or below over the next 100 years
or more, but implementation would require associated socioeconomic and institutional changes. To achieve stabilization
at these levels, the scenarios suggest that a very significant
reduction in world carbon emissions per unit of GDP from
1990 levels will be necessary. Technological improvement and
technology transfer play a critical role in the stabilization
scenarios assessed in this report. For the crucial energy sector,
almost all greenhouse gas mitigation and concentration
stabilization scenarios are characterized by the introduction
of efficient technologies for both energy use and supply, and
of low- or no-carbon energy. However, no single technology
option will provide all of the emissions reductions needed.
Reduction options in non-energy sources and non-CO 2
greenhouse gases will also provide significant potential for
reducing emissions. Transfer of technologies between countries
and regions will widen the choice of options at the regional
level and economies of scale and learning will lower the costs
of their adoption (Sections 2.3.2, 2.4, 2.5).
10. Social learning and innovation, and changes in institutional
structure could contribute to climate change mitigation.
Changes in collective rules and individual behaviours may
have significant effects on greenhouse gas emissions, but take
place within a complex institutional, regulatory and legal
setting. Several studies suggest that current incentive systems
can encourage resource intensive production and consumption
patterns that increase greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors,
e.g. transport and housing. In the shorter term, there are
opportunities to influence through social innovations individual
and organizational behaviours. In the longer term such
innovations, in combination with technological change, may
further enhance socio-economic potential, particularly if
preferences and cultural norms shift towards lower emitting
and sustainable behaviours. These innovations frequently meet
with resistance, which may be addressed by encouraging
greater public participation in the decision-making processes.
This can help contribute to new approaches to sustainability
and equity (Sections 1.4.3, 5.3.8, 10.3.2, 10.3.4).

8

"Known technological options" refer to technologies that exist in
operation or pilot plant stage today, as referenced in the mitigation
scenarios discussed in this report. It does not include any new
technologies that will require drastic technological breakthroughs. In
this way it can be considered to be a conservative estimate, considering
the length of the scenario period

299

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

The Costs and Ancillary9 Benefits of
Mitigation Actions
11. Estimates of cost and benefits of mitigation actions differ
because of (i) how welfare is measured, (ii) the scope and
methodology of the analysis, and (iii) the underlying assumptions
built into the analysis. As a result, estimated costs and benefits
may not reflect the actual costs and benefits of implementing
mitigation actions. With respect to (i) and (ii), costs and benefits
estimates, inter alia, depend on revenue recycling, and whether
and how the following are considered: implementation and
transaction cost, distributional impacts, multiple gases, land-use
change options, benefits of avoided climate change, ancillary
benefits, no regrets opportunities10 and valuation of externalities
and non-market impacts. Assumptions include, inter alia:
* Demographic change, the rate and structure of economic
growth; increases in personal mobility, technological
innovation such as improvements in energy efficiency and
the availability of low-cost energy sources, flexibility of
capital investments and labour markets, prices, fiscal
distortions in the no-policy (baseline) scenario.
* The level and timing of the mitigation target.
* Assumptions regarding implementation measures, e.g. the
extent of emissions trading, the Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) and Joint Implementation (JI), regulation, and
voluntary agreements11 and the associated transaction costs.
* Discount rates: the long time scales make discounting
assumptions critical and there is still no consensus on
appropriate long-term rates, though the literature shows
increasing attention to rates that decline over time and hence
give more weight to benefits that occur in the long term. These
discount rates should be distinguished from the higher rates
that private agents generally use in market transactions.
(Sections 7.2, 7.3, 8.2.1, 8.2.2, 9.4)
12. Some sources of greenhouse gas emissions can be limited
at no or negative net social cost to the extent that policies can
exploit no regrets opportunities (Sections 7.3.4, 9.2.1):
* Market imperfections. Reduction of existing market or
institutional failures and other barriers that impede

9

Ancillary benefits are the ancillary, or side effects, of policies aimed
exclusively at climate change mitigation. Such policies have an impact
not only on greenhouse gas emissions, but also on resource use
efficiency, like reduction in emissions of local and regional air pollutants
associated with fossil fuel use, and on issues such as transportation,
agriculture, land-use practices, employment, and fuel security. Sometimes
these benefits are referred to as "ancillary impacts" to reflect that in
some cases the benefits may be negative.
10
In this report, as in the SAR, no regrets opportunities are defined as
those options whose benefits such as reduced energy costs and reduced
emissions of local/regional pollutants equal or exceed their costs to
society, excluding the benefits of avoided climate change.
11
A voluntary agreement is an agreement between a government authority
and one or more private parties, as well as a unilateral commitment that
is recognized by the public authority, to achieve environmental objectives
or to improve environmental performance beyond compliance.

300

IPCC Third Assessment Report

adoption of cost-effective emission reduction measures,
can lower private costs compared to current practice. This
can also reduce private costs overall.
* Ancillary benefits. Climate change mitigation measures will
have effects on other societal issues. For example, reducing
carbon emissions in many cases will result in the
simultaneous reduction in local and regional air pollution.
It is likely that mitigation strategies will also affect
transportation, agriculture, land-use practices and waste
management and will have an impact on other issues of
social concern, such as employment, and energy security.
However, not all of the effects will be positive; careful
policy selection and design can better ensure positive
effects and minimize negative impacts. In some cases, the
magnitude of ancillary benefits of mitigation may be
comparable to the costs of the mitigating measures, adding
to the no regrets potential, although estimates are difficult
to make and vary widely (Sections 7.3.3, 8.2.4, 9.2.2-9.2.8,
9.2.10).
* Double dividend. Instruments (such as taxes or auctioned
permits) provide revenues to the government. If used to
finance reductions in existing distortionary taxes ("revenue
recycling"), these revenues reduce the economic cost of
achieving greenhouse gas reductions. The magnitude of
this offset depends on the existing tax structure, type of
tax cuts, labour market conditions, and method of recycling.
Under some circumstances, it is possible that the economic
benefits may exceed the costs of mitigation (Sections 7.3.3,
8.2.2, 9.2.1)
13. The cost estimates for Annex B countries to implement the
Kyoto Protocol vary between studies and regions as indicated
in Paragraph 11, and depend strongly upon the assumptions
regarding the use of the Kyoto mechanisms, and their
interactions with domestic measures. The great majority of
global studies reporting and comparing these costs use
international energy-economic models. Nine of these studies
suggest the following GDP impacts12 (Sections 7.3.5, 8.3.1,
9.2.3, 10.4.4):
Annex II countries13: In the absence of emissions trading
between Annex B countries14, the majority of global studies
show reductions in projected GDP of about 0.2% to 2% in
2010 for different Annex II regions. With full emissions trading
between Annex B countries, the estimated reductions in 2010
12

Many other studies incorporating more precisely the country specifics
and diversity of targeted policies provide a wider range of net cost
estimates (Section 8.2.2).
13
Annex II countries: Group of countries included in Annex II to the
UNFCCC, including all developed countries in the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development.
14
Annex B countries: Group of countries included in Annex B in the
Kyoto Protocol that have agreed to a target for their greenhouse gas
emissions, including all the Annex I countries (as amended in 1998)
but Turkey and Belarus.

Mitigation

are between 0.1% and 1.1% of projected GDP15. These studies
encompass a wide range of assumptions as listed in Paragraph
11. Models whose results are reported in this paragraph assume
full use of emissions trading without transaction cost. Results
for cases that do not allow Annex B trading assume full
domestic trading within each region. Models do not include
sinks or non-CO2 greenhouse gases. They do not include the
CDM, negative cost options, ancillary benefits, or targeted
revenue recycling.
For all regions costs are also influenced by the following
factors:
* Constraints on the use of Annex B trading, high transaction
costs in implementing the mechanisms, and inefficient
domestic implementation could raise costs.
* Inclusion in domestic policy and measures of the no regrets
possibilities10 identified in Paragraph 12, use of the CDM,
sinks, and inclusion of non-CO2 greenhouse gases, could
lower costs. Costs for individual countries can vary more
widely.
The
* models show that the Kyoto mechanisms are important in
controlling risks of high costs in given countries, and thus can
complement domestic policy mechanisms. Similarly, they can
minimize risks of inequitable international impacts and help to
level marginal costs. The global modelling studies reported above
show national marginal costs to meet the Kyoto targets from
about US$20/tC up to US$600/tC without trading, and a range
from about US$15/tC up to US$150/tC with Annex B trading.
The cost reductions from these mechanisms may depend on
the details of implementation, including the compatibility of
domestic and international mechanisms, constraints, and
transaction costs.
Economies in transition: For most of these countries, GDP
effects range from negligible to a several per cent increase.
This reflects opportunities for energy efficiency improvements
not available to Annex II countries. Under assumptions of drastic
energy efficiency improvement and/or continuing economic
recessions in some countries, the assigned amounts may exceed
projected emissions in the first commitment period. In this
case, models show increased GDP due to revenues from trading
assigned amounts. However, for some economies in transition,
implementing the Kyoto Protocol will have similar impact on
GDP as for Annex II countries.
14. Cost-effectiveness studies with a century timescale estimate
that the costs of stabilizing CO 2 concentrations in the

15

Many metrics can be used to present costs. For example, if the annual
costs to developed countries associated with meeting Kyoto targets
with full Annex B trading are in the order of 0.5% of GDP, this represents
US$125 billion (1000 million) per year, or US$125 per person per
year by 2010 in Annex II (SRES assumptions). This corresponds to an
impact on economic growth rates over ten years of less than 0.1 percentage
point

WGIII Summary for Policymakers

atmosphere increase as the concentration stabilization level
declines. Different baselines can have a strong influence on
absolute costs. While there is a moderate increase in the costs
when passing from a 750ppmv to a 550ppmv concentration
stabilization level, there is a larger increase in costs passing
from 550ppmv to 450ppmv unless the emissions in the baseline
scenario are very low. These results, however, do not
incorporate carbon sequestration, gases other than CO2 and
did not examine the possible effect of more ambitious targets
on induced technological change16. Costs associated with each
concentration level depend on numerous factors including the
rate of discount, distribution of emission reductions over time,
policies and measures employed, and particularly the choice
of the baseline scenario: for scenarios characterized by a focus
on local and regional sustainable development for example,
total costs of stabilizing at a particular level are significantly
lower than for other scenarios17 (Sections 2.5.2, 8.4.1, 10.4.6).
15. Under any greenhouse gas mitigation effort, the economic
costs and benefits are distributed unevenly between sectors;
to a varying degree, the costs of mitigation actions could be
reduced by appropriate policies. In general, it is easier to
identify activities, which stand to suffer economic costs
compared to those which may benefit, and the economic costs
are more immediate, more concentrated and more certain.
Under mitigation policies, coal, possibly oil and gas, and
certain energy-intensive sectors, such as steel production, are
most likely to suffer an economic disadvantage. Other
industries including renewable energy industries and services
can be expected to benefit in the long term from price changes
and the availability of financial and other resources that would
otherwise have been devoted to carbon-intensive sectors.
Policies such as the removal of subsidies from fossil fuels
may increase total societal benefits through gains in economic
efficiency, while use of the Kyoto mechanisms could be
expected to reduce the net economic cost of meeting Annex
B targets. Other types of policies, for example exempting
carbon-intensive industries, redistribute the costs but increase
total societal costs at the same time. Most studies show that
the distributional effects of a carbon tax can have negative
income effects on low-income groups unless the tax revenues
are used directly or indirectly to compensate such effects
(Section 9.2.1).

16

Induced technological change is an emerging field of inquiry. None of
the literature reviewed in TAR on the relationship between the centuryscale CO2 concentrations and costs, reported results for models employing
induced technological change. Models with induced technological
change under some circumstances show that century-scale
concentrations can differ, with similar GDP growth but under different
policy regimes (Section 8.4.1.4).
17
See Figure SPM-1 for the influence of reference scenarios on the
magnitude of the required mitigation effort to reach a given stabilization
level

301

Climate Change 2001

16. Emission constraints in Annex I countries have well
established, albeit varied "spillover" effects18 on non-Annex I
countries (Sections 8.3.2, 9.3).
* Oil-exporting, non-Annex I countries: Analyses report
costs differently, including, inter alia, reductions in projected
GDP and reductions in projected oil revenues19. The study
reporting the lowest costs shows reductions of 0.2% of
projected GDP with no emissions trading, and less than
0.05% of projected GDP with Annex B emissions trading
in 201020. The study reporting the highest costs shows
reductions of 25% of projected oil revenues with no emissions
trading, and 13% of projected oil revenues with Annex B
emissions trading in 2010. These studies do not consider
policies and measures21 other than Annex B emissions
trading, that could lessen the impact on non-Annex I, oilexporting countries, and therefore tend to overstate both
the costs to these countries and overall costs.
The effects on these countries can be further reduced by
removal of subsidies for fossil fuels, energy tax restructuring
according to carbon content, increased use of natural gas,
and diversification of the economies of non-Annex I, oilexporting countries.
* Other non-Annex I countries: They may be adversely
affected by reductions in demand for their exports to OECD
nations and by the price increase of those carbon-intensive
and other products they continue to import. These countries
may benefit from the reduction in fuel prices, increased
exports of carbon-intensive products and the transfer of
environmentally sound technologies and know-how. The
net balance for a given country depends on which of these
factors dominates. Because of these complexities, the
breakdown of winners and losers remains uncertain.
* Carbon leakage22. The possible relocation of some carbonintensive industries to non-Annex I countries and wider
impacts on trade flows in response to changing prices may
lead to leakage in the order of 5%-20% (Section 8.3.2.2).
Exemptions, for example for energy-intensive industries,
18

Spillover effects incorporate only economic effects, not environmental effects.
Details of the six studies reviewed are found in Table 9-4 of the
underlying report.
20
These estimated costs can be expressed as differences in GDP growth rates
over the period 2000-2010. With no emissions trading, GDP growth rate
is reduced by 0.02 percentage points/year; with Annex B emissions trading,
growth rate is reduced by less than 0.005 percentage points/year.
21
These policies and measures include: those for non-CO2 gases and nonenergy sources of all gases; offsets from sinks; industry restructuring
(e.g., from energy producer to supplier of energy services); use of
OPEC's market power; and actions (e.g. of Annex B Parties) related
to funding, insurance, and the transfer of technology. In addition, the
studies typically do not include the following policies and effects that
can reduce the total cost of mitigation: the use of tax revenues to reduce
tax burdens or finance other mitigation measures; environmental ancillary
benefits of reductions in fossil fuel use; and induced technological change
from mitigation policies.
22
Carbon leakage is defined here as the increase in emissions in nonAnnex B countries due to implementation of reductions in Annex B,
expressed as a percentage of Annex B reductions.
19

302

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

make the higher model estimates for carbon leakage unlikely,
but would raise aggregate costs. The transfer of environmentally
sound technologies and know-how, not included in models,
may lead to lower leakage and especially on the longer term
may more than offset the leakage.

Ways and Means for Mitigation
17. The successful implementation of greenhouse gas mitigation
options needs to overcome many technical, economic, political,
cultural, social, behavioural and/or institutional barriers which
prevent the full exploitation of the technological, economic and
social opportunities of these mitigation options. The potential
mitigation opportunities and types of barriers vary by region
and sector, and over time. This is caused by the wide variation in
mitigation capacity. The poor in any country are faced with limited
opportunities to adopt technologies or change their social
behaviour, particularly if they are not part of a cash economy,
and most countries could benefit from innovative financing
and institutional reform and removing barriers to trade. In the
industrialized countries, future opportunities lie primarily in
removing social and behavioural barriers; in countries with
economies in transition, in price rationalization; and in developing
countries, in price rationalization, increased access to data and
information, availability of advanced technologies, financial
resources, and training and capacity building. Opportunities
for any given country, however, might be found in the removal
of any combination of barriers (Sections 1.5, 5.3, 5.4).
18. National responses to climate change can be more effective
if deployed as a portfolio of policy instruments to limit or reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. The portfolio of national climate
policy instruments may include - according to national
circumstances - emissions/carbon/energy taxes, tradable or
non-tradable permits, provision and/or removal of subsidies,
deposit/refund systems, technology or performance standards,
energy mix requirements, product bans, voluntary agreements,
government spending and investment, and support for research
and development. Each government may apply different
evaluation criteria, which may lead to different portfolios of
instruments. The literature in general gives no preference for
any particular policy instrument. Market based instruments
may be cost-effective in many cases, especially where capacity
to administer them is developed. Energy efficiency standards
and performance regulations are widely used, and may be
effective in many countries, and sometimes precede market
based instruments. Voluntary agreements have recently been used
more frequently, sometimes preceding the introduction of more
stringent measures. Information campaigns, environmental
labelling, and green marketing, alone or in combination with
incentive subsidies, are increasingly emphasized to inform and
shape consumer or producer behaviour. Government and/or
privately supported research and development is important in
advancing the long-term application and transfer of mitigation

Mitigation

technologies beyond the current market or economic potential
(Section 6.2).
19. The effectiveness of climate change mitigation can be
enhanced when climate policies are integrated with the nonclimate objectives of national and sectorial policy development
and be turned into broad transition strategies to achieve the
long-term social and technological changes required by both
sustainable development and climate change mitigation. Just
as climate policies can yield ancillary benefits that improve
wellbeing, non-climate policies may produce climate benefits.
It may be possible to significantly reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by pursuing climate objectives through general socioeconomic policies. In many countries, the carbon intensity of
energy systems may vary depending on broader programmmes
for energy infrastructure development, pricing, and tax policies.
Adopting state-of-the-art environmentally sound technologies
may offer particular opportunity for environmentally sound
development while avoiding greenhouse gas intensive
activities. Specific attention can foster the transfer of those
technologies to small and medium size enterprises. Moreover,
taking ancillary benefits into account in comprehensive national
development strategies can lower political and institutional
barriers for climate-specific actions (Sections 2.2.3, 2.4.4,
2.4.5, 2.5.1, 2.5.2, 10.3.2, 10.3.4).
20. Co-ordinated actions among countries and sectors may
help to reduce mitigation cost, address competitiveness
concerns, potential conflicts with international trade rules, and
carbon leakage. A group of countries that wants to limit its
collective greenhouse gas emissions could agree to implement
well-designed international instruments. Instruments assessed
in this report and being developed in the Kyoto Protocol are
emissions trading; Joint Implementation (JI); the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM); other international instruments
also assessed in this report include co-ordinated or harmonized
emission/carbon/energy taxes; an emission/carbon/ energy tax;
technology and product standards; voluntary agreements with
industries; direct transfers of financial resources and technology;
and co-ordinated creation of enabling environments such as
reduction of fossil fuel subsidies. Some of these have been
considered only in some regions to date (Sections 6.3, 6.4.2,
10.2.7, 10.2.8).
21. Climate change decision-making is essentially a sequential
process under general uncertainty. The literature suggests that a
prudent risk management strategy requires a careful consideration
of the consequences (both environmental and economic), their
likelihood and society's attitude toward risk. The latter is likely
to vary from country to country and perhaps even from generation
to generation. This report therefore confirms the SAR finding
that the value of better information about climate change processes
and impacts and society's responses to them is likely to be great.
Decisions about near-term climate policies are in the process
of being made while the concentration stabilization target is

WGIII Summary for Policymakers

still being debated. The literature suggests a step-by-step resolution
aimed at stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations. This will also
involve balancing the risks of either insufficient or excessive
action. The relevant question is not "what is the best course
for the next 100 years", but rather "what is the best course for
the near term given the expected long-term climate change
and accompanying uncertainties" (Section 10.4.3).
22. This report confirms the finding in the SAR that earlier
actions, including a portfolio of emissions mitigation, technology
development and reduction of scientific uncertainty, increase
flexibility in moving towards stabilization of atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases. The desired mix of
options varies with time and place. Economic modelling
studies completed since the SAR indicate that a gradual nearterm transition from the world's present energy system towards
a less carbon-emitting economy minimizes costs associated
with premature retirement of existing capital stock. It also
provides time for technology development, and avoids
premature lock-in to early versions of rapidly developing lowemission technology. On the other hand, more rapid near-term
action would decrease environmental and human risks
associated with rapid climatic changes.
It would also stimulate more rapid deployment of existing lowemission technologies, provide strong near-term incentives to
future technological changes that may help to avoid lock-in to
carbon-intensive technologies, and allow for later tightening
of targets should that be deemed desirable in light of evolving
scientific understanding (Sections 2.3.2, 2.5.2, 8.4.1, 10.4.2,
10.4.3).
23. There is an inter-relationship between the environmental
effectiveness of an international regime, the cost-effectiveness
of climate policies and the equity of the agreement. Any
international regime can be designed in a way that enhances
both its efficiency and its equity. The literature assessed in
this report on coalition formation in international regimes presents
different strategies that support these objectives, including how
to make it more attractive to join a regime through appropriate
distribution of efforts and provision of incentives. While analysis
and negotiation often focus on reducing system costs, the
literature also recognizes that the development of an effective
regime on climate change must give attention to sustainable
development and non-economic issues (Sections 1.3, 10.2).

Gaps in Knowledge
24. Advances have been made since previous IPCC assessments
in the understanding of the scientific, technical, environmental,
and economic and social aspects of mitigation of climate
change. Further research is required, however, to strengthen
future assessments and to reduce uncertainties as far as possible
in order that sufficient information is available for policy

303

Climate Change 2001

making about responses to climate change, including research
in developing countries.
The following are high priorities for further narrowing gaps
between current knowledge and policy making needs:
* Further exploration of the regional, country and sector
specific potentials of technological and social innovation
options. This includes research on the short, medium and
long-term potential and costs of both CO2 and non-CO2,
non-energy mitigation options; understanding of technology
diffusion across different regions; identifying opportunities
in the area of social innovation leading to decreased
greenhouse gas emissions; comprehensive analysis of the
impact of mitigation measures on carbon flows in and out
of the terrestrial system; and some basic inquiry in the area
of geo-engineering.
* Economic, social and institutional issues related to climate
change mitigation in all countries. Priority areas include:
analysis of regionally specific mitigation options and
barriers; the implications of equity assessments; appropriate
methodologies and improved data sources for climate
change mitigation and capacity building in the area of
integrated assessment; strengthening future research and
assessments, especially in the developing countries.
* Methodologies for analysis of the potential of mitigation
options and their cost, with special attention to comparability

304

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

of results. Examples include: characterizing and measuring
barriers that inhibit greenhouse gas-reducing action; making
mitigation modelling techniques more consistent, reproducible,
and accessible; modelling technology learning; improving
analytical tools for evaluating ancillary benefits, e.g.
assigning the costs of abatement to greenhouse gases and to
other pollutants; systematically analyzing the dependency
of costs on baseline assumptions for various greenhouse
gas stabilization scenarios; developing decision analytical
frameworks for dealing with uncertainty as well as socioeconomic and ecological risk in climate policy making;
improving global models and studies, their assumptions
and their consistency in the treatment and reporting of nonAnnex I countries and regions.
* Evaluating climate mitigation options in the context of
development, sustainability and equity. Examples include:
exploration of alternative development paths, including
sustainable consumption patterns in all sectors, including
the transportation sector; integrated analysis of mitigation
and adaptation; identifying opportunities for synergy
between explicit climate policies and general policies
promoting sustainable development; integration of intraand inter-generational equity in climate change mitigation
analysis; implications of equity assessments; analysis of
scientific, technical and economic implications of options
under a wide variety of stabilization regimes.

Climate Change 2001:
Mitigation

Technical Summary

A Report Accepted by Working Group III of the IPCC but not Approved in Detail
"Acceptance" of IPCC Reports at a Session of the Working Group or Panel signifies that the material has not been subject to
line by line discussion and agreement, but nevertheless presents a comprehensive, objective, and balanced view of the
subject matter.

Lead Authors
Tariq Banuri (Pakistan), Terry Barker (UK), Igor Bashmakov (Russian Federation), Kornelis Blok (Netherlands), John
Christensen (Denmark), Ogunlade Davidson (Sierra Leone), Michael Grubb (UK), Kirsten Halsnaes (Denmark), Catrinus
Jepma (Netherlands), Eberhard Jochem (Germany), Pekka Kauppi (Finland), Olga Krankina (Russian Federation), Alan
Krupnick (USA), Lambert Kuijpers (Netherlands), Snorre Kverndokk (Norway), Anil Markandya (UK), Bert Metz
(Netherlands), William R. Moomaw (USA), Jose Roberto Moreira (Brazil), Tsuneyuki Morita (Japan), Jiahua Pan (China),
Lynn Price (USA), Richard Richels (USA), John Robinson (Canada), Jayant Sathaye (USA), Rob Swart (Netherlands),
Kanako Tanaka (Japan), Tomihiro Taniguchi (Japan), Ferenc Toth (Germany), Tim Taylor (UK), John Weyant (USA)
Review Editors
Rajendra Pachauri (India)

Climate Change 2001

1. Scope of the Report
1.1. Background
In 1998, Working Group (WG) III of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was charged by the IPCC
Plenary for the Panel's Third Assessment Report (TAR) to
assess the scientific, technical, environmental, economic, and
social aspects of the mitigation of climate change. Thus, the
mandate of the Working Group was changed from a
predominantly disciplinary assessment of the economic and
social dimensions on climate change (including adaptation)
in the Second Assessment Report (SAR), to an interdisciplinary
assessment of the options to control the emissions of
greenhouse gases (GHGs) and/or enhance their sinks.
After the publication of the SAR, continued research in the
area of mitigation of climate change, which was partly
influenced by political changes such as the adoption of the
Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1997, has been undertaken
and is reported on here. The report also draws on a number of
IPCC Special Reports1 and IPCC co-sponsored meetings and
Expert Meetings that were held in 1999 and 2000, particularly
to support the development of the IPCC TAR. This summary
follows the 10 chapters of the report.
1.2. Broadening the Context of Climate Change
Mitigation
This chapter places climate change mitigation, mitigation
policy, and the contents of the rest of the report in the broader
context of development, equity, and sustainability. This context
reflects the explicit conditions and principles laid down by
the UNFCCC on the pursuit of the ultimate objective of stabilizing
greenhouse gas concentrations. The UNFCCC imposes three
conditions on the goal of stabilization: namely that it should
take place within a time-frame sufficient to "allow ecosystems
to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production
is not threatened and to enable economic development to
proceed in a sustainable manner" (Art. 2). It also specifies
several principles to guide this process: equity, common but
differentiated responsibilities, precaution, cost-effective measures,
right to sustainable development, and support for an open
international economic system (Art. 3).
Previous IPCC assessment reports sought to facilitate this pursuit
by comprehensively describing, cataloguing, and comparing
technologies and policy instruments that could be used to
achieve mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions in a cost1

306

Notably the Special Report on Aviation and the Global Atmosphere, the
Special Report on Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology
Transfer, the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios, and the Special
Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

effective and efficient manner. The present assessment advances
this process by including recent analyses of climate change that
place policy evaluations in the context of sustainable development.
This expansion of scope is consistent both with the evolution
of the literature on climate change and the importance accorded
by the UNFCCC to sustainable development - including the
recognition that "Parties have a right to, and should promote
sustainable development" (Art. 3.4). It therefore goes some
way towards filling the gaps in earlier assessments.
Climate change involves complex interactions between climatic,
environmental, economic, political, institutional, social, and
technological processes. It cannot be addressed or comprehended
in isolation of broader societal goals (such as equity or sustainable
development), or other existing or probable future sources of
stress. In keeping with this complexity, a multiplicity of approaches
have emerged to analyze climate change and related challenges.
Many of these incorporate concerns about development, equity,
and sustainability (DES) (albeit partially and gradually) into
their framework and recommendations. Each approach
emphasizes certain elements of the problem, and focuses on
certain classes of responses, including for example, optimal
policy design, building capacity for designing and implementing
policies, strengthening synergies between climate change
mitigation and/or adaptation and other societal goals, and
policies to enhance societal learning. These approaches are
therefore complementary rather than mutually exclusive.
This chapter brings together three broad classes of analysis,
which differ not so much in terms of their ultimate goals as of
their points of departure and preferred analytical tools. The
three approaches start with concerns, respectively, about
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, equity and sustainable
development, and global sustainability and societal learning.
The difference between the three approaches selected lies in
their starting point not in their ultimate goals. Regardless of
the starting point of the analysis, many studies try in their own
way to incorporate other concerns. For example, many analyses
that approach climate change mitigation from a costeffectiveness perspective try to bring in considerations of equity
and sustainability through their treatment of costs, benefits, and
welfare. Similarly, the class of studies that are motivated strongly
by considerations of inter-country equity tend to argue that
equity is needed to ensure that developing countries can pursue
their internal goals of sustainable development-a concept that
includes the implicit components of sustainability and efficiency.
Likewise, analysts focused on concerns of global sustainability
have been compelled by their own logic to make a case for
global efficiency-often modelled as the decoupling of production
from material flows-and social equity. In other words, each
of the three perspectives has led writers to search for ways to
incorporate concerns that lie beyond their initial starting point.
All three classes of analyses look at the relationship of climate
change mitigation with all three goals-development, equity, and
sustainability-albeit in different and often highly complementary

Mitigation

ways. Nevertheless, they frame the issues differently, focus
on different sets of causal relationships, use different tools of
analysis, and often come to somewhat different conclusions.
There is no presumption that any particular perspective for analysis
is most appropriate at any level. Moreover, the three perspectives
are viewed here as being highly synergistic. The important changes
have been primarily in the types of questions being asked and
the kinds of information being sought. In practice, the literature
has expanded to add new issues and new tools, subsuming rather
than discarding the analyses included in the other perspectives.
The range and scope of climate policy analyses can be understood
as a gradual broadening of the types and extent of uncertainties
that analysts have been willing and able to address.
The first perspective on climate policy analysis is cost
effectiveness. It represents the field of conventional climate
policy analysis that is well represented in the First through
Third Assessments. These analyses have generally been driven
directly or indirectly by the question of what is the most costeffective amount of mitigation for the global economy starting
from a particular baseline GHG emissions projection, reflecting
a specific set of socio-economic projections. Within this
framework, important issues include measuring the performance
of various technologies and the removal of barriers (such as
existing subsidies) to the implementation of those candidate
policies most likely to contribute to emissions reductions. In
a sense, the focus of analysis here has been on identifying an
efficient pathway through the interactions of mitigation policies
and economic development, conditioned by considerations of
equity and sustainability, but not primarily guided by them. At
this level, policy analysis has almost always taken the existing
institutions and tastes of individuals as given; assumptions
that might be valid for a decade or two, but may become more
questionable over many decades.
The impetus for the expansion in the scope of the climate policy
analysis and discourse to include equity considerations was to
address not simply the impacts of climate change and mitigation
policies on global welfare as a whole, but also of the effects of
climate change and mitigation policies on existing inequalities
among and within nations. The literature on equity and climate
change has advanced considerably over the last two decades,
but there is no consensus on what constitutes fairness. Once equity
issues were introduced into the assessment agenda, though,
they became important components in defining the search for
efficient emissions mitigation pathways. The considerable
literature that indicated how environmental policies could be
hampered or even blocked by those who considered them unfair
became relevant. In light of these results, it became clear how
and why any widespread perception that a mitigation strategy
is unfair would likely engender opposition to that strategy, perhaps
to the extent of rendering it non-optimal (or even infeasible, as
could be the case if non-Annex I countries never participate).
Some cost-effectiveness analyses had, in fact, laid the groundwork

WGIII Technical Summary

for applying this literature by demonstrating the sensitivity of
some equity measures to policy design, national perspective,
and regional context. Indeed, cost-effectiveness analyses had even
highlighted similar sensitivities for other measures of development
and sustainability. As mentioned, the analyses that start from
equity concerns have by and large focused on the needs of
developing countries, and in particular on the commitment
expressed in Article 3.4 of the UNFCCC to the pursuit of
sustainable development. Countries differ in ways that have
dramatic implications for scenario baselines and the range of
mitigation options that can be considered. The climate policies
that are feasible, and/or desirable, in a particular country depend
significantly on its available resources and institutions, and on
its overall objectives including climate change as but one
component. Recognizing this heterogeneity may, thus, lead to
a different range of policy options than has been considered
likely thus far and may reveal differences in the capacities of
different sectors that may also enhance appreciation of what
can be done by non-state actors to improve their ability to mitigate.
The third perspective is global sustainability and societal learning.
While sustainability has been incorporated in the analyses in
a number of ways, a class of studies takes the issue of global
sustainability as their point of departure. These studies focus
on alternative pathways to pursue global sustainability and
address issues like decoupling growth from resource flows,
for example through eco-intelligent production systems,
resource light infrastructure and appropriate technologies, and
decoupling wellbeing from production, for example through
intermediate performance levels, regionalization of production
systems, and changing lifestyles. One popular method for
identifying constraints and opportunities within this perspective
is to identify future sustainable states and then examine possible
transition paths to those states for feasibility and desirability.
In the case of developing countries this leads to a number of
possible strategies that can depart significantly from those
which the developed countries pursued in the past.
1.3. Integrating the Various Perspectives
Extending discussions of how nations might respond to the
mitigation challenge so that they include issues of cost-effectiveness
and efficiency, distribution narrowly defined, equity more broadly
defined, and sustainability, adds enormous complexity to the
problem of uncovering how best to respond to the threat of climate
change. Indeed, recognizing that these multiple domains are
relevant complicates the task assigned to policymakers and
international negotiators by opening their deliberations to issues
that lie beyond the boundaries of the climate change problem,
per se. Their recognition thereby underlines the importance of
integrating scientific thought across a wide range of new policyrelevant contexts, but not simply because of some abstract
academic or narrow parochial interest advanced by a small
set of researchers or nations. Cost-effectiveness, equity, and
sustainability have all been identified as critical issues by the

307

Climate Change 2001

drafters of the UNFCCC, and they are an integral part of the
charge given to the drafters of the TAR. Integration across the
domains of cost-effectiveness, equity, and sustainability is
therefore profoundly relevant to policy deliberations according
to the letter as well as the spirit of the UNFCCC itself.
The literature being brought to bear on climate change
mitigation increasingly shows that policies lying beyond simply
reducing GHG emissions from a specified baseline to minimize
costs can be extremely effective in abating the emission of
GHGs. Therefore, a portfolio approach to policy and analysis
would be more effective than exclusive reliance on a narrow
set of policy instruments or analytical tools. Besides the
flexibility that an expanded range of policy instruments and
analytical tools can provide to policymakers for achieving
climate objectives, the explicit inclusion of additional policy
objectives also increases the likelihood of "buy-in" to climate
policies by more participants. In particular, it will expand the
range of no regrets2 options. Finally, it could assist in tailoring
policies to short-, medium-, and long-term goals.
In order to be effective, however, a portfolio approach requires
weighing the costs and impacts of the broader set of policies
according to a longer list of objectives. Climate deliberations
need to consider the climate ramifications of policies designed
primarily to address a wide range of issues including DES, as
well as the likely impacts of climate policies on the achievement
of these objectives. As part of this process the opportunity
costs and impacts of each instrument are measured against the
multiple criteria defined by these multiple objectives. Furthermore,
the number of decision makers or stakeholders to be considered
is increased beyond national policymakers and international
negotiators to include state, local, community, and household
agents, as well as non-government organizations (NGOs).
The term "ancillary benefits" is often used in the literature for
the ancillary, or secondary, effects of climate change mitigation
policies on problems other than GHG emissions, such as
reductions in local and regional air pollution, associated with
the reduction of fossil fuels, and indirect effects on issues such
as transportation, agriculture, land use practices, biodiversity
preservation, employment, and fuel security. Sometimes these
are referred to as "ancillary impacts", to reflect the fact that in
some cases the benefits may be negative3. The concept of

2

In this report, as in the SAR, no regrets options are defined as those options
whose benefits such as reduced energy costs and reduced emissions of local/
regional pollutants equal or exceed their costs to society, excluding the benefits
of avoided climate change. They are also known as negative cost options.
3
In this report sometimes the term "co-benefits" is also used to indicate the
additional benefits of policy options that are implemented for various
reasons at the same time, acknowledging that most policies designed to
address GHG mitigation also have other, often at least equally important,
rationales, e.g., related to objectives of development, sustainability and
equity. The benefits of avoided climate change are not covered in ancillary
or co-benefits. See also Section 7.2.

308

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

"mitigative capacity" is also introduced as a possible way to
integrate results derived from the application of the three
perspectives in the future. The determinants of the capacity to
mitigate climate change include the availability of technological
and policy options, and access to resources to underwrite
undertaking those options. These determinants are the focus
of much of the TAR. The list of determinants is, however,
longer than this. Mitigative capacity also depends upon nationspecific characteristics that facilitate the pursuit of sustainable
development - e.g., the distribution of resources, the relative
empowerment of various segments of the population, the
credibility of empowered decision makers, the degree to which
climate objectives complement other objectives, access to
credible information and analyses, the will to act on that
information, the ability to spread risk intra- and intergenerationally, and so on. Given that the determinants of
mitigative capacity are essentially the same as those of the
analogous concept of adaptive capacity introduced in the WGII
Report, this approach may provide an integrated framework
for assessing both sets of options.

2. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Scenarios
2.1. Scenarios
A long-term view of a multiplicity of future possibilities is required
to consider the ultimate risks of climate change, assess critical
interactions with other aspects of human and environmental
systems, and guide policy responses. Scenarios offer a structured
means of organizing information and gleaning insight on the
possibilities.
Each mitigation scenario describes a particular future world, with
particular economic, social, and environmental characteristics,
and they therefore implicitly or explicitly contain information
about DES. Since the difference between reference case
scenarios and stabilization and mitigation scenarios is simply
the addition of deliberate climate policy, it can be the case
that the differences in emissions among different reference
case scenarios are greater than those between any one such
scenario and its stabilization or mitigation version.
This section presents an overview of three scenario literatures:
general mitigation scenarios produced since the SAR,
narrative-based scenarios found in the general futures
literature, and mitigation scenarios based on the new reference
scenarios developed in the IPCC SRES.
2.2. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Mitigation Scenarios
This report considers the results of 519 quantitative emissions
scenarios from 188 sources, mainly produced after 1990. The
review focuses on 126 mitigation scenarios that cover global
emissions and have a time horizon encompassing the coming

Mitigation

century. Technological improvement is a critical element in
all the general mitigation scenarios.
Based on the type of mitigation, the scenarios fall into four
categories: concentration stabilization scenarios, emission
stabilization scenarios, safe emission corridor scenarios, and
other mitigation scenarios. All the reviewed scenarios include
energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions; several also
include CO2 emissions from land-use changes and industrial
processes, and other important GHGs.
Policy options used in the reviewed mitigation scenarios take
into account energy systems, industrial processes, and land
use, and depend on the underlying model structure. Most of
the scenarios introduce simple carbon taxes or constraints on
emissions or concentration levels. Regional targets are
introduced in the models with regional disaggregation.
Emission permit trading is introduced in more recent work.
Some models employ policies of supply-side technology
introduction, while others emphasize efficient demand-side
technology.
Allocation of emission reduction among regions is a contentious
issue. Only some studies, particularly recent ones, make explicit
assumptions about such allocations in their scenarios. Some
studies offer global emission trading as a mechanism to reduce
mitigation costs.
Technological improvement is a critical element in all the
general mitigation scenarios.
Detailed analysis of the characteristics of 31 scenarios for
stabilization of CO2 concentrations at 550ppmv4 (and their
baseline scenarios) yielded several insights:
* There is a wide range in baselines, reflecting a diversity of
assumptions, mainly with respect to economic growth and
low-carbon energy supply. High economic growth scenarios
tend to assume high levels of progress in the efficiency of
end-use technologies; however, carbon intensity reductions
were found to be largely independent of economic growth
assumptions. The range of future trends shows greater
divergence in scenarios that focus on developing countries
than in scenarios that look at developed nations. There is
little consensus with respect to future directions in developing
regions.
* The reviewed 550ppmv stabilization scenarios vary with
respect to reduction time paths and the distribution of
emission reductions among regions. Some scenarios
suggested that emission trading may lower the overall

4

The reference to a particular concentration level does not imply an
agreed-upon desirability of stabilization at this level. The selection of
550ppmv is based on the fact that the majority of studies in the literature
analyze this level, and does not imply any endorsement of this level as
a target for climate change mitigation policies.

WGIII Technical Summary

mitigation cost, and could lead to more mitigation in the
non-OECD countries. The range of assumed mitigation
policies is very wide. In general, scenarios in which there
is an assumed adoption of high-efficiency measures in the
baseline show less scope for further introduction of
efficiency measures in the mitigation scenarios. In part this
results from model input assumptions, which do not assume
major technological breakthroughs. Conversely, baseline
scenarios with high carbon intensity reductions show larger
carbon intensity reductions in their mitigation scenarios.
Only a small set of studies has reported on scenarios for
mitigating non-CO2 gases. This literature suggests that small
reductions of GHG emissions can be accomplished at lower
cost by including non-CO2 gases; that both CO2 and non-CO2
emissions would have to be controlled in order to slow the
increase of atmospheric temperature sufficiently to achieve
climate targets assumed in the studies; and that methane (CH4)
mitigation can be carried out more rapidly, with a more
immediate impact on the atmosphere, than CO2 mitigation.
Generally, it is clear that mitigation scenarios and mitigation
policies are strongly related to their baseline scenarios, but no
systematic analysis has been published on the relationship
between mitigation and baseline scenarios.
2.3. Global Futures Scenarios
Global futures scenarios do not specifically or uniquely
consider GHG emissions. Instead, they are more general
"stories" of possible future worlds. They can complement the
more quantitative emissions scenario assessments, because they
consider dimensions that elude quantification, such as
governance and social structures and institutions, but which
are nonetheless important to the success of mitigation policies.
Addressing these issues reflects the different perspectives
presented in Section 1: cost-effectiveness and/or efficiency,
equity, and sustainability.
A survey of this literature has yielded a number of insights
that are relevant to GHG emissions scenarios and sustainable
development. First, a wide range of future conditions has been
identified by futurists, ranging from variants of sustainable
development to collapse of social, economic, and environmental
systems. Since future values of the underlying socio-economic
drivers of emissions may vary widely, it is important that
climate policies should be designed so that they are resilient
against widely different future conditions.
Second, the global futures scenarios that show falling GHG
emissions tend to show improved governance, increased equity
and political participation, reduced conflict, and improved
environmental quality. They also tend to show increased energy
efficiency, shifts to non-fossil energy sources, and/or shifts to
a post-industrial (service-based) economy; population tends

309

Climate Change 2001

to stabilize at relatively low levels, in many cases thanks to
increased prosperity, expanded provision of family planning,
and improved rights and opportunities for women. A key
implication is that sustainable development policies can make
a significant contribution to emission reduction.
Third, different combinations of driving forces are consistent
with low emissions scenarios, which agrees with the SRES
findings. The implication of this seems to be that it is important
to consider the linkage between climate policy and other
policies and conditions associated with the choice of future
paths in a general sense.
2.4. Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
Six new GHG emission reference scenario groups (not including
specific climate policy initiatives), organized into 4 scenario
"families", were developed by the IPCC and published as the
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES). Scenario
families A1 and A2 emphasize economic development but differ
with respect to the degree of economic and social convergence;
B1 and B2 emphasize sustainable development but also differ
in terms of degree of convergence (see Box TS-1). In all, six
models were used to generate the 40 scenarios that comprise

Synthesis Report

the six scenario groups. Six of these scenarios, which should
be considered equally sound, were chosen to illustrate the
whole set of scenarios. These six scenarios include marker
scenarios for each of the worlds as well as two scenarios, A1FI
and A1T, which illustrate alternative energy technology
developments in the A1 world (see Figure TS.1).
The SRES scenarios lead to the following findings:
* Alternative combinations of driving-force variables can
lead to similar levels and structure of energy use, land-use
patterns, and emissions.
* Important possibilities for further bifurcations in future
development trends exist within each scenario family.
* Emissions profiles are dynamic across the range of SRES
scenarios. They portray trend reversals and indicate possible
emissions cross-over among different scenarios.
* Describing potential future developments involves inherent
ambiguities and uncertainties. One and only one possible
development path (as alluded to, for instance, in concepts
such as "business-as-usual scenario") simply does not exist.
The multi-model approach increases the value of the SRES
scenario set, since uncertainties in the choice of model input
assumptions can be more explicitly separated from the specific
model behaviour and related modelling uncertainties.

Box TS-1. The Emissions Scenarios of the IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)
A1. The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world
of very rapid economic growth, global population that peaks
in mid-century and declines thereafter, and the rapid introduction
of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes
are convergence among regions, capacity building and increased
cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction
in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario
family develops into three groups that describe alternative
directions of technological change in the energy system. The
three A1 groups are distinguished by their technological
emphasis: fossil intensive (A1FI), non-fossil energy sources
(A1T), or a balance across all sources (A1B) (where balanced
is defined as not relying too heavily on one particular energy
source, on the assumption that similar improvement rates
apply to all energy supply and end use technologies).
A2. The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very
heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance
and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across
regions converge very slowly, which results in continuously
increasing population. Economic development is primarily
regionally oriented and per capita economic growth and
technological change more fragmented and slower than other
storylines.
B1. The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent
world with the same global population, that peaks in mid-

310

IPCC Third Assessment Report

century and declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline, but
with rapid change in economic structures toward a service
and information economy, with reductions in material intensity
and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient technologies.
The emphasis is on global solutions to economic, social and
environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but
without additional climate initiatives.
B2. The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world
in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social
and environmental sustainability. It is a world with continuously
increasing global population, at a rate lower than A2,
intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid
and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and
A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented towards
environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local
and regional levels.
An illustrative scenario was chosen for each of the six scenario
groups A1B, A1FI, A1T, A2, B1 and B2. All should be
considered equally sound.
The SRES scenarios do not include additional climate initiatives,
which means that no scenarios are included that explicitly
assume implementation of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change or the emissions targets of
the Kyoto Protocol.

Mitigation

Scenario

WGIII Technical Summary

Population

Economy

Environment

Equity

Technology

Globalization

A1FI

A1B

A1T

B1

A2

B2

Figure TS-1: Qualitative directions of SRES scenarios for different indicators.

2.5. Review of Post-SRES Mitigation Scenarios
Recognizing the importance of multiple baselines in evaluating
mitigation strategies, recent studies analyze and compare
mitigation scenarios using as their baselines the new SRES
scenarios. This allows for the assessment in this report of 76
"post-SRES mitigation scenarios" produced by nine modelling
teams. These mitigation scenarios were quantified on the basis
of storylines for each of the six SRES scenarios that describe
the relationship between the kind of future world and the
capacity for mitigation.
Quantifications differ with respect to the baseline scenario,
including assumed storyline, the stabilization target, and the
model that was used. The post-SRES scenarios cover a very
wide range of emission trajectories, but the range is clearly
below the SRES range. All scenarios show an increase in CO2
reduction over time. Energy reduction shows a much wider
range than CO2 reduction, because in many scenarios a
decoupling between energy use and carbon emissions takes
place as a result of a shift in primary energy sources.
In general, the lower the stabilization target and the higher the
level of baseline emissions, the larger the CO2 divergence from
the baseline that is needed, and the earlier that it must occur.
The A1FI, A1B, and A2 worlds require a wider range of and
more strongly implemented technology and/or policy measures
than A1T, B1, and B2. The 450ppmv stabilization case requires
more drastic emission reduction to occur earlier than under

the 650ppmv case, with very rapid emission reduction over
the next 20 to 30 years (see Figure TS-2).
A key policy question is what kind of emission reductions in
the medium term (after the Kyoto Protocol commitment
period) would be needed. Analysis of the post-SRES scenarios
(most of which assume developing country emissions to be
below baselines by 2020) suggests that stabilization at 450ppmv
will require emissions reductions in Annex I countries after
2012 that go significantly beyond their Kyoto Protocol
commitments. It also suggests that it would not be necessary
to go much beyond the Kyoto commitments for Annex I by
2020 to achieve stabilization at 550ppmv or higher. However,
it should be recognized that several scenarios indicate the need
for significant Annex I emission reductions by 2020 and that
none of the scenarios introduces other constraints such as a
limit to the rate of temperature change.
An important policy question already mentioned concerns the
participation of developing countries in emission mitigation.
A preliminary finding of the post-SRES scenario analysis is
that, if it is assumed that the CO2 emission reduction needed
for stabilization occurs in Annex I countries only, Annex I per
capita CO2 emissions would fall below non-Annex I per capita
emissions during the 21st century in nearly all of the
stabilization scenarios, and before 2050 in two-thirds of the
scenarios, if developing countries emissions follow the baseline
scenarios. This suggests that the stabilization target and the
baseline emission level are both important determinants of

311

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

40

40

40

TS-2a IPCC SRES A1B Scenarios

TS-2b IPCC SRES A1T Scenarios

Global Anthropogenic Carbon Dioxide Emissions (GtC)

30

TS-2c IPCC SRES A1FI Scenarios

30

30

20

20

650 10
550
450

A1T 10
650
550
450
0

20

A1FI

A1B
10

0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

0
1990

2090

40

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

1990

40

30

2030

2050

2070

2090

TS-2f IPCC SRES B2 Scenarios

30

30

20

20

A2
20

2010

40

TS-2e IPCC SRES B1 Scenarios

TS-2d IPCC SRES A2 Scenarios

750
650
550
450

B2
750
10

10

B1
550
450

550
0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

10

0
1990

650
550
450
2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

Figure TS-2: Comparison of reference and stabilization scenarios. The figure is divided into six parts, one for each of the reference scenario
groups from the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES). Each part of the figure shows the range of total global CO2 emissions
(gigatonnes of carbon (GtC)) from all anthropogenic sources for the SRES reference scenario group (shaded in grey) and the ranges for the
various mitigation scenarios assessed in the TAR leading to stabilization of CO2 concentrations at various levels (shaded in colour). Scenarios
are presented for the A1 family subdivided into three groups (the balanced A1B group (Figure TS-2a), non-fossil fuel A1T (Figure TS-2b), and
the fossil intensive A1FI (Figure TS-2c)) and stabilization of CO2 concentrations at 450, 550, 650 and 750ppmv; for the A2 group with stabilization
at 550 and 750ppmv in Figure TS-2d, the B1 group and stabilization at 450 and 550ppmv in Figure TS-2e, and the B2 group including
stabilization at 450, 550, and 650ppmv in Figure TS-2f. The literature is not available to assess 1000ppmv stabilization scenarios. The figure
illustrates that the lower the stabilization level and the higher the baseline emissions, the wider the gap. The difference between emissions
in different scenario groups can be as large as the gap between reference and stabilization scenarios within one scenario group. The dotted
lines depict the boundaries of the ranges where they overlap (see Box TS-1).

the timing when developing countries emissions might need
to diverge from their baseline.
Climate policy would reduce per capita final energy use in the
economy-emphasized worlds (A1FI, A1B, and A2), but not in
the environment-emphasized worlds (B1 and B2). The reduction
in energy use caused by climate policies would be larger in
Annex I than in non-Annex I countries. However, the impact
of climate policies on equity in per capita final energy use would
be much smaller than that of the future development path.
There is no single path to a low emission future and countries
and regions will have to choose their own path. Most model
results indicate that known technological options5 could

5

312

"Known technological options" refer to technologies that exist in operation
or pilot plant stage today, as referenced in the mitigation scenarios discussed
in this report. It does not include any new technologies that will require
drastic technological breakthroughs. In this way it can be considered to
be a conservative estimate, considering the length of the scenario period.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

achieve a broad range of atmospheric CO2 stabilization levels,
such as 550ppmv, 450ppmv or, below over the next 100 years
or more, but implementation would require associated socioeconomic and institutional changes.
Assumed mitigation options differ among scenarios and are
strongly dependent on the model structure. However, common
features of mitigation scenarios include large and continuous
energy efficiency improvements and afforestation as well as
low-carbon energy, especially biomass over the next 100 years
and natural gas in the first half of the 21st century. Energy
conservation and reforestation are reasonable first steps, but
innovative supply-side technologies will eventually be required.
Possible robust options include using natural gas and combinedcycle technology to bridge the transition to more advanced
fossil fuel and zero-carbon technologies, such as hydrogen
fuel cells. Solar energy as well as either nuclear energy or carbon
removal and storage would become increasingly important for
a higher emission world or lower stabilization target.

Mitigation

Integration between global climate policies and domestic air
pollution abatement policies could effectively reduce GHG
emissions in developing regions for the next two or three
decades. However, control of sulphur emissions could amplify
possible climate change, and partial trade-offs are likely to
persist for environmental policies in the medium term.
Policies governing agriculture, land use and energy systems
could be linked for climate change mitigation. Supply of
biomass energy as well as biological CO2 sequestration would
broaden the available options for carbon emission reductions,
although the post-SRES scenarios show that they cannot
provide the bulk of the emission reductions required. That
has to come from other options.

3. Technological and Economic Potential
of Mitigation Options
3.1. Key Developments in Knowledge about
Technological Options to Mitigate GHG Emissions
in the Period up to 2010-2020 since the Second
Assessment Report
Technologies and practices to reduce GHG emissions are
continuously being developed. Many of these technologies
focus on improving the efficiency of fossil fuel energy or
electricity use and the development of low carbon energy
sources, since the majority of GHG emissions (in terms of
CO2 equivalents) are related to the use of energy. Energy
intensity (energy consumed divided by gross domestic product
(GDP)) and carbon intensity (CO2 emitted from burning fossil
fuels divided by the amount of energy produced) have been
declining for more than 100 years in developed countries
without explicit government policies for decarbonization, and
have the potential to decline further. Much of this change is
the result of a shift away from high carbon fuels such as coal
towards oil and natural gas, through energy conversion efficiency
improvements and the introduction of hydro and nuclear
power. Other non-fossil fuel energy sources are also being
developed and rapidly implemented and have a significant
potential for reducing GHG emissions. Biological sequestration
of CO2 and CO2 removal and storage can also play a role in
reducing GHG emissions in the future (see also Section 4
below). Other technologies and measures focus on the nonenergy sectors for reducing emissions of the remaining major
GHGs: CH4, nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).
Since the SAR several technologies have advanced more
rapidly than was foreseen in the earlier analysis. Examples
include the market introduction of efficient hybrid engine cars,
rapid advancement of wind turbine design, demonstration of
underground carbon dioxide storage, and the near elimination
of N2O emissions from adipic acid production. Greater energy

WGIII Technical Summary

efficiency opportunities for buildings, industry, transportation,
and energy supply are available, often at a lower cost than was
expected. By the year 2010 most of the opportunities to reduce
emissions will still come from energy efficiency gains in the
end-use sectors, by switching to natural gas in the electric
power sector, and by reducing the release of process GHGs
from industry, e.g., N2O, perfluoromethane (CF4), and HFCs.
By the year 2020, when a proportion of the existing power plants
will have been replaced in developed countries and countries
with economies in transition (EITs), and when many new plants
will become operational in developing countries, the use of
renewable sources of energy can begin contributing to the
reduction of CO2 emissions. In the longer term, nuclear energy
technologies - with inherent passive characteristics meeting
stringent safety, proliferation, and waste storage goals - along
with physical carbon removal and storage from fossil fuels and
biomass, followed by sequestration, could potentially become
available options.
Running counter to the technological and economic potential
for GHG emissions reduction are rapid economic development
and accelerating change in some socio-economic and
behavioural trends that are increasing total energy use,
especially in developed countries and high-income groups in
developing countries. Dwelling units and vehicles in many
countries are growing in size, and the intensity of electrical
appliance use is increasing. Use of electrical office equipment
in commercial buildings is increasing. In developed countries,
and especially the USA, sales of larger, heavier, and less
efficient vehicles are also increasing. Continued reduction or
stabilization in retail energy prices throughout large portions
of the world reduces incentives for the efficient use of energy
or the purchase of energy efficient technologies in all sectors.
With a few important exceptions, countries have made little
effort to revitalize policies or programmes to increase energy
efficiency or promote renewable energy technologies. Also
since the early 1990s, there has been a reduction in both public
and private resources devoted to R&D (research and
development) to develop and implement new technologies that
will reduce GHG emissions.
In addition, and usually related to technological innovation
options, there are important possibilities in the area of social
innovation. In all regions, many options are available for
lifestyle choices that may improve quality of life, while at the
same time decreasing resource consumption and associated
GHG emissions. Such choices are very much dependent on
local and regional cultures and priorities. They are very closely
related to technological changes, some of which can be
associated with profound lifestyle changes, while others do
not require such changes. While these options were hardly
noted in the SAR, this report begins to address them.

313

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

450
400

Priamry Energy (EJ)

350

Middle East

300

Latin America

250

Africa

200

Developing countries in Asia Pacific
Economies in transition

150

Industrialized countries
100
50
0
1971

1974

1977

1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

Figure TS-3: World primary energy use by region from 1971 to 1998.
Note: Primary energy calculated using the IEA's physical energy content method based on the primary energy sources used to produce heat
and electricity.

3.2. Trends in Energy Use and Associated
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Global consumption of energy and associated emission of
CO2 continue an upward trend in the 1990s (Figures TS-3
and TS-4). Fossil fuels remain the dominant form of energy
utilized in the world, and energy use accounts for more than
two thirds of the GHG emissions addressed by the Kyoto
Protocol. In 1998, 143 exajoules (EJ) of oil, 82EJ of natural
gas, and 100EJ of coal were consumed by the world's
economies. Global primary energy consumption grew an
average of 1.3% annually between 1990 and 1998. Average
annual growth rates were 1.6% for developed countries and
2.3% to 5.5% for developing countries between 1990 and
1998. Primary energy use for the EITs declined at an annual
rate of 4.7% between 1990 and 1998 owing to the loss of
heavy industry, the decline in overall economic activity, and
restructuring of the manufacturing sector.
Average global carbon dioxide emissions grew - approximately
at the same rate as primary energy - at a rate of 1.4% per year
between 1990 and 1998, which is much slower than the 2.1%
per year growth seen in the 1970s and 1980s. This was in large
measure because of the reductions from the EITs and structural
changes in the industrial sector of the developed countries.
Over the longer term, global growth in CO2 emissions from
energy use was 1.9% per year between 1971 and 1998. In
1998, developed countries were responsible for over 50% of
energy-related CO2 emissions, which grew at a rate of 1.6%
annually from 1990. The EITs accounted for 13% of 1998
emissions, and their emissions have been declining at an annual

314

IPCC Third Assessment Report

rate of 4.6% per year since 1990. Developing countries in the
Asia-Pacific region emitted 22% of the global total carbon
dioxide, and have been the fastest growing with increases of
4.9% per year since 1990. The rest of the developing countries
accounted for slightly more than 10% of total emissions,
growing at an annual rate of 4.3% since 1990.
During the period of intense industrialization from 1860 to
1997, an estimated 13,000EJ of fossil fuel were burned,
releasing 290GtC into the atmosphere, which along with landuse change has raised atmospheric concentrations of CO2 by
30%. By comparison, estimated natural gas resources6 are
comparable to those for oil, being approximately 35,000EJ.
The coal resource base is approximately four times as large.
Methane clathrates (not counted in the resource base) are
estimated to be approximately 780,000EJ. Estimated fossil
fuel reserves contain 1,500GtC, being more than 5 times the
carbon already released, and if estimated resources are added,
there is a total of 5,000GtC remaining in the ground. The
scenarios modelled by the SRES without any specific GHG

6

Reserves are those occurrences that are identified and measured as
economically and technically recoverable with current technologies and
prices. Resources are those occurrences with less certain geological
and/or economic characteristics, but which are considered poten-tially
recoverable with foreseeable technological and economic developments.
The resource base includes both categories. On top of that there are
additional quantities with unknown certainty of occurrence and/or with
unknown or no economic significance in the foreseeable future, referred
to as "additional occurrences" (SAR). Examples of unconventional
fossil fuel resources are tar sands and shale oils, geo-pressured gas,
and gas in aquifers.

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

emission policies foresee cumulative release ranging from
approximately 1,000 GtC to 2,100 GtC from fossil fuel
consumption between 2,000 and 2,100. Cumulative carbon
emissions for stabilization profiles of 450 to 750ppmv over that
same period are between 630 and 1,300GtC (see Figure TS-5).

Fossil-fuel scarcity, at least at the global level, is therefore not
a significant factor in considering climate change mitigation.
On the contrary, different from the relatively large coal and
unconventional oil and gas deposits, the carbon in conventional
oil and gas reserves or in conventional oil resources is much

8.000

Carbon Dioxide Emissions (MtC)

7.000
6.000

Middle East

5.000

Latin America
Africa

4.000

Developing countries in Asia Pacific
Economies in transition

3.000

Industrialized countries

2.000
1.000
0
1971 1974

1977 1980

1983 1986

1989 1992

1995 1998

Figure TS-4: World CO2 emissions by region, 1971-1998.

4000

Historic coal emissions
Historic gas emissions

3500

Historic oil emissions
3000

Unconventional reserves and resources
Conventional resources (upper estimate)

2500

GtC

Conventional reserves
Scenarios

2000
1500
1000
500

A1
F

I
RE
35
0
W
RE
45
0
W
RE
55
0
W
RE
65
0
W
RE
75
W
RE 0
10
00

18

W

A2

B
A1

B2

A1
T

B1

8
99

al

s

80

-1

Co

Ga

Oi

l

0

SRES scenarios

Figure TS-5: Carbon in oil, gas and coal reserves and resources compared with historic fossil fuel carbon emissions 1860-1998, and with
cumulative carbon emissions from a range of SRES scenarios and TAR stabilization scenarios up until 2100. Data for reserves and resources
are shown in the left hand columns. Unconventional oil and gas includes tar sands, shale oil, other heavy oil, coal bed methane, deep geopressured
gas, gas in acquifers, etc. Gas hydrates (clathrates) that amount to an estimated 12,000 GtC are not shown. The scenario columns show both
SRES reference scenarios as well as scenarios which lead to stabilization of CO2 concentrations at a range of levels. Note that if by 2100
cumulative emissions associated with SRES scenarios are equal to or smaller than those for stabilization scenarios, this does not imply that these
scenarios equally lead to stabilization.

315

Climate Change 2001

less than the cumulative carbon emissions associated with
stabilisation at 450ppmv or higher (Figure TS-5). In addition,
there is the potential to contribute large quantities of other
GHGs as well. At the same time it is clear from Figure TS-5
that the conventional oil and gas reserves are only a small
fraction of the total fossil fuel resource base. These resource
data may imply a change in the energy mix and the introduction
of new sources of energy during the 21st century. The choice
of energy mix and associated investment will determine whether,
and if so at what level and cost, greenhouse concentrations
can be stabilized. Currently most such investment is directed
towards discovering and developing more conventional and
unconventional fossil resources.
3.3. Sectoral Mitigation Technological Options7
The potential8 for major GHG emission reductions is estimated
for each sector for a range of costs (Table TS-1). In the
industrial sector, costs for carbon emission abatement are
estimated to range from negative (i.e., no regrets, where
reductions can be made at a profit), to around US$300/tC9. In
the buildings sector, aggressive implementation of energyefficient technologies and measures can lead to a reduction in
CO2 emissions from residential buildings in 2010 by 325MtC/yr
in developed and EIT countries at costs ranging from -US$250
to -US$150/tC and by 125MtC in developing countries at
costs of -US$250 to US$50/tC. Similarly, CO2 emissions from
commercial buildings in 2010 can be reduced by 185MtC in
developed and EIT countries at costs ranging from -US$400
to -US$250/tC avoided and by 80MtC in developing countries
at costs ranging from -US$400 to US$0/tC. In the transport
sector costs range from -US$200/tC to US$300/tC, and in
the agricultural sector from -US$100/tC to US$300/tC.
Materials management, including recycling and landfill gas
recovery, can also produce savings at negative to modest costs
under US$100/tC. In the energy supply sector a number of
fuel switching and technological substitutions are possible at
costs from -US$100 to more than US$200/tC. The realization
of this potential will be determined by the market conditions
as influenced by human and societal preferences and
government interventions.

Synthesis Report

Table TS-2 provides an overview and links with barriers and
mitigation impacts. Sectoral mitigation options are discussed
in more detail below.
3.3.1. The Main Mitigation Options in the Buildings Sector
The buildings sector contributed 31% of global energy-related
CO2 emissions in 1995, and these emissions have grown at an
annual rate of 1.8% since 1971. Building technology has continued
on an evolutionary trajectory with incremental gains during the
past five years in the energy efficiency of windows, lighting,
appliances, insulation, space heating, refrigeration, and air
conditioning. There has also been continued development of
building controls, passive solar design, integrated building design,
and the application of photovoltaic systems in buildings.
Fluorocarbon emissions from refrigeration and air conditioning
applications have declined as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) have
been phased out, primarily thanks to improved containment and
recovery of the fluorocarbon refrigerant and, to a lesser extent,
owing to the use of hydrocarbons and other non-fluorocarbon
refrigerants. Fluorocarbon use and emission from insulating foams
have declined as CFCs have been phased out, and are projected
to decline further as HCFCs are phased out. R&D effort has led
to increased efficiency of refrigerators and cooling and heating
systems. In spite of the continued improvement in technology
and the adoption of improved technology in many countries,
energy use in buildings has grown more rapidly than total energy
demand from 1971 through 1995, with commercial building
energy registering the greatest annual percentage growth (3.0%
compared to 2.2% in residential buildings). This is largely a
result of the increased amenity that consumers demand - in
terms of increased use of appliances, larger dwellings, and the
modernization and expansion of the commercial sector - as
economies grow. There presently exist significant cost-effective
technological opportunities to slow this trend. The overall
technical potential for reducing energy-related CO2 emissions
in the buildings sector using existing technologies combined
with future technical advances is 715MtC/yr in 2010 for a base
case with carbon emissions of 2,600MtC/yr (27%), 950MtC/yr
in 2020 for a base case with carbon emissions of 3,000MtC/yr
(31%), and 2,025MtC/yr in 2050 for a base case with carbon
emissions of 3,900MtC/yr (52%). Expanded R&D can assure
continued technology improvement in this sector.

7

International Energy Statistics (IEA) report sectoral data for the industrial
and transport sectors, but not for buildings and agriculture, which are
reported as "other". In this section, information on energy use and CO2
emissions for these sectors has been estimated using an allocation scheme
and based on a standard electricity conversion factor of 33%. In addition,
values for the EIT countries are from a different source (British Petroleum
statistics). Thus, the sectoral values can differ from the aggregate values
presented in section 3.2, although general trends are the same. In general,
there is uncertainty in the data for the EITs and for the commercial and
residential sub-categories of the buildings sector in all regions.
8
The potential differs in different studies assessed but the aggregate
potential reported in Sections 3 and 4 refers to the socio-economic
potential as indicated in Figure TS-7.
9
All costs in US$.

316

IPCC Third Assessment Report

3.3.2. The Main Mitigation Options in the Transport Sector
In 1995, the transport sector contributed 22% of global energyrelated carbon dioxide emissions; globally, emissions from this
sector are growing at a rapid rate of approximately 2.5% annually.
Since 1990, principal growth has been in the developing countries
(7.3% per year in the Asia-Pacific region) and is actually declining
at a rate of 5.0% per year for the EITs. Hybrid gasoline-electric
vehicles have been introduced on a commercial basis with fuel
economies 50%-100% better than those of comparably sized
four-passenger vehicles. Biofuels produced from wood, energy

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Table TS-1: Estimations of greenhouse gas emission reductions and cost per tonne of carbon equivalent avoided following
the anticipated socio- economic potential uptake by 2010 and 2020 of selected energy efficiency and supply technologies, either
globally or by region and with varying degrees of uncertainty.
US$/tC avoided
Region
Buildings/appliances
Residential sector

OECD/EIT
Dev. cos.

Commercial sector

-400 -200

0

+200 Potentiala

2010
Probabilityb Potentiala

2020
Probabilityb

References, comments,
and relevant section in
Chapter 3 of the main
report
Acosta Moreno et al., 1996;
Brown et al., 1998
Wang and Smith, 1999

OECD/EIT
Dev. cos.

Transport
Automobile efficiency
improvements

USA
Europe
Japan
Dev. cos.

Manufacturing
CO2 removal - fertilizer;
refineries
Material efficiency
improvement
Blended cements
N2O reduction by chem.
indus.
PFC reduction by Al
industry
HFC-23 reduction by
chem. industry
Energy efficient
improvements

Interlab. Working Group,
1997
Brown et al., 1998
US DOE/ EIA, 1998
ECMT, 1997 (8 countries
only)
Kashiwagi et al., 1999
Denis and Koopman, 1998
Worrell et al., 1997b

Global

Table 3.21

Global

Table 3.21

Global

Table 3.21

Global

Table 3.21

Global

Table 3.21

Global

Table 3.21

Global

Table 3.19

Agriculture
Increased uptake of
Dev. cos.
conservation tillage and
cropland management
Global

Zhou, 1998; Table 3.27
Dick et al., 1998
IPCC, 2000

Soil carbon sequestration Global

Lal and Bruce, 1999
Table 3.27

Nitrogenous fertilizer
management

Kroeze & Mosier, 1999
Table 3.27
OECD, 1999; IPCC, 2000

OECD
Global

Enteric methane reduction OECD
USA
Dev. cos.
Rice paddy irrigation and Global
fertilizers
Wastes
Landfill methane capture OECD

Kroeze & Mosier, 1999
Table 3.27
OECD, 1998
Reimer & Freund, 1999
Chipato, 1999
Riemer & Freund, 1999
IPCC, 2000
Landfill methane USEPA,
1999

317

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-1 (continued)
US$/tC avoided
Region
Energy supply
Nuclear for coal

-400 -200

0

2010

+200 Potentiala

Probabilityb Potentiala

2020
Probabilityb

Global

Totalsc - See Section 3.8.6

Annex I

Table 3.35a

Non-Annex I

Table 3.35b

Annex I

Table 3.35c

Non-Annex I

Table 3.35d

Annex I

Table 3.35a

Non-Annex I

Tables 3.35b

CO2 capture from coal

Global

Tables 3.35a + b

CO2 capture from gas

Global

Tables 3.35c + d

Biomass for coal

Global

Tables 3.35a + b
Moore, 1998; Interlab w.
gp. 1997

Biomass for gas

Global

Tables 3.35c + d

Wind for coal or gas

Global

Tables 3.35a - d
BTM Cons 1999;
Greenpeace, 1999

Co-fire coal with 10%
biomass

USA

Sulilatu, 1998

Solar for coal

Annex I

Table 3.35a

Non-Annex I

Table 3.35b

Hydro for coal

Global

Tables 3.35a + b

Hydro for gas

Global

Tables 3.35c + d

Nuclear for gas

Gas for coal

Notes:
a
Potential in terms of tonnes of carbon equivalent avoided for the cost range of US$/tC given.
= <20 MtC/yr
= 20-50 MtC/yr
= 50-100MtC/yr
= 100-200MtC/yr
b

c

Probability of realizing this level of potential based on the costs as indicated from the literature.
= Very unlikely
= Unlikely
= Possible
= Probable

= >200 MtC/yr

= Highly probable

Energy supply total mitigation options assumes that not all the potential will be realized for various reasons including competition between the
individual technologies as listed below the totals.

crops, and waste may also play an increasingly important role
in the transportation sector as enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulosic
material to ethanol becomes more cost effective. Meanwhile,
biodiesel, supported by tax exemptions, is gaining market share
in Europe. Incremental improvements in engine design have,
however, largely been used to enhance performance rather than
to improve fuel economy, which has not increased since the SAR.
Fuel cell powered vehicles are developing rapidly, and are scheduled
to be introduced to the market in 2003. Significant improvements

318

References, comments,
and relevant section in
Chapter 3 of the main
report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

in the fuel economy of aircraft appear to be both technically and
economically possible for the next generation fleet. Nevertheless,
most evaluations of the technological efficiency improvements
(Table TS-3) show that because of growth in demand for
transportation, efficiency improvement alone is not enough to
avoid GHG emission growth. Also, there is evidence that, other
things being equal, efforts to improve fuel efficiency have only
partial effects in emission reduction because of resulting increases
in driving distances caused by lower specific operational costs.

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Table TS-2: Technological options, abrriers, opportunities, and impacts on production in various sectors.
Technological options

Barriers and opportunities

Implications of mitigation policies on sectors

Buildings, households and services: Hundreds of
technologies and measures exist that can improve
the energy efficiency of appliances and equipment
as well as building structures in all regions of the
world. It is estimated that CO2 emissions from
residential buildings in 2010 can be reduced by
325MtC in developed countries and the EIT region
at costs ranging from -US$ 250 to -US$ 150/tC
and by 125MtC in developing countries at costs of
-US$ 250 to US$ 50/tC. Similarly, CO2 emissions
from commercial buildings in 2010 can be reduced
by 185MtC in industrialized countries and the EIT
region at costs ranging from -US$ 400 to -US$
250/tC and by 80MtC in developing countries at
costs ranging from -US$ 400 to US$ 0/tC. These
savings represent almost 30% of buildings, CO2
emissions in 2010 and 2020 compared to a central
scenario such as the SRES B2 Marker scenario.

Barriers: In developed countries a market structure
not conducive to efficiency improvements,
misplaced incentives, and lack of information; and
in developing countries lack of financing and
skills, lack of information, traditional customs,
and administered pricing.

Service industries: Many will gain output and
employment depending on how mitigation
policies are implemented, however in general the
increases are expected to be small and diffused.

Transportation: Transportation technology for
light-duty vehicles has advanced more rapidly
than anticipated in the SAR, as a consequence of
international R& D efforts. Hybrid-electric vehicles
have already appeared in the market and introduction
of fuel cell vehicles by 2003 has been announced by
most major manufacturers. The GHG mitigation
impacts of technological efficiency improvements
will be diminished to some extent by the rebound
effect, unless counteracted by policies that effectively
increase the price of fuel or travel. In countries
with high fuel prices, such as Europe, the rebound
effect may be as large as 40%; in countries with
low fuel prices, such as the USA, the rebound
appears to be no larger than 20%. Taking into
account rebound effects, technological measures
can reduce GHG emissions by 5%-15% by 2010
and 15%-35% by 2020, in comparison to a
baseline of continued growth.

Barriers: Risk to manufacturers of transportation
equipment is an important barrier to more rapid
adoption of energy efficient technologies in transport.
Achieving significant energy efficiency improvements
generally requires a "clean sheet" redesign of vehicles,
along with multibillion dollar investments in new
production facilities. On the other hand, the value of
greater efficiency to customers is the difference between
the present value of fuel savings and increased purchase
price, which net can often be a small quantity. Although
markets for transport vehicles are dominated by a very
small number of companies in the technical sense,
they are nonetheless highly competitive in the sense
that strategic errors can be very costly. Finally, many
of the benefits of increased energy efficiency accrue
in the form of social rather than private benefits. For
all these reasons, the risk to manufacturers of sweeping
technological change to improve energy efficiency
is generally perceived to outweigh the direct market
benefits. Enormous public and private investments
in transportation infrastructure and a built environment
adapted to motor vehicle travel pose significant barriers
to changing the modal structure of transportation
in many countries.

Transportation: Growth in transportation demand
is projected to remain, influenced by GHG
mitigation policies only in a limited way. Only
limited opportunities for replacing fossil carbon
based fuels exist in the short to medium term.
The main effect of mitigation policies will be to
improve energy efficiency in all modes of
transportation.

Households and the informal sector: The impact
of mitigation on households comes directly
Opportunities: Developing better marketing through changes in the technology and price of
approaches and skills, information- based marketing, household's use of energy and indirectly through
voluntary programmes and standards have been macroeconomic effects on income and employment.
shown to overcome barriers in developed countries. An important ancillary benefit is the improvement
Affordable credit skills, capacity building, information in indoor and outdoor air quality, particularly in
base and consumer awareness, standards, incentives developing countries and cities all over the world.
for capacity building, and deregulation of the energy
industry are ways to address the aforementioned
barriers in the developing world.

Opportunities: Information technologies are
creating new opportunities for pricing some of the
external costs of transportation, from congestion
to environmental pollution. Implementation of more
efficient pricing can provide greater incentives for
energy efficiency in both equipment and modal
structure. The factors that hinder the adoption of fuelefficient technologies in transport vehicle markets
create conditions under which energy efficiency
regulations, voluntary or mandatory, can be effective.
Well-formulated regulations eliminate much of the risk
of making sweeping technological changes, because
all competitors face the same regulations. Study after
study has demonstrated the existence of technologies
capable of reducing vehicle carbon intensities by
up to 50% or in the longer run 100%, approximately
cost-effectively. Finally, intensive R&D efforts for
light-duty road vehicles have achieved dramatic
improvements in hybrid power-train and fuel cell
technologies. Similar efforts could be directed at road
freight, air, rail, and marine transport technologies,
with potentially dramatic pay-offs.

319

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-2 (continued).

320

Technological options

Barriers and opportunities

Implications of mitigation policies on sectors

Industry: Energy efficiency improvement is the
main emission reduction option in industry.
Especially in industrialized countries much has
been done already to improve energy efficiency,
but options for further reductions remain. 300-
500MtC/yr and 700-1,100MtC/yr can be reduced
by 2010 and 2020, respectively, as compared to a
scenario like SRES B2. The larger part of these
options has net negative costs. Non-CO2 emissions
in industry are generally relatively small and can
be reduced by over 85%, most at moderate or
sometimes even negative costs.

Barriers: lack of full-cost pricing, relatively low
contribution of energy to production costs, lack of
information on part of the consumer and producer,
limited availability of capital and skilled personnel
are the key barriers to the penetration of mitigation
technology in the industrial sector in all, but most
importantly in developing countries.

Industry: Mitigation is expected to lead to structural
change in manufacturing in Annex I countries
(partly caused by changing demands in private
consumption), with those sectors supplying energysaving equipment and low-carbon technologies
benefitting and energy-intensive sectors having to
switch fuels, adopt new technologies, or increase
prices. However, rebound effects may lead to
unexpected negative results.

Land-use change and forestry: There are three
fundamental ways in which land use or management
can mitigate atmospheric CO2 increases: protection,
sequestration, and substitutiona. These options show
different temporal patterns; consequently, the
choice of options and their potential effectiveness
depend on the target time frame as well as on site
productivity and disturbance history. The SAR
estimated that globally these measures could reduce
atmospheric C by about 83 to 131GtC by 2050
(60 to 87GtC in forests and 23 to 44GtC in
agricultural soils). Studies published since then
have not substantially revised these estimates. The
costs of terrestrial management practices are quite
low compared to alternatives, and range from 0
('win-win' opportunities) to US$12/tC.

Barriers: to mitigation in land-use change and
forestry include lack of funding and of human and
institutional capacity to monitor and verify, social
constraints such as food supply, people living off the
natural forest, incentives for land clearing, population
pressure, and switch to pastures because of demand
for meat. In tropical countries, forestry activities are
often dominated by the state forest departments with
a minimal role for local communities and the private
sector. In some parts of the tropical world, particularly
Africa, low crop productivity and competing demands
on forests for crop production and fuelwood are
likely to reduce mitigation opportunities.

Agriculture and waste management: Energy
inputs are growing by <1% per year globally with
the highest increases in non-OECD countries but
they have reduced in the EITs. Several options already
exist to decrease GHG emissions for investments of
-US$ 50 to 150/tC. These include increasing
carbon stock by cropland management (125MtC/
yr by 2010); reducing CH4 emissions from better
livestock management (>30MtC/yr) and rice
production (7MtC/yr); soil carbon sequestration (50100MtC/yr) and reducing N2O emissions from
animal wastes and application of N measures are
feasible in most regions given appropriate
technology transfer and incentives for farmers to
change their traditional methods. Energy cropping
to displace fossil fuels has good prospects if the
costs can be made more competitive and the crops
are produced sustainably. Improved waste
management can decrease GHG emissions by
200MtCeq in 2010 and 320MtCeq in 2020 as
compared to 240MtCeq emissions in 1990.

Barriers: In agriculture and waste management,
these include inadequate R& D funding, lack of
intellectual property rights, lack of national human
and institutional capacity and information in the
developing countries, farm- level adoption constraints,
lack of incentives and information for growers in
developed countries to adopt new husbandry
techniques, (need other benefits, not just greenhouse
gas reduction).

Energy: forest and land management can provide
a variety of solid, liquid, or gaseous fuels that are
renewable and that can substitute for fossil fuels.

Opportunities: Expansion of credit schemes, shifts
in research priorities, development of institutional
linkages across countries, trading in soil carbon,
and integration of food, fibre, and energy products
are ways by which the barriers may be overcome.
Measures should be linked with moves towards
sustainable production methods.

Agriculture/land use: commitment of large areas
to carbon sequestration or carbon management
may compliment or conflict with other demands
for land, such as agriculture. GHG mitigation will
have an impact on agriculture through increased
demand for biofuel production in many regions.
Increasing competition for arable land may increase
prices of food and other agricultural products.

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Opportunities: legislation to address local
environmental concerns; voluntary agreements,
especially if complemented by government efforts;
and direct subsidies and tax credits are approaches
that have been successful in overcoming the above
barriers. Legislation, including standards, and better
marketing are particularly suitable approaches for
light industries.

GHG mitigation policies can have a large effect on
land use, especially through carbon sequestration
and biofuel production. In tropical countries,
large-scale adoption of mitigation activities could
lead to biodiversity conservation, rural employment
generation and watershed protection contributing
to sustainable development. To achieve this,
institutional changes to involve local communities
and industry and necessary thereby leading to a
reduced role for governments in managing forests.

Opportunities: in land use and forestry, incentives
and policies are required to realize the technical
potential. There may be in the form of government
regulations, taxes, and subsidies, or through
economic incentives in the form of market payments
for capturing and holding carbon as suggested in
the Kyoto Protocol, depending on its implementation
following decisions by CoP.

Energy cropping provides benefits of land use
diversification where suitable land is currently
under utilized for food and fibre production and
water is readily available.

Materials: products from forest and other biological
materials are used for construction, packaging,
papers, and many other uses and are often less
energy-intensive than are alternative materials that
provide the same service.

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Table TS-2 (continued).
Technological options

Barriers and opportunities

Waste management: Utilization of methane from
landfills and from coal beds. The use of landfill
gas for heat and electric power is also growing.
In several industrial countries and especially in
Europe and Japan, waste-to-energy facilities have
become more efficient with lower air pollution
emissions, paper and fibre recycling, or by utilizing
waste paper as a biofuel in waste to energy facilities.

Barriers: Little is being done to manage landfill
gas or to reduce waste in rapidly growing markets
in much of the developing world.

Energy sector: In the energy sector, options are
available both to increase conversion efficiency
and to increase the use of primary energy with less
GHGs per unit of energy produced, by sequestering
carbon, and reducing GHG leakages. Win-win
options such as coal bed methane recovery and
improved energy efficiency in coal and gas fired
power generation as well as co-production of heat
and electricity can help to reduce emissions. With
economic development continuing, efficiency
increases alone will be insufficient to control GHG
emissions from the energy sector. Options to decrease
emissions per unit energy produced include new
renewable forms of energy, which are showing strong
growth but still account for less than 1% of energy
produced worldwide. Technologies for CO2 capture
and disposal to achieve "clean fossil" energy have
been proposed and could contribute significantly at
costs competitive with renewable energy although
considerable research is still needed on the feasibility
and possible environmental impacts of such methods
to determine their application and usage. Nuclear
power and, in some areas, larger scale hydropower
could make a substantially increased contribution but
face problems of costs and acceptability. Emerging
fuel cells are expected to open opportunities for
increasing the average energy conversion efficiency
in the decades to come.

Barriers: key barriers are human and institutional
capacity, imperfect capital markets that discourage
investment in small decentralized systems, more
uncertain rates of return on investment, high trade
tariffs, lack of information, and lack of intellectual
property rights for mitigation technologies. For
renewable energy, high first costs, lack of access to
capital, and subsidies for fossil fuels and key barriers.

Implications of mitigation policies on sectors

Opportunities: countries like the US and Germany
have specific policies to either reduce methane
producing waste, and/or requirements to utulize
methane from landfills as an energy source. Costs
of recovery are negative for half of landfill methane.
Coal: Coal production, use, and employment are
likely to fall as a result of greenhouse gas mitigation
policies, compared with projections of energy supply
without additional climate policies. However, the costs
of adjustment will be much lower if policies for new
coal production also encourage clean coal technology.

Oil: Global mitigation policies are likely to lead to
reductions in oil production and trade, with energy
Opportunities for developing countries include exporters likely to face reductions in real incomes as
promotion of leapfrogs in energy supply and demand compared to a situation without such policies. The
technology, facilitating technology transfer through effect on the global oil price of achieving the Kyoto
creating an enabling environment, capacity building, targets, however, may be less severe than many of the
and appropriate mechanisms for transfer of clean and models predict, because of the options to include nonefficient energy technologies. Full cost pricing and CO2 gases and the flexible mechanisms in achieving
information systems provide opportunities in the target, which are often not included in the models.
developed countries. Ancillary benefits associated with
improved technology, and with reduced production Gas: Over the next 20 years mitigation may influence
and use of fossil fuels, can be substantial.
the use of natural gas may positively or negatively,
depending on regional and local conditions. In the
Annex I countries any switch that takes place from
coal or oil would be towards natural gas and renewable
sources for power generation. In the case of the nonAnnex 1 countries, the potential for switching to
natural gas is much higher, however energy security
and the availability of domestic resources are
considerations, particularly for countries such as
China and India with large coal reserves.
Renewables: Renewable sources are very diverse
and the mitigation impact would depend on
technological development. It would vary from
region to region depending on resource endowment.
However, mitigation is very likely to lead to larger
markets for the renewables industry. In that situation,
R&D for cost reduction and enhanced performance
and increased flow of funds to renewables could
increase their application leading to cost reduction.
Nuclear: There is substantial technical potential for
nuclear power development to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions; whether this is realized will depend on
relative costs, political factors, and public acceptance.

Halocarbons: Emissions of HFCs are growing as
HFCs are being used to replace some of the ozonedepleting substances being phased out. Compared
to SRES projections for HFCs in 2010, it is estimated
that emissions could be lower by as much as
100MtCeq at costs below US$ 200/tCeq. About half
of the estimated reduction is an artifact caused by
the SRES baseline values being higher than the
study baseline for this report. The remainder could
be accomplished by reducing emissions through
containment, recovering and recycling refrigerants,
and through use of alternative fluids and technologies.

Barriers: uncertainty with respect to the future
of HFC policy in relation to global warming and
ozone depletion.
Opportunities: capturing new technological
developments.

321

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-2 (continued).
Technological options

Barriers and opportunities

Geo-engineering: Regarding mitigation opportunities
in marine ecosystems and geo-engineeringb, human
understanding of biophysical systems, as well as
many ethical, legal, and equity assessments are still
rudimentary.

Barriers: In geo-engineering, the risks for unanticipated Sector not yet in existence: not applicable.
consequences are large and it may not even be
possible to engineer the regional distribution of
temperature and precipitation.

Implications of mitigation policies on sectors

Opportunities: Some basic inquiry appears
appropriate.
a

'Protection' refers to active measures that maintain and preserve existing C reserves, including those in vegetation, soil organic matter, and products exported
from the ecosystem (e. g., preventing the conversion of tropical forests for agricultural purposes and avoiding drainage of wetlands). 'Sequestration' refers
to measures, deliberately undertaken, that increase C stocks above those already present (e. g., afforestation, revised forest management, enhanced C
storage in wood products, and altered cropping systems, including more forage crops, reduced tillage). "Substitution" refers to practices that substitute
renewable biological products for fossil fuels or energy-intensive products, thereby avoiding the emission of CO2 from combustion of fossil fuels.
b
Geo-engineering involves efforts to stabilize the climate system by directly managing the energy balance of the earth, thereby overcoming the enhanced
greenhouse effect.

Table TS-3: Projected energy intensities for transportation from 5-Laboratory Study in the USA.a
2010
Determinants

1997

BAU

Energy
efficiency

HE/LC

New passenger car l/100km
New light truck l/100km
Light-duty fleet l/100kmb
Aircraft efficiency (seat-l/100km)
Freight truck fleet l/100km
Rail efficiency (tonne-km/MJ)

08.6
11.5
12.0
04.5
42.0
04.2

08.5
11.4
12.1
04.0
39.2
04.6

06.3
08.7
10.9
03.8
34.6
05.5

05.5
07.6
10.1
03.6
33.6
06.2

a
b

BAU, Business as usual; HE/LC, high-energy/low-carbon.
Includes existing passenger cars and light trucks.

3.3.3. The Main Mitigation Options in the Industry Sector
Industrial emissions account for 43% of carbon released in
1995. Industrial sector carbon emissions grew at a rate of 1.5%
per year between 1971 and 1995, slowing to 0.4% per year
since 1990. Industries continue to find more energy efficient
processes and reductions of process-related GHGs. This is
the only sector that has shown an annual decrease in carbon
emissions in OECD economies (-0.8%/yr between 1990 and
1995). The CO2 from EITs declined most strongly (-6.4% per
year between 1990 and 1995 when total industrial production
dropped).
Differences in the energy efficiency of industrial processes
between different developed countries, and between developed
and developing countries remain large, which means that there
are substantial differences in relative emission reduction
potentials between countries.
Improvement of the energy efficiency of industrial processes
is the most significant option for lowering GHG emissions.
This potential is made up of hundreds of sector-specific

322

IPCC Third Assessment Report

technologies. The worldwide potential for energy efficiency
improvement - compared to a baseline development - for the
year 2010 is estimated to be 300-500MtC and for the year
2020 700-900MtC. In the latter case continued technological
development is necessary to realize the potential. The majority
of energy efficiency improvement options can be realized at
net negative costs.
Another important option is material efficiency improvement
(including recycling, more efficient product design, and
material substitution); this may represent a potential of 600MtC
in the year 2020. Additional opportunities for CO2 emissions
reduction exist through fuel switching, CO2 removal and
storage, and the application of blended cements.
A number of specific processes not only emit CO2, but also
non-CO2 GHGs. The adipic acid manufacturers have strongly
reduced their N2O emissions, and the aluminium industry has
made major gains in reducing the release of PFCs (CF4, C2F6).
Further reduction of non-CO2 GHGs from manufacturing
industry to low levels is often possible at relatively low costs
per tonne of C-equivalent (tCeq) mitigated.

Mitigation

Sufficient technological options are known today to reduce
GHG emissions from industry in absolute terms in most
developed countries by 2010, and to limit growth of emissions
in this sector in developing countries significantly.
3.3.4. The Main Mitigation Options in the Agricultural Sector
Agriculture contributes only about 4% of global carbon
emissions from energy use, but over 20% of anthropogenic
GHG emissions (in terms of MtCeq/yr) mainly from CH4 and
N2O as well as carbon from land clearing. There have been
modest gains in energy efficiency for the agricultural sector
since the SAR, and biotechnology developments related to
plant and animal production could result in additional gains,
provided concerns about adverse environmental effects can
be adequately addressed. A shift from meat towards plant
production for human food purposes, where feasible, could
increase energy efficiency and decrease GHG emissions
(especially N 2O and CH 4 from the agricultural sector).
Significant abatement of GHG emissions can be achieved by
2010 through changes in agricultural practices, such as:
* soil carbon uptake enhanced by conservation tillage and
reduction of land use intensity;
* CH4 reduction by rice paddy irrigation management, improved
fertilizer use, and lower enteric CH4 emissions from ruminant
animals;
* avoiding anthropogenic agricultural N2O emissions (which
for agriculture exceeds carbon emission from fossil fuel use)
through the use of slow release fertilizers, organic manure,
nitrification inhibitors, and potentially genetically-engineered
leguminous plants. N2O emissions are greatest in China and
the USA, mainly from fertilizer use on rice paddy soils and
other agricultural soils. More significant contributions can
be made by 2020 when more options to control N2O emissions
from fertilized soils are expected to become available.
Uncertainties on the intensity of use of these technologies by
farmers are high, since they may have additional costs involved
in their uptake. Economic and other barriers may have to be
removed through targetted policies.
3.3.5. The Main Mitigation Options in the Waste
Management Sector
There has been increased utilization of CH4 from landfills and
from coal beds. The use of landfill gas for heat and electric power
is also growing because of policy mandates in countries like
Germany, Switzerland, the EU, and USA. Recovery costs are
negative for half of landfill CH4. Requiring product life management
in Germany has been extended from packaging to vehicles
and electronics goods. If everyone in the USA increased per
capita recycling rates from the national average to the per capita
recycling rate achieved in Seattle, Washington, the result would
be a reduction of 4% of total US GHG emissions. Debate is
taking place over whether the greater reduction in lifecycle

WGIII Technical Summary

GHG emissions occurs through paper and fibre recycling or
by utilizing waste paper as a biofuel in waste-to-energy
facilities. Both options are better than landfilling in terms of
GHG emissions. In several developed countries, and especially
in Europe and Japan, waste-to-energy facilities have become
more efficient with lower air pollution emissions.
3.3.6. The Main Mitigation Options in the Energy
Supply Sector
Fossil fuels continue to dominate heat and electric power
production. Electricity generation accounts for 2,100MtC/yr
or 37.5% of global carbon emissions10. Baseline scenarios
without carbon emission policies anticipate emissions of 3,500
and 4,000MtCeq for 2010 and 2020, respectively. In the power
sector, low-cost combined cycle gas turbines (CCGTs) with
conversion efficiencies approaching 60% for the latest model
have become the dominant option for new electric power plants
wherever adequate natural gas supply and infrastructure are
available. Advanced coal technologies based on integrated
gasification combined cycle or supercritical (IGCCS) designs
potentially have the capability of reducing emissions at modest
cost through higher efficiencies. Deregulation of the electric
power sector is currently a major driver of technological
choice. Utilization of distributed industrial and commercial
combined heat and power (CHP) systems to meet space heating
and manufacturing needs could achieve substantial emission
reductions. The further implications of the restructuring of
the electric utility industry in many developed and developing
countries for CO2 emissions are uncertain at this time, although
there is a growing interest in distributed power supply systems
based on renewable energy sources and also using fuel cells,
micro-turbines and Stirling engines.
The nuclear power industry has managed to increase
significantly the capacity factor at existing facilities, which
improved their economics sufficiently that extension of facility
life has become cost effective. But other than in Asia, relatively
few new plants are being proposed or built. Efforts to develop
intrinsically safe and less expensive nuclear reactors are
proceeding with the goal of lowering socio-economic barriers
and reducing public concern about safety, nuclear waste
storage, and proliferation. Except for a few large projects in
India and China, construction of new hydropower projects
has also slowed because of few available major sites,
sometimes-high costs, and local environmental and social
concerns. Another development is the rapid growth of wind
turbines, whose annual growth rate has exceeded 25% per year,
and by 2000 exceeded 13GW of installed capacity. Other
renewables, including solar and biomass, continue to grow as
costs decline, but total contributions from non-hydro renewable

10

Note that the section percentages do not add up to 100% as these emissions
have been allocated to the four sectors in the paragraphs above.

323

Climate Change 2001

sources remain below 2% globally. Fuel cells have the potential
to provide highly efficient combined sources of electricity and
heat as power densities increase and costs continue to drop.
By 2010, co-firing of coal with biomass, gasification of fuel
wood, more efficient photovoltaics, off-shore wind farms, and
ethanol-based biofuels are some of the technologies that are
capable of penetrating the market. Their market share is
expected to increase by 2020 as the learning curve reduces
costs and capital stock of existing generation plants is replaced.
Physical removal and storage of CO2 is potentially a more viable
option than at the time of the SAR. The use of coal or biomass
as a source of hydrogen with storage of the waste CO2 represents
a possible step to the hydrogen economy. CO2 has been stored
in an aquifer, and the integrity of storage is being monitored.
However, long-term storage is still in the process of being
demonstrated for that particular reservoir. Research is also needed
to determine any adverse and/or beneficial environmental impacts
and public health risks of uncontrolled release of the various
storage options. Pilot CO2 capture and storage facilities are
expected to be operational by 2010, and may be capable of
making major contributions to mitigation by 2020. Along with
biological sequestration, physical removal and storage might
complement current efforts at improving efficiency, fuel
switching, and the development of renewables, but must be
able to compete economically with them.
The report considers the potential for mitigation technologies
in this sector to reduce CO2 emissions to 2020 from new power
plants. CCGTs are expected to be the largest provider of new
capacity between now and 2020 worldwide, and will be a strong
competitor to displace new coal-fired power stations where
additional gas supplies can be made available. Nuclear power
has the potential to reduce emissions if it becomes politically
acceptable, as it can replace both coal and gas for electricity
production. Biomass, based mainly on wastes and agricultural
and forestry by-products, and wind power are also potentially
capable of making major contributions by 2020. Hydropower
is an established technology and further opportunities exist beyond
those anticipated to contribute to reducing CO2 equivalent
emissions. Finally, while costs of solar power are expected to decline
substantially, it is likely to remain an expensive option by 2020
for central power generation, but it is likely to make increased
contributions in niche markets and off-grid generation. The best
mitigation option is likely to be dependent on local circumstances,
and a combination of these technologies has the potential to
reduce CO2 emissions by 350-700MtC by 2020 compared to
projected emissions of around 4,00MtC from this sector.
3.3.7. The Main Mitigation Options for Hydrofluorocarbons and Perfluorocarbons
HFC and, to a lesser extent, PFC use has grown as these
chemicals replaced about 8% of the projected use of CFCs by
weight in 1997; in the developed countries the production of

324

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

CFCs and other ozone depleting substances (ODSs) was halted
in 1996 to comply with the Montreal Protocol to protect the
stratospheric ozone layer. HCFCs have replaced an additional
12% of CFCs. The remaining 80% have been eliminated
through controlling emissions, specific use reductions, or
alternative technologies and fluids including ammonia,
hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide and water, and not-in-kind
technologies. The alternative chosen to replace CFCs and other
ODSs varies widely among the applications, which include
refrigeration, mobile and stationary air-conditioning, heat
pumps, medical and other aerosol delivery systems, fire
suppression, and solvents. Simultaneously considering energy
efficiency with ozone layer protection is important, especially
in the context of developing countries, where markets have
just begun to develop and are expected to grow at a fast rate.
Based on current trends and assuming no new uses outside
the ODS substitution area, HFC production is projected to be
370 kt or 170MtCeq/yr by 2010, while PFC production is expected
to be less than 12MtCeq/yr. For the year 2010, annual emissions
are more difficult to estimate. The largest emissions are likely
to be associated with mobile air conditioning followed by
commercial refrigeration and stationary air conditioning. HFC
use in foam blowing is currently low, but if HFCs replaces a
substantial part of the HCFCs used here, their use is projected
to reach 30MtCeq/yr by 2010, with emissions in the order of
5-10MtCeq/yr.
3.4. The Technological and Economic Potential of
Greenhouse Gas Mitigation: Synthesis
Global emissions of GHGs grew on average by 1.4% per year
during the period 1990 to 1998. In many areas, technical
progress relevant to GHG emission reduction since the SAR
has been significant and faster than anticipated. The total
potential for worldwide GHG emissions reductions resulting
from technological developments and their adoption amount
to 1,900 to 2,600MtC/yr by 2010, and 3,600 to 5,050MtC/yr
by 2020. The evidence on which this conclusion is based is
extensive, but has several limitations. No comprehensive
worldwide study of technological potential has yet been done,
and the existing regional and national studies generally have
varying scopes and make different assumptions about key
parameters. Therefore, the estimates as presented in Table TS-1
should be considered to be indicative only. Nevertheless, the
main conclusion in the paragraph above can be drawn with
high confidence.
Costs of options vary by technology and show regional
differences. Half of the potential emissions reductions may be
achieved by 2020 with direct benefits (energy saved) exceeding
direct costs (net capital, operating, and maintenance costs),
and the other half at a net direct cost of up to US$100/tCeq (at
1998 prices). These cost estimates are derived using discount
rates in the range of 5% to 12%, consistent with public sector

Mitigation

discount rates. Private internal rates of return vary greatly,
and are often significantly higher, which affects the rate of
adoption of these technologies by private entities. Depending
on the emissions scenario this could allow global emissions
to be reduced below 2000 levels in 2010-2020 at these net
direct costs. Realizing these reductions will involve additional
implementation costs, which in some cases may be substantial,
and will possibly need supporting policies (such as those
described in Section 6), increased research and development,
effective technology transfer, and other barriers to be overcome
(Section 5 for details).
Hundreds of technologies and practices exist to reduce GHG
emissions from the buildings, transport, and industry sectors.
These energy efficiency options are responsible for more than
half of the total emission reduction potential of these sectors.
Efficiency improvements in material use (including recycling)
will also become more important in the longer term. The energy
supply and conversion sector will remain dominated by cheap
and abundant fossil fuels. However, there is significant
emission reduction potential thanks to a shift from coal to
natural gas, conversion efficiency improvement of power
plants, the expansion of distributed co-generation plants in
industry, commercial buildings and institutions, and CO2
recovery and sequestration. The continued use of nuclear
power plants (including their lifetime extension), and the
application of renewable energy sources could avoid some
additional emissions from fossil fuel use. Biomass from byproducts and wastes such as landfill gas are potentially
important energy sources that can be supplemented by energy
crop production where suitable land and water are available.
Wind energy and hydropower will also contribute, more so
than solar energy because of its relatively high costs. N2O and
fluorinated GHG reductions have already been achieved
through major technological advances. Process changes,
improved containment and recovery, and the use of alternative
compounds and technologies have been implemented.
Potential for future reductions exists, including process-related
emissions from insulated foam and semiconductor production
and by-product emissions from aluminium and HCFC-22. The
potential for energy efficiency improvements connected to the
use of fluorinated gases is of a similar magnitude to reductions
of direct emissions. Soil carbon sequestration, enteric CH4
control, and conservation tillage can all contribute to mitigating
GHG emissions from agriculture.
Appropriate policies are required to realize these potentials.
Furthermore, on-going research and development is expected
to significantly widen the portfolio of technologies that provide
emission reduction options. Maintaining these R&D activities
together with technology transfer actions will be necessary if
the longer term potential as outlined in Table TS-1 is to be
realized. Balancing mitigation activities in the various sectors
with other goals, such as those related to DES, is key to ensuring
they are effective.

WGIII Technical Summary

4. Technological and Economic Potential of
Options to Enhance, Maintain and Manage
Biological Carbon Reservoirs and Geoengineering
4.1. Mitigation through Terrestrial Ecosystem and
Land Management
Forests, agricultural lands, and other terrestrial ecosystems offer
significant, if often temporary, mitigation potential. Conservation
and sequestration allow time for other options to be further
developed and implemented. The IPCC SAR estimated that
about 60 to 87GtC could be conserved or sequestered in forests
by the year 2050 and another 23 to 44GtC could be sequestered
in agricultural soils. The current assessment of the potential
of biological mitigation options is in the order of 100GtC
(cumulative) by 2050, equivalent to about 10% to 20% of
projected fossil fuel emissions during that period. In this section,
biological mitigation measures in terrestrial ecosystems are
assessed, focusing on the mitigation potential, ecological and
environmental constraints, economics, and social considerations.
Also, briefly, the so-called geo-engineering options are discussed.
Increased carbon pools through the management of terrestrial
ecosystems can only partially offset fossil fuel emissions. Moreover,
larger C stocks may pose a risk for higher CO2 emissions in the
future, if the C-conserving practices are discontinued. For
example, abandoning fire control in forests, or reverting to intensive
tillage in agriculture may result in a rapid loss of at least part
of the C accumulated during previous years. However, using
biomass as a fuel or wood to displace more energy-intensive
materials can provide permanent carbon mitigation benefits.
It is useful to evaluate terrestrial sequestration opportunities
alongside emission reduction strategies, as both approaches
will likely be required to control atmospheric CO2 levels.
Carbon reservoirs in most ecosystems eventually approach some
maximum level. The total amount of carbon stored and/or
carbon emission avoided by a forest management project at
any given time is dependent on the specific management
practices (see Figure TS-6). Thus, an ecosystem depleted of
carbon by past events may have a high potential rate of carbon
accumulation, while one with a large carbon pool tends to
have a low rate of carbon sequestration. As ecosystems eventually
approach their maximum carbon pool, the sink (i.e., the rate
of change of the pool) will diminish. Although both the
sequestration rate and pool of carbon may be relatively high
at some stages, they cannot be maximized simultaneously.
Thus, management strategies for an ecosystem may depend
on whether the goal is to enhance short-term accumulation or
to maintain the carbon reservoirs through time. The ecologically
achievable balance between the two goals is constrained by
disturbance history, site productivity, and target time frame.
For example, options to maximize sequestration by 2010 may
not maximize sequestration by 2020 or 2050; in some cases,

325

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

225

Displaced fossil fuels

200

Cumulative carbon (tC/ha)

Energy for products
175
Landfill

150
125

Short-lived products

100

Long-lived products

75

Trees

50

Litter

25
Soil
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Time (years)
Figure TS-6: Carbon balance from a hypothetical forest management project.
Note: The figure shows cumulative carbon-stock changes for a scenario involving afforestation and harvest for a mix of traditional forest
products with some of the harvest being used as a fuel. Values are illustrative of what might be observed in the southeastern USA or Central
Europe. Regrowth restores carbon to the forest and the (hypothetical) forest stand is harvested every 40 years, with some litter left on the
ground to decay, and products accumulate or are disposed of in landfills. These are net changes in that, for example, the diagram shows
savings in fossil fuel emissions with respect to an alternative scenario that uses fossil fuels and alternative, more energy-intensive products
to provide the same services.

maximizing sequestration by 2010 may lead to lower carbon
storage over time.
The effectiveness of C mitigation strategies, and the security
of expanded C pools, will be affected by future global changes,
but the impacts of these changes will vary by geographical
region, ecosystem type, and local abilities to adapt. For
example, increases in atmospheric CO2, changes in climate,
modified nutrient cycles, and altered (either natural or human
induced disturbance) regimes can each have negative or
positive effects on C pools in terrestrial ecosystems.
In the past, land management has often resulted in reduced C
pools, but in many regions like Western Europe, C pools have
now stabilized and are recovering. In most countries in temperate
and boreal regions forests are expanding, although current C pools
are still smaller than those in pre-industrial or pre-historic times.
While complete recovery of pre-historic C pools is unlikely, there
is potential for substantial increases in carbon stocks. The Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the UN Economic
Commission for Europe (ECE)'s statistics suggest that the average
net annual increment exceeded timber fellings in managed boreal
and temperate forests in the early 1990s. For example, C stocks
in live tree biomass have increased by 0.17GtC/yr in the USA
and 0.11GtC/yr in Western Europe, absorbing about 10% of
global fossil CO2 emissions for that time period. Though these
estimates do not include changes in litter and soils, they
illustrate that land surfaces play a significant and changing role
in the atmospheric carbon budget. Enhancing these carbon pools
provides potentially powerful opportunities for climate mitigation.

326

IPCC Third Assessment Report

In some tropical countries, however, the average net loss of
forest carbon stocks continues, though rates of deforestation
may have declined slightly in the past decade. In agricultural
lands, options are now available to recover partially the C lost
during the conversion from forest or grasslands.
4.2. Social and Economic Considerations
Land is a precious and limited resource used for many purposes
in every country. The relationship of climate mitigation
strategies with other land uses may be competitive, neutral, or
symbiotic. An analysis of the literature suggests that C
mitigation strategies can be pursued as one element of more
comprehensive strategies aimed at sustainable development,
where increasing C stocks is but one of many objectives. Often,
measures can be adopted within forestry, agriculture, and other
land uses to provide C mitigation and, at the same time, also
advance other social, economic, and environmental goals.
Carbon mitigation can provide additional value and income
to land management and rural development. Local solutions
and targets can be adapted to priorities of sustainable
development at national, regional, and global levels.
A key to making C mitigation activities effective and sustainable
is to balance it with other ecological and/or environmental,
economic, and social goals of land use. Many biological mitigation
strategies may be neutral or favourable for all three goals and
become accepted as "no regrets" or "win-win" solutions. In
other cases, compromises may be needed. Important potential
environmental impacts include effects on biodiversity, effects

Mitigation

on amount and quality of water resources (particularly where
they are already scarce), and long-term impacts on ecosystem
productivity. Cumulative environmental, economic, and social
impacts could be assessed in individual projects and also from
broader, national and international perspectives. An important
issue is "leakage" - an expanded or conserved C pool in one area
leading to increased emissions elsewhere. Social acceptance
at the local, national, and global levels may also influence how
effectively mitigation policies are implemented.
4.3. Mitigation Options
In tropical regions there are large opportunities for C mitigation,
though they cannot be considered in isolation of broader policies
in forestry, agriculture, and other sectors. Additionally, options vary
by social and economic conditions: in some regions slowing or
halting deforestation is the major mitigation opportunity; in other
regions, where deforestation rates have declined to marginal
levels, improved natural forest management practices,
afforestation, and reforestation of degraded forests and
wastelands are the most attractive opportunities. However, the
current mitigative capacity11 is often weak and sufficient land
and water is not always available.
Non-tropical countries also have opportunities to preserve
existing C pools, enhance C pools, or use biomass to offset
fossil fuel use. Examples of strategies include fire or insect
control, forest conservation, establishing fast-growing stands,
changing silvicultural practices, planting trees in urban areas,
ameliorating waste management practices, managing agricultural
lands to store more C in soils, improving management of grazing
lands, and re-planting grasses or trees on cultivated lands.
Wood and other biological products play several important
roles in carbon mitigation: they act as a carbon reservoir; they
can replace construction materials that require more fossil fuel
input; and they can be burned in place of fossil fuels for
renewable energy. Wood products already contribute somewhat
to climate mitigation, but if infrastructures and incentives can
be developed, wood and agricultural products may become a
vital element of a sustainable economy: they are among the
few renewable resources available on a large scale.

WGIII Technical Summary

*
*
*
*
*

compatibility with other land-use objectives;
leakage and additionality issues;
economic costs;
environmental impacts other than climate mitigation;
social, cultural, and cross-cutting issues, as well as issues
of equity; and
* the system-wide effects on C flows in the energy and
materials sector.
Activities undertaken for other reasons may enhance mitigation.
An obvious example is reduced rates of tropical deforestation.
Furthermore, because wealthy countries generally have a stable
forest estate, it could be argued that economic development
is associated with activities that build up forest carbon
reservoirs.
4.5. Economic Costs
Most studies suggest that the economic costs of some
biological carbon mitigation options, particularly forestry
options, are quite modest through a range. Cost estimates of
biological mitigation reported to date vary significantly from
US$0.1/tC to about US$20/tC in several tropical countries
and from US$20 to US$100/tC in non-tropical countries.
Moreover the cost calculations do not cover, in many instances,
inter alia, costs for infrastructure, appropriate discounting,
monitoring, data collection and interpretation, and opportunity
costs of land and maintenance, or other recurring costs, which
are often excluded or overlooked. The lower end of the ranges
are biased downwards, but understanding and treatment of
costs is improving over time. Furthermore, in many cases
biological mitigation activities may have other positive
impacts, such as protecting tropical forests or creating new
forests with positive external environmental effects. However,
costs rise as more biological mitigation options are exercised
and as the opportunity costs of the land increases. Biological
mitigation costs appear to be lowest in developing countries
and higher in developed countries. If biological mitigation
activities are modest, leakage is likely to be small. However,
the amount of leakage could rise if biological mitigation
activities became large and widespread.
4.6. Marine Ecosystem and Geo-engineering

4.4. Criteria for Biological Carbon Mitigation Options
To develop strategies that mitigate atmospheric CO2 and advance
other, equally important objectives, the following criteria merit
consideration:
* potential contributions to C pools over time;
* sustainability, security, resilience, permanence, and robustness
of the C pool maintained or created;

11

Mitigative capacity: the social, political, and economic structures and
conditions that are required for effective mitigation.

Marine ecosystems may also offer possibilities for removing
CO2 from the atmosphere. The standing stock of C in the
marine biosphere is very small, however, and efforts could
focus, not on increasing biological C stocks, but on using
biospheric processes to remove C from the atmosphere and
transport it to the deep ocean. Some initial experiments have
been performed, but fundamental questions remain about the
permanence and stability of C removals, and about unintended
consequences of the large-scale manipulations required to have
a significant impact on the atmosphere. In addition, the
economics of such approaches have not yet been determined.

327

Climate Change 2001

Geo-engineering involves efforts to stabilize the climate system
by directly managing the energy balance of the earth, thereby
overcoming the enhanced greenhouse effect. Although there
appear to be possibilities for engineering the terrestrial energy
balance, human understanding of the system is still rudimentary.
The prospects of unanticipated consequences are large, and it
may not even be possible to engineer the regional distribution
of temperature, precipitation, etc. Geo-engineering raises
scientific and technical questions as well as many ethical, legal,
and equity issues. And yet, some basic inquiry does seem
appropriate.
In practice, by the year 2010 mitigation in land use, land-use
change, and forestry activities can lead to significant mitigation
of CO2 emissions. Many of these activities are compatible with,
or complement, other objectives in managing land. The overall
effects of altering marine ecosystems to act as carbon sinks or
of applying geo-engineering technology in climate change
mitigation remain unresolved and are not, therefore, ready for
near-term application.

5. Barriers, Opportunities, and Market
Potential of Technologies and Practices

Synthesis Report

Of course, elimination of all these market and institutional barriers
would not produce technology diffusion at the level of the
"technical potential". The remaining barriers, which define the
gap between economic potential and technical potential, are
usefully placed in two groups separated by a socio-economic
potential. The first group consists of barriers derived from people's
preferences and other social and cultural barriers to the diffusion
of new technology. That is, even if market and institutional barriers
are removed, some GHG-mitigating technologies may not be
widely used simply because people do not like them, are too
poor to afford them, or because existing social and cultural forces
operate against their acceptance. If, in addition to overcoming
market and institutional barriers, this second group of barriers
could be overcome, what is labelled as the "socio-economic
potential" would be achieved. Thus, the socio-economic potential
represents the level of GHG mitigation that would be approached
by overcoming social and cultural obstacles to the use of
technologies that are cost-effective.
Finally, even if all market, institutional, social, and cultural barriers
were removed, some technologies might not be widely used
simply because they are too expensive. Elimination of this
requirement would therefore take us up to the level of "technological
potential", the maximum technologically feasible extent of
GHG mitigation through technology diffusion.

5.1. Introduction
The transfer of technologies and practices that have the
potential to reduce GHG emissions is often hampered by barriers12
that slow their penetration. The opportunity13 to mitigate GHG
concentrations by removing or modifying barriers to or otherwise
accelerating the spread of technology may be viewed within a
framework of different potentials for GHG mitigation (Figure
TS-7). Starting at the bottom, one can imagine addressing
barriers (often referred to as market failures) that relate to
markets, public policies, and other institutions that inhibit the
diffusion of technologies that are (or are projected to be) costeffective for users without reference to any GHG benefits they
may generate. Amelioration of this class of "market and
institutional imperfections" would increase GHG mitigation
towards the level that is labelled as the "economic potential".
The economic potential represents the level of GHG mitigation
that could be achieved if all technologies that are cost-effective
from the consumers' point of view were implemented. Because
economic potential is evaluated from the consumer's point of
view, we would evaluate cost-effectiveness using market prices
and the private rate of time discounting, and also take into
account consumers' preferences regarding the acceptability
of the technologies' performance characteristics.

12

A barrier is any obstacle to reaching a potential that can be overcome
by a policy, programme, or measure.
13
An opportunity is a situation or circumstance to decrease the gap
between the market potential of a technology or practice and the
economic, socio-economic, or technological potential.

328

IPCC Third Assessment Report

An issue arises as to how to treat the relative environmental costs
of different technologies within this framework. Because the
purpose of the exercise is ultimately to identify opportunities
for global climate change policies, the technology potentials
are defined without regard to GHG impacts. Costs and benefits
associated with other environmental impacts would be part of
the cost-effectiveness calculation underlying economic potential
only insofar as existing environmental regulations or policies
internalize these effects and thereby impose them on consumers.
Broader impacts might be ignored by consumers, and hence
not enter into the determination of economic potential, but
they would be incorporated into a social cost-effectiveness
calculation. Thus, to the extent that other environmental benefits
make certain technologies socially cost-effective, even if they
are not cost-effective from a consumer's point of view, the GHG
benefits of diffusion of such technologies would be incorporated
in the socio-economic potential.
5.2. Sources of Barriers and Opportunities
Technological and social innovation is a complex process of
research, experimentation, learning, and development that can
contribute to GHG mitigation. Several theories and models have
been developed to understand its features, drivers, and implications.
New knowledge and human capital may result from R&D
spending, through learning by doing, and/or in an evolutionary
process. Most innovations require some social or behavioural
change on the part of users. Rapidly changing economies, as well
as social and institutional structures offer opportunities for locking

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Mitigation potential

Examples of
barriers

Physical potential
(theoretical upper-bound, may
shift over time)

Technological potential
(approached by implementing
technology that has already been
demonstrated)

Examples of actions to
overcome barriers

Research,
development,
demonstration of
new technologies
Limited availability of
and knowledge about
new technologies

Network creation
Community
involvement in
policy-making
Alternative
lifestyles
Education
Policy initiatives
Institutional
reform
Subsidy reform
Micro-credit
Rural
electrification
Co-operative
agreements
New measures
(taxes, incentives)
Multi- and
bi-lateral projects

Achieved

Market potential
(actual use of environmentally sound
technologies and practices)

Time
Figure TS-7: Penetration of environmentally sound technologies: a conceptual framework.

in to GHG-mitigative technologies that may lead countries on to
sustainable development pathways. The pathways will be influenced
by the particular socio-economic context that reflects prices,
financing, international trade, market structure, institutions,
the provision of information, and social, cultural, and
behavioural factors; key elements of these are described below.

Unstable macroeconomic conditions increase risk to private
investment and finance. Unsound government borrowing and
fiscal policy lead to chronic public deficits and low liquidity in
the private sector. Governments may also create perverse microeconomic incentives that the encourage rent-seeking and corruption,
rather than the efficient use of resources. Trade barriers that

329

Climate Change 2001

favour inefficient technologies, or prevent access to foreign
technology, slow technology diffusion. Tied aid still dominates
in official development assistance. It distorts the efficiency of
technology choice, and may crowd-out viable business models.
Commercial financing institutions face high risks with developing
"green" financial products. Environmentally sound technologies
with relatively small project sizes and long repayment periods
deter banks with their high transaction costs. Small collateral
value makes it difficult to use financing instruments, such as
project finance. Innovative approaches in the private sector
to address these issues include leasing, environmental and
ethical banks, micro-credits or small grants facilities targetted
at low income households, environmental funds, energy service
companies (ESCOs), and green venture capital. The insurance
industry has already begun to react to risks of climate change.
New green financial institutions, such as forestry investment
funds, have tapped market opportunities by working towards
capturing values of standing forests.
Distorted or incomplete prices are also important barriers.
The absence of a market price for certain impacts (externalities),
such as environmental harm, constitutes a barrier to the
diffusion of environmentally beneficial technologies.
Distortion of prices because of taxes, subsidies, or other policy
interventions that make resource consumption more or less
expensive to consumers also impedes the diffusion of resourceconserving technologies.
Network externalities can generate barriers. Some technologies
operate in such a way that a given user's equipment interacts
with the equipment of other users so as to create "network
externalities". For example, the attractiveness of vehicles using
alternative fuels depends on the availability of convenient
refuelling sites. On the other hand, the development of a fuel
distribution infrastructure depends on there being a demand
for alternative fuel vehicles.
Misplaced incentives result between landlords and tenants
when the tenant is responsible for the monthly cost of fuel
and/or electricity, and the landlord is prone to provide the
cheapest-first-cost equipment without regard to its monthly
energy use. Similar problems are encountered when vehicles
are purchased by companies for the use of their employees.
Vested interests: A major barrier to the diffusion of technical
progress lies in the vested interests who specialize in conventional
technologies and who may, therefore, be tempted to collude and
exert political pressure on governments to impose administrative
procedures, taxes, trade barriers, and regulations in order to
delay or even prevent the arrival of new innovations that might
destroy their rents.
Lack of effective regulatory agencies impedes the introduction
of environmentally sound technologies. Many countries have

330

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

excellent constitutional and legal provisions for environmental
protection but the latter are not enforced. However, "informal
regulation" under community pressure from, for example, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), trade unions,
neighbourhood organizations, etc. may substitute for formal
regulatory pressure.
Information is often considered as a public good. Generic
information regarding the availability of different kinds of
technologies and their performance characteristics may have the
attributes of a "public good" and hence may be underprovided
by the private market. This problem is exacerbated by the fact
that even after a technology is in place and being used, it is
often difficult to quantify the energy savings that resulted from
its installation owing to measurement errors and the difficulty
with baseline problems. Knowing that this uncertainty will
prevail can itself inhibit technology diffusion.
Current lifestyles, behaviours, and consumption patterns have
developed within current and historical socio-cultural contexts.
Changes in behaviour and lifestyles may result from a number
of intertwined processes, such as:
* scientific, technological, and economic developments;
* developments in dominant world views and public discourse;
* changes in the relationships among institutions, political
alliances, or actor networks;
* changes in social structures or relationships within firms
and households; and
* changes in psychological motivation (e.g., convenience,
social prestige, career, etc.).
Barriers take various forms in association with each of the above
processes.
In some situations policy development is based on a model of
human psychology that has been widely criticized. People are
assumed to be rational welfare-maximizers and to have a fixed
set of values. Such a model does not explain processes, such
as learning, habituation, value formation, or the bounded
rationality, observed in human choice. Social structures can
affect consumption, for example, through the association of
objects with status and class. Individuals' adoption of more
sustainable consumption patterns depends not only on the
match between those patterns and their perceived needs, but
also on the extent to which they understand their consumption
options, and are able to make choices.
Uncertainty: Another important barrier is uncertainty. A consumer
may be uncertain about future energy prices and, therefore, future
energy savings. Also, there may be uncertainty about the next
generation of equipment - will next year bring a cheaper or better
model? In practical decision making, a barrier is often associated
with the issue of sunk cost and long lifetimes of infrastructure,
and the associated irreversibilities of investments of the nonfungible infrastructure capita.

Mitigation

5.3. Sector- and Technology-specific Barriers and
Opportunities
The following sections describe barriers and opportunities
particular to each mitigation sector (see also Table TS-2).
Buildings: The poor in every country are affected far more by
barriers in this sector than the rich, because of inadequate
access to financing, low literacy rates, adherence to traditional
customs, and the need to devote a higher fraction of their
income to satisfy basic needs, including fuel purchases. Other
barriers in this sector are lack of skills and social barriers,
misplaced incentives, market structure, slow stock turnover,
administratively set prices, and imperfect information. Integrated
building design for residential construction could lead to
energy saving by 40%-60%, which in turn could reduce the
cost of living (Section 3.3.4).
Policies, programmes, and measures to remove barriers and
reduce energy costs, energy use, and carbon emissions in
residential and commercial buildings fall into ten general
categories: voluntary programmes, building efficiency standards,
equipment efficiency standards, state market transformation
programmes, financing, government procurement, tax credits,
energy planning (production, distribution, and end-use), and
accelerated R&D. Affordable credit financing is widely
recognized in Africa as one of the critical measures to remove
the high first-cost barrier. Poor macroeconomic management
captured by unstable economic conditions often leads to
financial repression and higher barriers. As many of several
obstacles can be observed simultaneously in the innovation chain
of an energy-efficient investment or organizational measure,
policy measures usually have to be applied as a bundle to
realize the economic potential of a particular technology.
Transport: The car has come to be widely perceived in modern
societies as a means of freedom, mobility and safety, a symbol
of personal status and identity, and as one of the most important
products in the industrial economy. Several studies have found
that people living in denser and more compact cities rely less on
cars, but it is not easy, even taking congestion problems into
account, to motivate the shift away from suburban sprawl to compact
cities as advocated in some literature. An integrated approach
to town and transport planning and the use of incentives are key
to energy efficiency and saving in the transport sector. This is an
area, where lock-in effects are very important: when land-use
patterns have been chosen there is hardly a way back. This
represents an opportunity in particular for the developing world.
Transport fuel taxes are commonly used, but have proved very
unpopular in some countries, especially where they are seen
as revenue-raising measures. Charges on road users have been
accepted where they are earmarked to cover the costs of transport
provision. Although trucks and cars may be subject to different
barriers and opportunities because of differences in their purpose

WGIII Technical Summary

of use and travel distance, a tax policy that assesses the full
cost of GHG emissions would result in a similar impact on
CO2 reductions in road transport. Several studies have explored
the potential for adjusting the way existing road taxes, licence
fees, and insurance premiums are levied and have found potential
emissions reductions of around 10% in OECD countries.
Inadequate development and provision of convenient and efficient
mass transport systems encourage the use of more energy
consuming private vehicles. It is the combination of policies
protecting road transport interest, however, that poses the
greatest barrier to change, rather than any single type of instrument.
New and used vehicles and/or their technologies mostly flow
from the developed to developing countries. Hence, a global
approach to reducing emissions that targets technology in
developed countries would have a significant impact on future
emissions from developing countries.
Industry: In industry, barriers may take many forms, and are
determined by the characteristics of the firm (size and structure)
and the business environment. Cost-effective energy efficiency
measures are often not undertaken as a result of lack of information
and high transaction costs for obtaining reliable information.
Capital is used for competing investment priorities, and is subject
to high hurdle rates for energy efficiency investments. Lack
of skilled personnel, especially for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs), leads to difficulties installing new energyefficient equipment compared to the simplicity of buying
energy. Other barriers are the difficulty of quantifying energy
savings and slow diffusion of innovative technology into
markets, while at the same time firms typically underinvest in
R&D, despite the high rates of return on investment.
A wide array of policies to reduce barriers, or the perception
of barriers, has been used and tested in the industrial sector in
developed countries, with varying success rates. Information
programmes are designed to assist energy consumers in
understanding and employing technologies and practices to
use energy more efficiently. Forms of environmental legislation
have been a driving force in the adoption of new technologies.
New approaches to industrial energy efficiency improvement
in developed countries include voluntary agreements (VAs).
In the energy supply sector virtually all the generic barriers cited
in Section 5.2 restrict the introduction of environmentally sound
technologies and practices. The increasing deregulation of energy
supply, while making it more efficient, has raised particular concerns.
Volatile spot and contract prices, short-term outlook of private
investors, and the perceived risks of nuclear and hydropower
plants have shifted fuel and technology choice towards natural
gas and oil plants, and away from renewable energy, including
- to a lesser extent - hydropower, in many countries.
Co-generation or combined production of power and heat
(CHP) is much more efficient than the production of energy for

331

Climate Change 2001

each of these uses alone. The implementation of CHP is closely
linked to the availability and density of industrial heat loads,
district heating, and cooling networks. Yet, its implementation
is hampered by lack of information, the decentralized character
of the technology, the attitude of grid operators, the terms of
grid connection, and a lack of policies that foster long-term
planning. Firm public policy and regulatory authority is necessary
to install and safeguard harmonized conditions, transparency,
and unbundling of the main power supply functions.
Agriculture and Forestry: Lack of adequate capacity for research
and provision of extension services will hamper the spread of
technologies that suit local conditions, and the declining
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
(CGIAR) system has exacerbated this problem in the developing
world. Adoption of new technology is also limited by small farm
size, credit constraints, risk aversion, lack of access to information
and human capital, inadequate rural infrastructure and tenurial
arrangements, and unreliable supply of complementary inputs.
Subsidies for critical inputs to agriculture, such as fertilizers,
water supply, and electricity and fuels, and to outputs in order
to maintain stable agricultural systems and an equitable
distribution of wealth distort markets for these products.
Measures to address the above barriers include:
* The expansion of credit and savings schemes;
* Shifts in international research funding towards water-use
efficiency, irrigation design, irrigation management,
adaptation to salinity, and the effect of increased CO2 levels
on tropical crops;
* The improvement of food security and disaster early
warning systems;
* The development of institutional linkages between countries;
and
* The rationalization of input and output prices of agricultural
commodities, taking DES issues into consideration.
The forestry sector faces land-use regulation and other
macroeconomic policies that usually favour conversion to
other land uses such as agriculture, cattle ranching, and urban
industry. Insecure land tenure regimes and tenure rights and
subsidies favouring agriculture or livestock are among the most
important barriers for ensuring sustainable management of
forests as well as sustainability of carbon abatement. In relation
to climate change mitigation, other issues, such as lack of technical
capability, lack of credibility about the setting of project baselines,
and monitoring of carbon stocks, poses difficult challenges.
Waste Management: Solid waste and wastewater disposal and
treatment represent about 20% of human-induced methane
emissions. The principal barriers to technology transfer in this sector
include limited financing and institutional capability, jurisdictional
complexity, and the need for community involvement. Climate
change mitigation projects face further barriers resulting from
unfamiliarity with CH4 capture and potential electricity generation,

332

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

unwillingness to commit additional human capacity for climate
mitigation, and the additional institutional complexity required
not only by waste treatment but also byenergy generation and
supply. The lack of clear regulatory and investment frameworks
can pose significant challenges for project development.
To overcome the barriers and to avail the opportunities in waste
management, it is necessary to have a multi-project approach,
the components of which include the following:
* Building databases on availability of wastes, their characteristics,
distribution, accessibility, current practices of utilization and/
or disposal technologies, and economic viability;
* Institutional mechanism for technology transfer though a
co-ordinated programme involving the R&D institutions,
financing agencies, and industry; and
* Defining the role of stakeholders including local authorities,
individual householders, industries, R&D institutions, and
the government.
Regional Considerations: Changing global patterns provide
an opportunity for introducing GHG mitigation technologies
and practices that are consistent with DES goals. A culture of
energy subsidies, institutional inertia, fragmented capital
markets, vested interests, etc., however, presents major barriers
to their implementation, and may be particular issues in
developing and EIT countries. Situations in these two groups of
countries call for a more careful analysis of trade, institutional,
financial, and income barriers and opportunities, distorted prices,
and information gaps. In the developed countries, other barriers
such as the current carbon-intensive lifestyle and consumption
patterns, social structures, network externalities, and misplaced
incentives offer opportunities for intervention to control the growth
of GHG emissions. Lastly, new and used technologies mostly
flow from the developed to developing and transitioning countries.
A global approach to reducing emissions that targets technology
that is transferred from developed to developing countries
could have a significant impact on future emissions.

6. Policies, Measures, and Instruments
6.1. Policy Instruments and Possible Criteria for
their Assessment
The purpose of this section is to examine the major types of
policies and measures that can be used to implement options
to mitigate net concentrations of GHGs in the atmosphere. In
keeping within the defined scope of this Report, policies and
measures that can be used to implement or reduce the costs of
adaptation to climate change are not examined. Alternative
policy instruments are discussed and assessed in terms of specific
criteria, all on the basis of the most recent literature. There is
naturally some emphasis on the instruments mentioned in the
Kyoto Protocol (the Kyoto mechanisms), because they are new
and focus on achieving GHG emissions limits, and the extent

Mitigation

of their envisaged international application is unprecedented.
In addition to economic dimensions, political economy, legal,
and institutional elements are discussed insofar as they are relevant
to these policies and measures.
Any individual country can choose from a large set of possible
policies, measures, and instruments, including (in arbitrary
order): emissions, carbon, or energy taxes, tradable permits,
subsidies, deposit-refund systems, voluntary agreements, nontradable permits, technology and performance standards,
product bans, and direct government spending, including R&D
investment. Likewise, a group of countries that wants to limit
its collective GHG emissions could agree to implement one,
or a mix, of the following instruments (in arbitrary order):
tradable quotas, joint implementation, clean development
mechanism, harmonized emissions or carbon or energy taxes,
an international emissions, carbon, or energy tax, non-tradable
quotas, international technology and product standards,
voluntary agreements, and direct international transfers of
financial resources and technology.
Possible criteria for the assessment of policy instruments include:
environmental effectiveness; cost effectiveness; distributional
considerations including competitiveness concerns; administrative
and political feasibility; government revenues; wider economic
effects including implications for international trade rules; wider
environmental effects including carbon leakage; and effects on
changes in attitudes, awareness, learning, innovation, technical
progress, and dissemination of technology. Each government may
apply different weights to various criteria when evaluating GHG
mitigation policy options depending on national and sector
level circumstances. Moreover, a government may apply different
sets of weights to the criteria when evaluating national (domestic)
versus international policy instruments. Co-ordinated actions
could help address competitiveness concerns, potential
conflicts with international trade rules, and carbon leakage.
The economics literature on the choice of policies adopted
has emphasized the importance of interest group pressures,
focusing on the demand for regulation. But it has tended to
neglect the "supply side" of the political equation, emphasized
in the political science literature: the legislators and government
and party officials who design and implement regulatory policy,
and who ultimately decide which instruments or mix of
instruments will be used. However, the point of compliance
of alternative policy instruments, whether they are applied to
fossil fuel users or manufacturers, for example, is likely to be
politically crucial to the choice of policy instrument. And a
key insight is that some forms of regulation actually can benefit
the regulated industry, for example, by limiting entry into the
industry or imposing higher costs on new entrants. A policy
that imposes costs on industry as a whole might still be supported
by firms who would fare better than their competitors. Regulated
firms, of course, are not the only group with a stake in regulation:
opposing interest groups will fight for their own interests.

WGIII Technical Summary

6.2. National Policies, Measures, and Instruments
In the case of countries in the process of structural reform, it
is important to understand the new policy context to develop
reasonable assessments of the feasibility of implementing GHG
mitigation policies. Recent measures taken to liberalize energy
markets have been inspired for the most part by desires to
increase competition in energy and power markets, but they
also can have significant emission implications, through their
impact on the production and technology pattern of energy or
power supply. In the long run, the consumption pattern change
might be more important than the sole implementation of
climate change mitigation measures.
Market-based instruments - principally domestic taxes and
domestic tradable permit systems - will be attractive to
governments in many cases because they are efficient. They
will frequently be introduced in concert with conventional
regulatory measures. When implementing a domestic emissions
tax, policymakers must consider the collection point, the tax
base, the variation among sectors, the association with trade,
employment, revenue, and the exact form of the mechanism.
Each of these can influence the appropriate design of a
domestic emissions tax, and political or other concerns are
likely to play a role as well. For example, a tax levied on the
energy content of fuels could be much more costly than a
carbon tax for equivalent emissions reduction, because an
energy tax raises the price of all forms of energy, regardless
of their contribution to CO2 emissions. Yet, many nations may
choose to use energy taxes for reasons other than cost
effectiveness, and much of the analysis in this section applies
to energy taxes, as well as carbon taxes.
A country committed to a limit on its GHG emissions also can
meet this limit by implementing a tradable permit system that
directly or indirectly limits emissions of domestic sources.
Like a tax, a tradable permit system poses a number of design
issues, including type of permit, ways to allocate permits,
sources included, point of compliance, and use of banking.
To be able to cover all sources with a single domestic permit
regime is unlikely. The certainty provided by a tradable permit
system of achieving a given emissions level for participating
sources comes at the cost of the uncertainty of permit prices
(and hence compliance costs). To address this concern, a hybrid
policy that caps compliance costs could be adopted, but the
level of emissions would no longer be guaranteed.
For a variety of reasons, in most countries the management of
GHG emissions will not be addressed with a single policy
instrument, but with a portfolio of instruments. In addition to
one or more market-based policies, a portfolio might include
standards and other regulations, voluntary agreements, and
information programmes:
* Energy efficiency standards have been effective in reducing
energy use in a growing number of countries. They may be

333

Climate Change 2001

especially effective in many countries where the capacity to
administer market instruments is relatively limited, thereby
helping to develop this administrative infrastructure. They
need updating to remain effective. The main disadvantage
of standards is that they can be inefficient, but efficiency
can be improved if the standard focuses on the desired
results and leaves as much flexibility as possible in the
choice of how to achieve the results.
* Voluntary agreements (VAs) may take a variety of forms.
Proponents of VAs point to low transaction costs and
consensus elements, while sceptics emphasize the risk of
"free riding", and the risk that the private sector will not
pursue real emissions reduction in the absence of monitoring
and enforcement. Voluntary agreements sometimes precede
the introduction of more stringent measures.
* Imperfect information is widely recognized as a key market
failure that can have significant effects on improved energy
efficiency, and hence emissions. Information instruments
include environmental labelling, energy audits, and industrial
reporting requirements, and information campaigns are
marketing elements in many energy-efficiency programmes.
A growing literature has demonstrated theoretically, and with
numerical simulation models, that the economics of addressing
GHG reduction targets with domestic policy instruments depend
strongly on the choice of those instruments. Price-based policies
tend to lead to positive marginal and positive total mitigation costs.
In each case, the interaction of these abatement costs with the
existing tax structure and, more generally, with existing factor
prices is important. Price-based policies that generate revenues can
be coupled with measures to improve market efficiency. However,
the role of non-price policies, which affect the sign of the change
in the unit price of energy services, often remains decisive.
6.3. International Policies and Measures
Turning to international policies and measures, the Kyoto Protocol
defines three international policy instruments, the so-called
Kyoto mechanisms: international emissions trading (IET), joint
implementation (JI), and the Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM). Each of these international policy instruments provides
opportunities for Annex I Parties to fulfil their commitments
cost-effectively. IET essentially would allow Annex I Parties
to exchange part of their assigned national emission allowances
(targets). IET implies that countries with high marginal abatement
costs (MACs) may acquire emission reductions from countries
with low MACs. Similarly, JI would allow Annex I Parties to
exchange emission reduction units among themselves on a
project-by-project basis. Under the CDM, Annex I Parties
would receive credit - on a project-by-project basis - for
reductions accomplished in non-Annex I countries.
Economic analyses indicate that the Kyoto mechanisms could
reduce significantly the overall cost of meeting the Kyoto
emissions limitation commitments. However, achievement of

334

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

the potential cost savings requires the adoption of domestic
policies that allow individual entities to use the mechanisms
to meet their national emissions limitation obligations. If
domestic policies limit the use of the Kyoto mechanisms, or
international rules governing the mechanisms limit their use, the
cost savings may be reduced.
In the case of JI, host governments have incentives to ensure
that emission reduction units (ERUs) are issued only for real
emission reductions, assuming that they face strong penalties for
non-compliance with national emissions limitation commitments.
In the case of CDM, a process for independent certification of
emission reductions is crucial, because host governments do
not have emissions limitation commitments and hence may
have less incentive to ensure that certified emission reductions
(CERs) are issued only for real emission reductions. The main
difficulty in implementing project-based mechanisms, both JI
and CDM, is determining the net additional emission reduction
(or sink enhancement) achieved; baseline definition may be
extremely complex. Various other aspects of these Kyoto
mechanisms are awaiting further decision making, including:
monitoring and verification procedures, financial additionality
(assurance that CDM projects will not displace traditional
development assistance flows), and possible means of
standardizing methodologies for project baselines.
The extent to which developing country (non-Annex I) Parties
will effectively implement their commitments under the
UNFCCC may depend, among other factors, on the transfer
of environmentally sound technologies (ESTs).
6.4. Implementation of National and International
Policy Instruments
Any international or domestic policy instrument can be
effective only if accompanied by adequate systems of monitoring
and enforcement. There is a linkage between compliance
enforcement and the amount of international co-operation that
will actually be sustained. Many multilateral environmental
agreements address the need to co-ordinate restrictions on
conduct taken in compliance with obligations they impose and the
expanding legal regime under the WTO and/or GATT umbrella.
Neither the UNFCCC nor the Kyoto Protocol now provides for
specific trade measures in response to non-compliance. But
several domestic policies and measures that might be developed
and implemented in conjunction with the Kyoto Protocol could
conflict with WTO provisions. International differences in
environmental regulation may have trade implications.
One of the main concerns in environmental agreements
(including the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol) has been
with reaching wider participation. The literature on international
environmental agreements predicts that participation will be
incomplete, and incentives may be needed to increase
participation (see also Section 10).

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

7. Costing Methodologies

7.2. Analytical Approaches

7.1. Conceptual Basis

Cost assessment is an input into one or more rules for decisionmaking, including cost-benefit analysis (CBA), cost-effectiveness
analysis (CEA), and multi-attribute analysis. The analytical
approaches differ primarily by how the objectives of the
decision-making framework are selected, specified, and valued.
Some objectives in mitigation policies can be specified in
economic units (e.g., costs and benefits measured in monetary
units), and some in physical units (e.g., the amount of pollutants
dispersed in tonnes of CO2). In practice, however, the challenge
is in developing a consistent and comprehensive definition of
every important impact to be measured.

Using resources to mitigate greenhouse gases (GHGs) generates
opportunity costs that should be considered to help guide
reasonable policy decisions. Actions taken to abate GHG
emissions or to increase carbon sinks divert resources from
other alternative uses. Assessing the costs of these actions
should ideally consider the total value that society attaches to
the goods and services forgone because of the diversion of
resources to climate protection. In some cases, the sum of
benefits and costs will be negative, meaning that society gains
from undertaking the mitigation action.
This section addresses the methodological issues that arise in
the estimation of the monetary costs of climate change. The
focus is on the correct assessment of the costs of mitigation
measures to reduce the emissions of GHGs. The assessment
of costs and benefits should be based on a systematic analytical
framework to ensure comparability and transparency of
estimates. One well-developed framework assesses costs as
changes in social welfare based on individual values. These
individual values are reflected by the willingness to pay (WTP)
for environmental improvements or the willingness to accept
(WTA) compensation. From these value measures can be
derived measures such as the social surpluses gained or lost
from a policy, the total resource costs, and opportunity costs.
While the underlying measures of welfare have limits and using
monetary values remains controversial, the view is taken that
the methods to "convert" non-market inputs into monetary terms
provide useful information for policymakers. These methods
should be pursued when and where appropriate. It is also
considered useful to supplement this welfare-based cost
methodology with a broader assessment that includes equity and
sustainability dimensions of climate change mitigation policies.
In practice, the challenge is to develop a consistent and
comprehensive definition of the key impacts to be measured.
A frequent criticism of this costing method is that it is inequitable,
as it gives greater weight to the "well off". This is because, typically,
a well-off person has a greater WTP or WTA than a less well-off
person and hence the choices made reflect more the preferences
of the better off. This criticism is valid, but there is no coherent
and consistent method of valuation that can replace the existing
one in its entirety. Concerns about, for example, equity can be
addressed along with the basic cost estimation. The estimated
costs are one piece of information in the decision-making
process for climate change that can be supplemented with other
information on other social objectives, for example impacts on
key stakeholders and the meeting of poverty objectives.
In this section the costing methodology is overviewed, and
issues involved in using these methods addressed.

7.2.1. Co-Benefits and Costs and Ancillary Benefits
and Costs
The literature uses a number of terms to depict the associated
benefits and costs that arise in conjunction with GHG mitigation
policies. These include co-benefits, ancillary benefits, side
benefits, secondary benefits, collateral benefits, and associated
benefits. In the current discussion, the term "co-benefits" refers
to the non-climate benefits of GHG mitigation policies that
are explicitly incorporated into the initial creation of mitigation
policies. Thus, the term co-benefits reflects that most policies
designed to address GHG mitigation also have other, often at
least equally important, rationales involved at the inception
of these policies (e.g., related to objectives of development,
sustainability, and equity). In contrast, the term ancillary
benefits connotes those secondary or side effects of climate
change mitigation policies on problems that arise subsequent
to any proposed GHG mitigation policies.
Policies aimed at mitigating GHGs, as stated earlier, can yield
other social benefits and costs (here called ancillary or cobenefits and costs), and a number of empirical studies have
made a preliminary attempt to assess these impacts. It is
apparent that the actual magnitude of the ancillary benefits or
co-benefits assessed critically depends on the scenario
structure of the analysis, in particular on the assumptions about
policy management in the baseline case. This implies that
whether a particular impact is included or not depends on the
primary objective of the programme. Moreover, something that
is seen as a GHG reduction programme from an international
perspective may be seen, from a national perspective, as one
in which local pollutants and GHGs are equally important.
7.2.2. Implementation Costs
All climate change policies necessitate some costs of
implementation, that is costs of changes to existing rules and
regulations, making sure that the necessary infrastructure is
available, training and educating those who are to implement the
policy as well those affected by the measures, etc. Unfortunately,
such costs are not fully covered in conventional cost analyses.

335

Climate Change 2001

Implementation costs in this context are meant to reflect the
more permanent institutional aspects of putting a programme into
place and are different to those costs conventionally considered
as transaction costs. The latter, by definition, are temporary costs.
Considerable work needs to be done to quantify the institutional
and other costs of programmes, so that the reported figures
are a better representation of the true costs that will be incurred
if programmes are actually implemented.
7.2.3. Discounting
There are broadly two approaches to discounting-an ethical
or prescriptive approach based on what rates of discount should
be applied, and a descriptive approach based on what rates of
discount people (savers as well as investors) actually apply in
their day-to-day decisions. For mitigation analysis, the country
must base its decisions at least partly on discount rates that
reflect the opportunity cost of capital. Rates that range from
4% to 6% would probably be justified in developed countries.
The rate could be 10-12% or even higher in developing countries.
It is more of a challenge to argue that climate change mitigation
projects should face different rates, unless the mitigation
project is of very long duration. The literature shows increasing
attention to rates that decline over time and hence give more
weight to benefits that occur in the long term. Note that these
rates do not reflect private rates of return, which typically must
be greater to justify a project, at around 10-25%.
7.2.4. Adaptation and Mitigation Costs and the Link
Between Them
While most people appreciate that adaptation choices affect the
costs of mitigation, this obvious point is often not addressed in
climate policymaking. Policy is fragmented - with mitigation being
seen as addressing climate change and adaptation seen as a means
of reacting to natural hazards. Usually mitigation and adaptation
are modelled separately as a necessary simplification to gain
traction on an immense and complex issue. As a consequence,
the costs of risk reduction action are frequently estimated
separately, and therefore each measure is potentially biased.
This realization suggests that more attention to the interaction
of mitigation and adaptation, and its empirical ramification,
is worthwhile, though uncertainty about the nature and timing
of impacts, including surprises, will constrain the extent to
which the associated costs can be fully internalized.
7.3. System Boundaries: Project, Sector, and Macro
Researchers make a distinction between project, sector, and
economywide analyses. Project level analysis considers a "standalone" investment assumed to have insignificant secondary
impacts on markets. Methods used for this level include CBA,
CEA, and life-cycle analysis. Sector level analysis examines
sectoral policies in a "partial-equilibrium" context in which
all other variables are assumed to be exogenous. Economy-

336

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

wide analysis explores how policies affect all sectors and markets,
using various macroeconomic and general equilibrium models.
A trade-off exists between the level of detail in the assessment
and complexity of the system considered. This section presents
some of the key assumptions made in cost analysis.
A combination of different modelling approaches is required
for an effective assessment of climate change mitigation options.
For example, detailed project assessment has been combined with
a more general analysis of sectoral impacts, and macroeconomic
carbon tax studies have been combined with the sectoral
modelling of larger technology investment programmes.
7.3.1. Baselines
The baseline case, which by definition gives the emissions of
GHGs in the absence of the climate change interventions being
considered, is critical to the assessment of the costs of climate
change mitigation. This is because the definition of the baseline
scenario determines the potential for future GHG emissions
reduction, as well as the costs of implementing these reduction
policies. The baseline scenario also has a number of important
implicit assumptions about future economic policies at the
macroeconomic and sectoral levels, including sectoral structure,
resource intensity, prices, and thereby technology choice.
7.3.2. Consideration of No Regrets Options
No regrets options are by definition actions to reduce GHG
emissions that have negative net costs. Net costs are negative
because these options generate direct or indirect benefits, such
as those resulting from reductions in market failures, double
dividends through revenue recycling and ancillary benefits,
large enough to offset the costs of implementing the options.
The no regrets issue reflects specific assumptions about the
working and the efficiency of the economy, especially the
existence and stability of a social welfare function, based on a
social cost concept:
* Reduction of existing market or institutional failures and
other barriers that impede adoption of cost-effective emission
reduction measures can lower private costs compared to
current practice. This can also reduce private costs overall.
* A double dividend related to recycling of the revenue of
carbon taxes in such a way that it offsets distortionary taxes.
* Ancillary benefits and costs (or ancillary impacts), which can
be synergies or trade-offs in cases in which the reduction
of GHG emissions has joint impacts on other environmental
policies (i.e., relating to local air pollution, urban congestion,
or land and natural resource degradation).
Market Imperfections
The existence of a no regrets potential implies that market and
institutions do not behave perfectly, because of market imperfections
such as lack of information, distorted price signals, lack of
competition, and/or institutional failures related to inadequate

Mitigation

regulation, inadequate delineation of property rights, distortioninducing fiscal systems, and limited financial markets. Reduction
of market imperfections suggests it is possible to identify and
implement policies that can correct these market and institutional
failures without incurring costs larger than the benefits gained.
Double Dividend
The potential for a double dividend arising from climate
mitigation policies was extensively studied during the 1990s.
In addition to the primary aim of improving the environment
(the first dividend), such policies, if conducted through revenueraising instruments such as carbon taxes or auctioned emission
permits, yield a second dividend, which can be set against the
gross costs of these policies. All domestic GHG policies have
an indirect economic cost from the interactions of the policy
instruments with the fiscal system, but in the case of revenueraising policies this cost is partly offset (or more than offset) if,
for example, the revenue is used to reduce existing distortionary
taxes. Whether these revenue-raising policies can reduce
distortions in practice depends on whether revenues can be
"recycled" to tax reduction.
Ancillary Benefits and Costs (Ancillary Impacts)
The definition of ancillary impacts is given above. As noted
there, these can be positive as well as negative. It is important
to recognize that gross and net mitigation costs cannot be
established as a simple summation of positive and negative
impacts, because the latter are interlinked in a very complex
way. Climate change mitigation costs (gross and well as net
costs) are only valid in relation to a comprehensive specific
scenario and policy assumption structure.
The existence of no regrets potentials is a necessary, but not a
sufficient, condition for the potential implementation of these
options. The actual implementation also requires the development
of a policy strategy that is complex as comprehensive enough
to address these market and institutional failures and barriers.
7.3.3. Flexibility
For a wide variety of options, the costs of mitigation depend
on what regulatory framework is adopted by national
governments to reduce GHGs. In general, the more flexibility
the framework allows, the lower the costs of achieving a given
reduction. More flexibility and more trading partners can reduce
costs. The opposite is expected with inflexible rules and few
trading partners. Flexibility can be measured as the ability to
reduce carbon emissions at the lowest cost, either domestically
or internationally.

WGIII Technical Summary

and intra-generational equity. Mitigation cost assessments that
follow this line can address these impacts on the basis of a
decision-making framework that includes a number of sideimpacts to the GHG emissions reduction policy objective. The
goal of such an assessment is to inform decision makers about
how different policy objectives can be met efficiently, given
priorities of equity and other policy constraints (natural resources,
environmental objectives). A number of international studies
have applied such a broad decision-making framework to the
assessment of development implications of CDM projects.
There are a number of key linkages between mitigation costing
issues and broader development impacts of the policies,
including macroeconomic impacts, employment creation,
inflation, the marginal costs of public funds, capital availability,
spillovers, and trade.
7.4. Special Issues Relating to Developing
Countries and EITs
A number of special issues related to technology use should
be considered as the critical determinants of climate change
mitigation potential and related costs for developing countries.
These include current technological development levels,
technology transfer issues, capacity for innovation and diffusion,
barriers to efficient technology use, institutional structure,
human capacity aspects, and foreign exchange earnings.
Climate change studies in developing countries and EITs need
to be strengthened in terms of methodology, data, and policy
frameworks. Although a complete standardization of the
methods is not possible, to achieve a meaningful comparison
of results it is essential to use consistent methodologies,
perspectives, and policy scenarios in different nations.
The following modifications to conventional approaches are
suggested:
* Alternative development pathways should be analyzed with
different patterns of investment in infrastructure, irrigation,
fuel mix, and land-use policies.
* Macroeconomic studies should consider market transformation
processes in the capital, labour, and power markets.
* Informal and traditional sector transactions should be
included in national macroeconomic statistics. The value
of non-commercial energy consumption and the unpaid work
of household labour for non-commercial energy collection
is quite significant and needs to be considered explicitly
in economic analysis.
* The costs of removing market barriers should be considered
explicitly.

7.3.4. Development, Equity, and Sustainability Issues
7.5. Modelling Approaches to Cost Assessment
Climate change mitigation policies implemented at a national
level will, in most cases, have implications for short-term
economic and social development, local environmental quality,

The modelling of climate mitigation strategies is complex and
a number of modelling techniques have been applied including

337

Climate Change 2001

input-output models, macroeconomic models, computable
general equilibrium (CGE) models, and energy sector based
models. Hybrid models have also been developed to provide
more detail on the structure of the economy and the energy
sector. The appropriate use of these models depends on the
subject of the evaluation and the availability of data.
As discussed in Section 6, the main categories of climate change
mitigation policies include: market-oriented policies, technologyoriented policies, voluntary policies, and research and development
policies. Climate change mitigation policies can include all
four of the above policy elements. Most analytical approaches,
however, only consider some of the four elements. Economic
models, for example, mainly assess market-oriented policies
and in some cases technology policies primarily those related
to energy supply options, while engineering approaches mainly
focus on supply and demand side technology policies. Both
of these approaches are relatively weak in the representation
of research and development and voluntary agreement policies.

8. Global, Regional, and National Costs and
Ancillary Benefits
8.1. Introduction
The UNFCCC (Article 2) has as its ultimate goal the "stabilisation
of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that
will prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system"14. In addition, the Convention (Article 3.3) states that
"policies and measures to deal with climate change should be costeffective so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible
costs"15. This section reports on literature on the costs of greenhouse
gas mitigation policies at the national, regional, and global levels.
Net welfare gains or losses are reported, including (when
available) the ancillary benefits of mitigation policies. These
studies employ the full range of analytical tools described in
the previous chapter. These range from technologically detailed
bottom-up models to more aggregate top-down models, which
link the energy sector to the rest of the economy.
8.2. Gross Costs of GHG Abatement in TechnologyDetailed Models
In technology-detailed "bottom-up" models and approaches, the
cost of mitigation is derived from the aggregation of technological
14

338

"The ultimate objective of this Convention and any related legal
instruments that the Conference of Parties may adopt is to achieve, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention, stabilization
of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at such a level
that would prevent dangerous interference with the climate system.
Such a level should be achieved within a timeframe sufficient to allow
ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food
production is not threatened, and to enable economic development to
proceed in a sustainable manner."

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

and fuel costs such as: investments, operation and maintenance
costs, and fuel procurement, but also (and this is a recent trend)
revenues and costs from import and exports.
Models can be ranked along two classification axes. First, they
range from simple engineering-economics calculations effected
technology-by-technology, to integrated partial equilibrium
models of whole energy systems. Second, they range from the
strict calculation of direct technical costs of reduction to the
consideration of observed technology-adoption behaviour of
markets, and of the welfare losses due to demand reductions
and revenue gains and losses due to changes in trade.
This leads to contrasting two generic approaches, namely the
engineering-economics approach and least-cost equilibrium
modelling. In the first approach, each technology is assessed
independently via an accounting of its costs and savings. Once
these elements have been estimated, a unit cost can be calculated
for each action, and each action can be ranked according to
its costs. This approach is very useful to point out the potentials
for negative cost abatements due to the `efficiency gap' between
the best available technologies and technologies currently in use.
However, its most important limitation is that studies neglect or
do not treat in a systematic way the interdependence of the
various actions under examination.
Partial equilibrium least-costs models have been constructed
to remedy this defect, by considering all actions simultaneously
and selecting the optimal bundle of actions in all sectors and
at all time periods. These more integrated studies conclude
higher total costs of GHG mitigation than the strict technology
by technology studies. Based on an optimization framework they
give very easily interpretable results that compare an optimal
response to an optimal baseline; however, their limitation is that
they rarely calibrate the base year of the model to the existing
non optimal situation and implicitly assume an optimal
baseline. They consequently provide no information about the
negative cost potentials.
Since the publication of the SAR, the bottom-up approaches
have produced a wealth of new results for both Annex I and
non-Annex I countries, as well as for groups of countries.
Furthermore, they have extended their scope much beyond the

15

"The Parties should take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent,
or minimise the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse
effects. Where there are threats of serious irreversible damage, lack of
full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing
such measures, taking into account that polices and measures to deal
with climate change should be cost-effective so as to ensure global
benefits at the lowest possible costs. To achieve this, such policies and
measures should take into account different socio-economic contexts,
be comprehensive, cover all relevant sources, sinks and reservoirs of
greenhouse gases and adaptation, and comprise all economic sectors.
Efforts to address climate change may be carried out co-operatively
by interested Parties."

Mitigation

classical computations of direct abatement costs by inclusion
of demand effects and some trade effects.
However, the modelling results show considerable variations from
study to study, which are explained by a number of factors, some
of which reflect the widely differing conditions that prevail in the
countries studied (e.g., energy endowment, economic growth, energy
intensity, industrial and trade structure), and others reflect modelling
assumptions and assumptions about negative cost potentials.
However, as in the SAR, there is agreement on a no regrets
potential resulting from the reduction of existing market
imperfections, consideration of ancillary benefits, and inclusion
of double dividends. This means that some mitigation actions
can be realized at negative costs. The no regrets potential results
from existing market or institutional imperfections that prevent
cost-effective emission reduction measures from being taken.
The key question is whether such imperfections can be removed
cost-effectively by policy measures.
The second important policy message is that short and medium
term marginal abatement costs, which govern most of the
macroeconomic impacts of climate policies, are very sensitive
to uncertainty regarding baseline scenarios (rate of growth and
energy intensity) and technical costs. Even with significant negative
cost options, marginal costs may rise quickly beyond a certain
anticipated mitigation level. This risk is far lower in models allowing
for carbon trading. Over the long term this risk is reduced as
technical change curbs down the slope of marginal cost curves.
8.3. Costs of Domestic Policy to Mitigate Carbon
Emissions
Particularly important for determining the gross mitigation
costs is the magnitude of emissions reductions required in order
to meet a given target, thus the emissions baseline is a critical
factor. The growth rate of CO2 depends on the growth rate in
GDP, the rate of decline of energy use per unit of output, and
the rate of decline of CO2 emissions per unit of energy use.
In a multi-model comparison project that engaged more than a
dozen modelling teams internationally, the gross costs of complying
with the Kyoto Protocol were examined, using energy sector
models. Carbon taxes are implemented to lower emissions and
the tax revenue is recycled lump sum. The magnitude of the
carbon tax provides a rough indication of the amount of market
intervention that would be needed and equates the marginal
abatement cost to meet a prescribed emissions target. The size
of the tax required to meet a specific target will be determined
by the marginal source of supply (including conservation) with
and without the target. This in turn will depend on such factors
as the size of the necessary emissions reductions, assumptions
about the cost and availability of carbon-based and carbonfree technologies, the fossil fuel resource base, and short- and
long-term price elasticities.

WGIII Technical Summary

With no international emission trading, the carbon taxes
necessary to meet the Kyoto restrictions in 2010 vary a lot
among the models. Note from Table TS-416 that for the USA
they are calculated to be in the range US$76 to US$322, for
OECD Europe between US$20 and US$665, for Japan
between US$97 and US$645, and finally for the rest of OECD
(CANZ) between US$46 and US$425. All numbers are
reported in 1990 dollars. Marginal abatement costs are in the
range of US$20-US$135/tC if international trading is allowed.
These models do not generally include no regrets measures or
take account of the mitigation potential of CO2 sinks and of
greenhouse gases other than CO2.
However, there is no strict correlation between the level of
the carbon tax and GDP variation and welfare because of the
influence of the country specifics (countries with a low share
of fossil energy in their final consumption suffer less than others
for the same level of carbon tax) and because of the content of
the policies.
The above studies assume, to allow an easy comparison across
countries, that the revenues from carbon taxes (or auctioned
emissions permits) are recycled in a lump-sum fashion to the
economy. The net social cost resulting from a given marginal
cost of emissions constraint can be reduced if the revenues
are targetted to finance cuts in the marginal rates of pre-existing
distortionary taxes, such as income, payroll, and sales taxes.
While recycling revenues in a lump-sum fashion confers no
efficiency benefit, recycling through marginal rate cuts helps
avoid some of the efficiency costs or dead-weight loss of
existing taxes. This raises the possibility that revenue-neutral
carbon taxes might offer a double dividend by (1) improving
the environment and (2) reducing the costs of the tax system.
One can distinguish a weak and a strong form of the double
dividend. The weak form asserts that the costs of a given
revenue-neutral environmental reform, when revenues are
devoted to cuts in marginal rates of prior distortionary taxes,
are reduced relative to the costs when revenues are returned
in lump-sum fashion to households or firms. The strong form
of the double-dividend assertion is that the costs of the revenueneutral environmental tax reform are zero or negative. While
the weak form of the double-dividend claim receives virtually
universal support, the strong form of the double dividend
assertion is controversial.
Where to recycle revenues from carbon taxes or auctioned
permits depends upon the country specifics. Simulation results
show that in economies that are especially inefficient or
distorted along non-environmental lines, the revenue-recycling
effect can indeed be strong enough to outweigh the primary

16

The highest figures cited in this sentence are all results from one model:
the ABARE-GTEM model.

339

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Table TS-4: Energy Modelling Forum main results. Marginal abatement costs (in 1990 US$/tC; 2010 Kyoto target).
No trading
Model

US

OECD-E

Japan

CANZ

Annex I trading

Global trading

ABARE-GTEM
AIM
CETA
Fund
G-Cubed
GRAPE
MERGE3
MIT-EPPA
MS-MRT
Oxford
RICE
SGM
WorldScan
Administration
EIA
POLES

322
153
168

665
198

0645
0234

425
147

076

227
204
218
276
179
966
159
407
020

0097
0304
0500
0501
0402
1074
0251
0357
0122

157

023
038
026
010
020
044
086

135.3

0194.6

131.4

106
065
046
014
053
070
135
076
077
224
062
084
020
043
110
052.9

264
193
236
410
132
188
085
154
251
135.8

250
247
213
145
201
046

027
123
018
022
005
018
057
018.4

Note: The results of the Oxford model are not included in the ranges cited in the TS and SPM because this model has not been subject to substantive academic
review (and hence is inappropriate for IPCC assessment), and relies on data from the early 1980s for a key parametization that determines the model
results. This model is entirely unrelated to the CLIMOX model, from the Oxford Institutes of Energy Studies, referred to in Table TS-6.
EMF-16. GDP losses (as a percentage of total GDP) associated with complying with the prescribed targets under the Kyoto Protocol. Four regions
include USA, OECD Europe (OECD-E), Japan, and Canada, Australia and New Zealand (CANZ). Scenarios include no trading, Annex B trading
only, and full global trading.

cost and tax-interaction effect so that the strong double
dividend may materialize. Thus, in several studies involving
European economies, where tax systems may be highly
distorted in terms of the relative taxation of labour, the strong
double dividend can be obtained, in any case more frequently
than in other recycling options. In contrast, most studies of
carbon taxes or permits policies in the USA demonstrate that
recycling through lower labour taxation is less efficient than
through capital taxation; but they generally do not find a strong
double dividend. Another conclusion is that even in cases of
no strong double-dividend effect, one fares considerably better
with a revenue-recycling policy in which revenues are used to
cut marginal rates of prior taxes, than with a non-revenue
recycling policy, like for example grandfathered quotas.
In all countries where CO2 taxes have been introduced, some
sectors have been exempted by the tax, or the tax is differentiated
across sectors. Most studies conclude that tax exemptions raise
economic costs relative to a policy involving uniform taxes.
However, results differ in the magnitude of the costs of
exemptions.
8.4. Distributional Effects of Carbon Taxes
As well as the total costs, the distribution of the costs is important
for the overall evaluation of climate policies. A policy that
leads to an efficiency gain may not be welfare improving
overall if some people are in a worse position than before,
and vice versa. Notably, if there is a wish to reduce the income

340

IPCC Third Assessment Report

differences in the society, the effect on the income distribution
should be taken into account in the assessment.
The distributional effects of a carbon tax appear to be
regressive unless the tax revenues are used either directly or
indirectly in favour of the low-income groups. Recycling the
tax revenue by reducing the labour tax may have more
attractive distributional consequences than a lump-sum
recycling, in which the recycled revenue is directed to both
wage earners and capital owners. Reduced taxation of labour
results in increased wages and favours those who earn their
income mainly from labour. However, the poorest groups in
the society may not even earn any income from labour. In this
regard, reducing labour taxes may not always be superior to
recycling schemes that distribute to all groups of a society
and might reduce the regressive character of carbon taxes.
8.5. Aspects of International Emission Trading
It has long been recognized that international trade in emission
quota can reduce mitigation costs. This will occur when
countries with high domestic marginal abatement costs
purchase emission quota from countries with low marginal
abatement costs. This is often referred to as "where flexibility".
That is, allowing reductions to take place where it is cheapest
to do so regardless of geographical location. It is important to
note that where the reductions take place is independent of
who pays for the reductions.

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Table TS-5: Energy Modeling Forum main results. GDP loss in 2010 (in % of GDP; 2010 Kyoto target).
No trading
Model

US

ABARE-GTEM
AIM
CETA
G-Cubed
GRAPE
MERGE3
MS-MRT
Oxford
RICE

1.96 0.94
0.45 0.31
1.93
0.42 1.50
0.81
1.06 0.99
1.88 0.63
1.78 2.08
0.94 0.55

Annex I trading

OECD-E Japan CANZ US
0.72
0.25

1.96
0.59

0.57
0.19
0.80
1.20
1.88
0.78

1.83
2.02
1.83
0.96

Global trading

OECD-E Japan CANZ US

0.47 0.13
0.31 0.17
0.67
0.24 0.61
0.81
0.51 0.47
0.91 0.13
1.03 0.73
0.56 0.28

0.05
0.13

0.23
0.36

0.45
0.10
0.19
0.22
0.52
0.30

0.72
1.14
0.88
0.54

OECD-E Japan CANZ

0.09 0.03
0.20 0.08
0.43
0.06 0.26
0.54
0.20 0.20
0.29 0.03
0.66 0.47
0.19 0.09

0.01
0.01

0.04
0.35

0.14
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.33
0.09

0.32
0.67
0.32
0.19

Note: The results of the Oxford model are not included in the ranges cited in the TS and SPM because this model has not been subject to substantive
academic review (and hence is inappropriate for IPCC assessment), and relies on data from the early 1980s for a key parametization that determines
the model results. This model is entirely unrelated to the CLIMOX model, from the Oxford Institutes of Energy Studies, referred to in Table TS-6.

"Where flexibility" can occur on a number of scales. It can be
global, regional or at the country level. In the theoretical case
of full global trading, all countries agree to emission caps and
participate in the international market as buyers or sellers of
emission allowances. The CDM may allow some of these cost
reductions to be captured. When the market is defined at the
regional level (e.g., Annex B countries), the trading market is
more limited. Finally, trade may take place domestically with
all emission reductions occurring in the country of origin.
Table TS-5 shows the cost reductions from emission trading
for Annex B and full global trading compared to a no-trading
case. The calculation is made by various models with both
global and regional detail. In each instance, the goal is to meet
the emission reduction targets contained in the Kyoto Protocol.
All of the models show significant gains as the size of the
trading market is expanded. The difference among models is
due in part to differences in their baseline, the assumptions
about the cost and availability of low-cost substitutes on both
the supply and demand sides of the energy sector, and the
treatment of short-term macro shocks. In general, all calculated
gross costs for the non-trading case are below 2% of GDP
(which is assumed to have increased significantly in the period
considered) and in most cases below 1%. Annex B trading
lowers the costs for the OECD region as a whole to less than
0.5% and regional impacts within this vary between 0.1% to
1.1%. Global trading in general would decrease these costs to
well below 0.5% of GDP with OECD average below 0.2%.
The issue of the so-called "hot air"17 also influences the cost
of implementing the Kyoto Protocol. The recent decline in
economic activity in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
17

Hot air: a few countries, notably those with economies in transition,
have assigned amount units that appear to be well in excess of their
anticipated emissions (as a result of economic downturn). This excess
is referred to as hot air.

Union has led to a decrease in their GHG emissions. Although
this trend is eventually expected to reverse, for some countries
emissions are still projected to lie below the constraint imposed
by the Kyoto Protocol. If this does occur, these countries will
have excess emission quota that may be sold to countries in search
of low-cost options for meeting their own targets. The cost savings
from trading are sensitive to the magnitude of "hot air".
Numerous assessments of reduction in projected GDP have
been associated with complying with Kyoto-type limits. Most
economic analyses have focused on gross costs of carbon emitting
activities18, ignoring the cost-saving potential of mitigating
non-CO2 gases and using carbon sequestration and neither
taking into account environmental benefits (ancillary benefits
and avoided climate change), nor using revenues to remove
distortions. Including such possibilities could lower costs.
A constraint would lead to a reallocation of resources away
from the pattern that is preferred in the absence of a limit and
into potentially costly conservation and fuel substitution.
Relative prices will also change. These forced adjustments
lead to reductions in economic performance, which impact
GDP. Clearly, the broader the permit trading market, the greater
the opportunity for reducing overall mitigation costs.
Conversely, limits on the extent to which a country can satisfy
its obligations through the purchase of emissions quota can
increase mitigation costs. Several studies have calculated the
magnitude of the increase to be substantial falling in particular
on countries with the highest marginal abatement costs. But
another parameter likely to limit the savings from carbon
trading is the very functioning of trading systems (transaction
costs, management costs, insurance against uncertainty, and
strategic behaviour in the use of permits).

18

Although some studies include multi-gas analysis, much research is
needed on this potential both intertemporally and regionally.

341

Climate Change 2001

8.6. Ancillary Benefits of Greenhouse Gas Mitigation
Policies aimed at mitigating greenhouse gases can have
positive and negative side effects on society, not taking into
account benefits of avoided climate change. This section
assesses in particular those studies that evaluate the side effects
of climate change mitigation. Therefore the term "ancillary
benefits or costs" is used. There is little agreement on the
definition, reach, and size of these ancillary benefits, and on
methodologies for integrating them into climate policy. Criteria
are established for reviewing the growing literature linking
specific carbon mitigation policies to monetized ancillary
benefits. Recent studies that take an economy-wide, rather than
a sectoral, approach to ancillary benefits are described in the
report and their credibility is examined (Section 9 presents
sectoral analyses). In spite of recent progress in methods
development, it remains very challenging to develop
quantitative estimates of the ancillary effects, benefits and costs
of GHG mitigation policies. Despite these difficulties, in the
short term, ancillary benefits of GHG policies under some
circumstances can be a significant fraction of private (direct)
mitigation costs and in some cases they can be comparable to
the mitigation costs. According to the literature, ancillary
benefits may be of particular importance in developing
countries, but this literature is as yet limited.
The exact magnitude, scale, and scope of these ancillary
benefits and costs will vary with local geographical and
baseline conditions. In some circumstances, where baseline
conditions involve relatively low carbon emissions and
population density, benefits may be low. The models most in
use for ancillary benefit estimation - the computable general
equilibrium (CGE) models - have difficulty in estimating
ancillary benefits because they rarely have, and may not be
able to have, the necessary spatial detail.
With respect to baseline considerations most of the literature
on ancillary benefits systematically treats only government
policies and regulations with respect to the environment. In
contrast, other regulatory policy baseline issues, such as those
relating to energy, transportation, and health, have been
generally ignored, as have baseline issues that are not
regulatory, such as those tied with technology, demography,
and the natural resource base. For the studies reviewed here,
the biggest share of the ancillary benefits is related to public
health. A major component of uncertainty for modelling
ancillary benefits for public health is the link between
emissions and atmospheric concentrations, particularly in light
of the importance of secondary pollutants. However, it is
recognized that there are significant ancillary benefits in
addition to those for public health that have not been quantified
or monetized. At the same time, it appears that there are major
gaps in the methods and models for estimating ancillary costs.

342

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

8.7. "Spillover" Effects19 from Actions Taken in
Annex B on Non-Annex B Countries
In a world where economies are linked by international trade
and capital flows, abatement of one economy will have welfare
impacts on other abating or non-abating economies. These
impacts are called spillover effects, and include effects on
trade, carbon leakage, transfer and diffusion of environmentally
sound technology, and other issues (Figure TS-8).
As to the trade effects, the dominant finding of the effects of
emission constraints in Annex B countries on non-Annex B
countries in simulation studies prior to the Kyoto Protocol
was that Annex B abatement would have a predominantly
adverse impact on non-Annex B regions. In simulations of
the Kyoto Protocol, the results are more mixed with some nonAnnex B regions experiencing welfare gains and other losses.
This is mainly due to a milder target in the Kyoto simulations
than in pre-Kyoto simulations. It was also universally found
that most non-Annex B economies that suffered welfare losses
under uniform independent abatement would suffer smaller
welfare losses under emissions trading.
A reduction in Annex B emissions will tend to result in an
increase in non-Annex B emissions reducing the environmental
effectiveness of Annex B abatement. This is called "carbon
leakage", and can occur in the order of 5%-20% through a
possible relocation of carbon-intensive industries because of
reduced Annex B competitiveness in the international marketplace,
lower producer prices of fossil fuels in the international market,
and changes in income due to better terms of trade.
While the SAR reported that there was a high variance in estimates
of carbon leakage from the available models, there has been some
reduction in the variance of estimates obtained in the subsequent
years. However, this may largely result from the development of
new models based on reasonably similar assumptions and data
sources. Such developments do not necessarily reflect more
widespread agreement about appropriate behavioural assumptions.
One robust result seems to be that carbon leakage is an increasing
function of the stringency of the abatement strategy. This means
that leakage may be a less serious problem under the Kyoto target
than under the more stringent targets considered previously. Also
emission leakage is lower under emissions trading than under
independent abatement. Exemptions for energy-intensive industries
found in practice, and other factors, make the higher model estimates
for carbon leakage unlikely, but would raise aggregate costs.
Carbon leakage may also be influenced by the assumed degree
of competitiveness in the world oil market. While most studies
19

"Spillovers" from domestic mitigation strategies are the effects that
these strategies have on other countries. Spillover effects can be positive
or negative and include effects on trade, carbon leakage, transfer and
diffusion of environmentally sound technology, and other issues.

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Spillovers

Benefits from technology
improvement

Impacts on energy industries
activity and prices

Impacts on energy intensive
industries

Resource transfers to
sectors

Policies and measures
Public R&D policies

Increase in the scientific
knowledge base

"Market access" policies
for new technologies

Increase in know-how
through experience, learning
by doing

Standards, subsidies,
Voluntary agreements

New cleaner industry/
product performance
standards

Carbon taxes

Energy subsidy removal

Harmonized carbon taxes

Price-induced technical
change and technology
diffusion

Reduction of activity in fossil
fuel industries
Lower international prices,
negative impacts for
exporters,
positive for importers,
possibility of a
"rebound effect"

Carbon leakages, positive
impacts for activity, negative
for envir. in receiving country

Reduced distorsions in
industrial competition

Distorsion in competition if
differentiated schemes
(grandfathered vs. auctioned)

Domestic emission trading

Joint Implementation, Clean
Development Mechanism

Technology transfer

International emission trading

Net gain when permit price
is superior (not equal)
to average reduction costs

Figure TS-8: "Spillovers" from domestic mitigation strategies are the effects that these strategies have on other countries. Spillover effects can
be positive or negative and include effects on trade, carbon leakage, transfer and diffusion of environmentally sound technology, and other issues.

assume a competitive oil market, studies considering imperfect
competition find lower leakage if OPEC is able to exercise a
degree of market power over the supply of oil and therefore
reduce the fall in the international oil price. Whether or not
OPEC acts as a cartel can have a reasonably significant effect
on the loss of wealth to OPEC and other oil producers and on the
level of permit prices in Annex B regions (see also Section 9.2).
The third spillover effect mentioned above, the transfer and
diffusion of environmentally sound technology, is related to
induced technical change (see Section 8.10). The transfer of
environmentally sound technologies and know-how, not
included in models, may lead to lower leakage and especially
on the longer term may more than offset the leakage.
8.8. Summary of the Main Results for Kyoto Targets
The cost estimates for Annex B countries to implement the
Kyoto Protocol vary between studies and regions, and depend
strongly upon the assumptions regarding the use of the Kyoto
mechanisms, and their interactions with domestic measures.
The great majority of global studies reporting and comparing
these costs use international energy-economic models. Nine
of these studies suggest the following GDP impacts20:

Annex II countries21: In the absence of emissions trading
between Annex B countries22, the majority of global studies
show reductions in projected GDP of about 0.2% to 2% in
2010 for different Annex II regions. With full emissions trading
between Annex B countries, the estimated reductions in 2010
are between 0.1% and 1.1% of projected GDP23. These studies
encompass a wide range of assumptions. Models whose results
are reported here assume full use of emissions trading without
transaction cost. Results for cases that do not allow Annex B
trading assume full domestic trading within each region.
20

Many other studies incorporating more precisely the country specifics and
diversity of targetted policies provide a wider range of net cost estimates.
21
Annex II countries: Group of countries included in Annex II to the
UNFCCC, including all developed countries in the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development.
22
Annex B countries: Group of countries included in Annex B in the Kyoto
Protocol that have agreed to a target for their greenhouse gas emissions,
including all the Annex I countries (as amended in 1998) but Turkey
and Belarus.
23
Many metrics can be used to present costs. For example, if the annual
costs to developed countries associated with meeting Kyoto targets with
full Annex B trading are in the order of 0.5% of GDP, this represents
US$125 billion (1000 million) per year, or US$125 per person per year
by 2010 in Annex II (SRES assumptions). This corresponds to an impact
on economic growth rates over ten years of less than 0.1 percentage point.

343

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Models do not include sinks or non-CO2 greenhouse gases.
They do not include the CDM, negative cost options, ancillary
benefits, or targeted revenue recycling.
For all regions costs are also influenced by the following factors:
* Constraints on the use of Annex B trading, high transaction
costs in implementing the mechanisms and inefficient
domestic implementation could raise costs.
* Inclusion in domestic policy and measures of the no regrets
possibilities2, use of the CDM, sinks, and inclusion of nonCO2 greenhouse gases, could lower costs. Costs for individual
countries can vary more widely.

shows reductions of 25% of projected oil revenues with
no emissions trading, and 13% of projected oil revenues
with Annex B emissions trading in 2010. These studies do
not consider policies and measures27 other than Annex B
emissions trading, that could lessen the impact on nonAnnex I, oil-exporting countries, and therefore tend to
overstate both the costs to these countries and overall costs.
The effects on these countries can be further reduced by
removal of subsidies for fossil fuels, energy tax restructuring
according to carbon content, increased use of natural gas,
and diversification of the economies of non-Annex I, oilexporting countries.
* Other non-Annex I countries: They may be adversely affected
by reductions in demand for their exports to OECD nations
and by the price increase of those carbon-intensive and
other products they continue to import. These countries
may benefit from the reduction in fuel prices, increased
exports of carbon-intensive products and the transfer of
environmentally sound technologies and know-how. The
net balance for a given country depends on which of these
factors dominates. Because of these complexities, the
breakdown of winners and losers remains uncertain.
* Carbon leakage28: The possible relocation of some carbonintensive industries to non-Annex I countries and wider
impacts on trade flows in response to changing prices may
lead to leakage in the order of 5-20%. Exemptions, for
example for energy-intensive industries, make the higher
model estimates for carbon leakage unlikely, but would
raise aggregate costs. The transfer of environmentally
sound technologies and know-how, not included in models,
may lead to lower leakage and especially on the longer
term may more than offset the leakage.

The models show that the Kyoto mechanisms, are important in
controlling risks of high costs in given countries, and thus can
complement domestic policy mechanisms. Similarly, they can
minimize risks of inequitable international impacts and help to
level marginal costs. The global modelling studies reported above
show national marginal costs to meet the Kyoto targets from about
US$20/tC up to US$600/tC without trading, and a range from
about US$15/tC up to US$150/tC with Annex B trading. The cost
reductions from these mechanisms may depend on the details
of implementation, including the compatibility of domestic and
international mechanisms, constraints, and transaction costs.
Economies in transition: For most of these countries, GDP effects
range from negligible to a several percent increase. This reflects
opportunities for energy efficiency improvements not available
to Annex II countries. Under assumptions of drastic energy
efficiency improvement and/or continuing economic recessions
in some countries, the assigned amounts may exceed projected
emissions in the first commitment period. In this case, models
show increased GDP through revenues from trading assigned
amounts. However, for some economies in transition,
implementing the Kyoto Protocol will have similar impacts
on GDP as for Annex II countries.
Non-Annex I countries: Emission constraints in Annex I countries
have well established, albeit varied "spillover" effects24 on nonAnnex I countries.
* Oil-exporting, non-Annex I countries: Analyses report
costs differently, including, inter alia, reductions in
projected GDP and reductions in projected oil revenues25.
The study reporting the lowest costs shows reductions of
0.2% of projected GDP with no emissions trading, and
less than 0.05% of projected GDP with Annex B emissions
trading in 201026. The study reporting the highest costs

24

Spillover effects here incorporate only economic effects, not environmental
effects.
25
Details of the six studies reviewed are found in Table 9-4 of the
underlying report.
26
These estimated costs can be expressed as differences in GDP growth rates
over the period 2000-2010. With no emissions trading, GDP growth rate
is reduced by 0.02 percentage points/year; with Annex B emissions trading,
growth rate is reduced by less than 0.005 percentage points/year.

344

IPCC Third Assessment Report

8.9. The Costs of Meeting a Range of Stabilization
Targets
Cost-effectiveness studies with a century timescale estimate
that the costs of stabilizing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere
increase as the concentration stabilization level declines.
Different baselines can have a strong influence on absolute costs.
While there is a moderate increase in the costs when passing
from a 750ppmv to a 550ppmv concentration stabilization

27

These policies and measures include: those for non-CO2 gases and nonenergy sources of all gases; offsets from sinks; industry restructuring
(e.g., from energy producer to supplier of energy services); use of
OPEC's market power; and actions (e.g. of Annex B Parties) related
to funding, insurance, and the transfer of technology. In addition, the
studies typically do not include the following policies and effects that
can reduce the total cost of mitigation: the use of tax revenues to reduce
tax burdens or finance other mitigation measures; environmental
ancillary benefits of reductions in fossil fuel use; and induced
technological change from mitigation policies.
28
Carbon leakage is defined here as the increase in emissions in nonAnnex B countries resulting from implementation of reductions in
Annex B, expressed as a percentage of Annex B reductions.

Mitigation

level, there is a larger increase in costs passing from 550ppmv
to 450ppmv unless the emissions in the baseline scenario are
very low. These results, however, do not incorporate carbon
sequestration and gases other than CO2, and did not examine
the possible effect of more ambitious targets on induced
technological change29. In particular, the choice of the reference
scenario has a strong influence. Recent studies using the IPCC
SRES reference scenarios as baselines against which to analyze
stabilization clearly show that the average reduction in projected
GDP in most of the stabilization scenarios reviewed here is under
3% of the baseline value (the maximum reduction across all the
stabilization scenarios reached 6.1% in a given year). At the same
time, some scenarios (especially in the A1T group) showed an
increase in GDP compared to the baseline because of apparent
positive economic feedbacks of technology development and
transfer. The GDP reduction (averaged across storylines and
stabilization levels) is lowest in 2020 (1%), reaches a maximum
in 2050 (1.5%), and declines by 2100 (1.3%). However, in
the scenario groups with the highest baseline emissions (A2
and A1FI), the size of the GDP reduction increases throughout
the modelling period. Due to their relatively small scale when
compared to absolute GDP levels, GDP reductions in the postSRES stabilization scenarios do not lead to significant declines
in GDP growth rates over this century. For example, the annual
1990-2100 GDP growth rate across all the stabilization
scenarios was reduced on average by only 0.003% per year,
with a maximum reduction reaching 0.06% per year.
The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is determined more
by cumulative rather than by year-by-year emissions. That is, a
particular concentration target can be reached through a variety
of emissions pathways. A number of studies suggest that the choice
of emissions pathway can be as important as the target itself in
determining overall mitigation costs. The studies fall into two
categories: those that assume that the target is known and those
that characterize the issue as one of decision making under
uncertainty.
For studies that assume that the target is known, the issue is one
of identifying the least-cost mitigation pathway for achieving the
prescribed target. Here the choice of pathway can be seen as a
carbon budget problem. This problem has been so far addressed
in terms of CO2 only and very limited treatment has been given
to non-CO2 GHGs. A concentration target defines an allowable
amount of carbon to be emitted into the atmosphere between
now and the date at which the target is to be achieved. The
issue is how best to allocate the carbon budget over time.

29

Induced technological change is an emerging field of inquiry. None of
the literature reviewed in TAR on the relationship between the centuryscale CO2 concentrations and costs reported results for models
employing induced technological change. Models with induced
technological change under some circumstances show that centuryscale concentrations can differ, with similar GDP growth but under
different policy regimes.

WGIII Technical Summary

Most studies that have attempted to identify the least-cost pathway
for meeting a particular target conclude that such as pathway
tends to depart gradually from the model's baseline in the early
years with more rapid reductions later on. There are several
reasons why this is so. A gradual near-term transition from the
world's present energy system minimizes premature retirement
of existing capital stock, provides time for technology
development, and avoids premature lock-in to early versions
of rapidly developing low-emission technology. On the other
hand, more aggressive near-term action would decrease
environmental risks associated with rapid climatic changes,
stimulate more rapid deployment of existing low-emission
technologies (see also Section 8.10), provide strong near-term
incentives to future technological changes that may help to
avoid lock-in to carbon intensive technologies, and allow for
later tightening of targets should that be deemed desirable in
light of evolving scientific understanding.
It should also be noted that the lower the concentration target,
the smaller the carbon budget, and hence the earlier the
departure from the baseline. However, even with higher
concentration targets, the more gradual transition from the
baseline does not negate the need for early action. All
stabilization targets require future capital stock to be less
carbon-intensive. This has immediate implications for nearterm investment decisions. New supply options typically take
many years to enter into the marketplace. An immediate and
sustained commitment to R&D is required if low-carbon lowcost substitutes are to be available when needed.
The above addresses the issue of mitigation costs. It is also
important to examine the environmental impacts of choosing one
emission pathway over another. This is because different emission
pathways imply not only different emission reduction costs,
but also different benefits in terms of avoided environmental
impacts (see Section 10).
The assumption that the target is known with certainty is, of
course, an oversimplification. Fortunately, the UNFCCC
recognizes the dynamic nature of the decision problem. It calls
for periodic reviews "in light of the best scientific information
on climate change and its impacts." Such a sequential decision
making process aims to identify short-term hedging strategies
in the face of long-term uncertainties. The relevant question
is not "what is the best course of action for the next hundred
years" but rather "what is the best course for the near-term
given the long-term uncertainties."
Several studies have attempted to identify the optimal nearterm hedging strategy based on the uncertainty regarding the
long-term objective. These studies find that the desirable
amount of hedging depends upon one's assessment of the
stakes, the odds, and the cost of mitigation. The risk premium
- the amount that society is willing to pay to avoid risk -
ultimately is a political decision that differs among countries.

345

Climate Change 2001

8.10. The Issue of Induced Technological Change
Most models used to assess the costs of meeting a particular
mitigation objective tend to oversimplify the process of
technical change. Typically, the rate of technical change is
assumed to be independent of the level of emissions control.
Such change is referred to as autonomous. In recent years, the
issue of induced technical change has received increased attention.
Some argue that such change might substantially lower and
perhaps even eliminate the costs of CO2 abatement policies.
Others are much less sanguine about the impact of induced
technical change.
Recent research suggests that the effect on timing depends on the
source of technological change. When the channel for technological
change is R&D, the induced technological change makes it
preferable to concentrate more abatement efforts in the future.
The reason is that technological change lowers the costs of future
abatement relative to current abatement, making it more costeffective to place more emphasis on future abatement. But,
when the channel for technological change is learning-bydoing, the presence of induced technological change has an
ambiguous impact on the optimal timing of abatement. On the
one hand, induced technical change makes future abatement
less costly, which suggests emphasizing future abatement efforts.
On the other hand, there is an added value to current abatement
because such abatement contributes to experience or learning
and helps reduce the costs of future abatement. Which of these
two effects dominates depends on the particular nature of the
technologies and cost functions.
Certain social practices may resist or enhance technological
change. Therefore, public awareness-raising and education may
help encourage social change to an environment favourable
for technological innovation and diffusion. This represents an
area for further research.

9. Sectoral Costs and Ancillary Benefits of
Mitigation
9.1. Differences between Costs of Climate Change
Mitigation Evaluated Nationally and by Sector
Policies adopted to mitigate global warming will have implications
for specific sectors, such as the coal industry, the oil and gas
industry, electricity, manufacturing, transportation, and
households. A sectoral assessment helps to put the costs in
perspective, to identify the potential losers and the extent and
location of the losses, and to identify the sectors that may
benefit. However, it is worth noting that the available literature
to make this assessment is limited: there are few comprehensive
studies of the sectoral effects of mitigation, compared with
those on the macro GDP effects, and they tend to be for Annex
I countries and regions.

346

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

There is a fundamental problem for mitigation policies. It is
well established that, compared to the situation for potential
gainers, the potential sectoral losers are easier to identify,
and their losses are likely to be more immediate, more
concentrated, and more certain. The potential sectoral gainers
(apart from the renewables sector and perhaps the natural
gas sector) can only expect a small, diffused, and rather
uncertain gain, spread over a long period. Indeed many of
those who may gain do not exist, being future generations
and industries yet to develop.
It is also well established that the overall effects on GDP of
mitigation policies and measures, whether positive or negative,
conceal large differences between sectors. In general, the
energy intensity and the carbon intensity of the economies
will decline. The coal and perhaps the oil industries are
expected to lose substantial proportions of their traditional
output relative to those in the reference scenarios, though the
impact of this on the industries will depend on diversification,
and other sectors may increase their outputs but by much
smaller proportions. Reductions in fossil fuel output below
the baseline will not impact all fossil fuels equally. Fuels have
different costs and price sensitivities; they respond differently
to mitigation policies. Energy-efficiency technology is fuel
and combustion device-specific, and reductions in demand
can affect imports differently from output. Energy-intensive
sectors, such as heavy chemicals, iron and steel, and mineral
products, will face higher costs, accelerated technical or
organizational change, or loss of output (again relative to the
reference scenario) depending on their energy use and the
policies adopted for mitigation.
Industries concerned directly with mitigation are likely to benefit
from action. These industries include renewable and nuclear
electricity, producers of mitigation equipment (incorporating
energy- and carbon-saving technologies), agriculture and forestry
producing energy crops, and research services producing
energy and carbon-saving R&D. They may benefit in the long
term from the availability of financial and other resources that
would otherwise have been taken up in fossil fuel production.
They may also benefit from reductions in tax burdens if taxes
are used for mitigation and the revenues recycled as reductions
in employer, corporate, or other taxes. Those studies that report
reductions in GDP do not always provide a range of recycling
options, suggesting that policy packages increasing GDP have
not been explored. The extent and nature of the benefits will
vary with the policies followed. Some mitigation policies can
lead to net overall economic benefits, implying that the gains
from many sectors will outweigh the losses for coal and other
fossil fuels, and energy-intensive industries. In contrast, other
less-well-designed policies can lead to overall losses.
It is worth placing the task faced by mitigation policy in an
historical perspective. CO2 emissions have tended to grow
more slowly than GDP in a number of countries over the past

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

40 years. The reasons for such trends vary but include:
* a shift away from coal and oil and towards nuclear and gas
as the source of energy;
* improvements in energy efficiency by industry and
households; and
* a shift from heavy manufacturing towards more service
and information-based economic activity.
These trends will be encouraged and strengthened by
mitigation policies.
9.2. Selected Specific Sectoral Findings on Costs
of Climate Change Mitigation
9.2.1. Coal
Within this broad picture, certain sectors will be substantially
affected by mitigation. Relative to the reference case, the coal
industry, producing the most carbon-intensive of products,
faces almost inevitable decline in the long term, relative to
the baseline projection. Technologies still under development,
such as CO2 removal and storage from coal-burning plants
and in-situ gasification, could play a future role in maintaining
the output of coal whilst avoiding CO2 and other emissions.
Particularly large effects on the coal sector are expected from
policies such as the removal of fossil fuel subsidies or the
restructuring of energy taxes so as to tax the carbon content
rather than the energy content of fuels. It is a well-established
finding that removal of the subsidies would result in substantial
reductions in GHG emissions, as well as stimulating economic
growth. However, the effects in specific countries depend
heavily on the type of subsidy removed and the commercial
viability of alternative energy sources, including imported coal.
9.2.2. Oil
The oil industry also faces a potential relative decline, although
this may be moderated by lack of substitutes for oil in

transportation, substitution away from solid fuels towards
liquid fuels in electricity generation, and the diversification
of the industry into energy supply in general.
Table TS-6 shows a number of model results for the impacts of
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol on oil exporting countries.
Each model uses a different measure of impact, and many use
different groups of countries in their definition of oil exporters.
However, the studies all show that the use of the flexibility
mechanisms will reduce the economic cost to oil producers.
Thus, studies show a wide range of estimates for the impact
of GHG mitigation policies on oil production and revenue.
Much of these differences are attributable to the assumptions
made about: the availability of conventional oil reserves, the
degree of mitigation required, the use of emission trading,
control of GHGs other than CO2, and the use of carbon sinks.
However, all studies show a net growth in both oil production
and revenue to at least 2020, and significantly less impact on
the real price of oil than has resulted from market fluctuations
over the past 30 years. Figure TS-9 shows the projection of real
oil prices to 2010 from the IEA's 1998 World Energy Outlook,
and the effect of Kyoto implementation from the G-cubed
model, the study which shows the largest fall in Organization
of Oil Exporting Countries (OPEC) revenues in Table TS-6.
The 25% loss in OPEC revenues in the non-trading scenario
implies a 17% fall in oil prices shown for 2010 in the figure;
this is reduced to a fall of just over 7% with Annex I trading.
These studies typically do not consider some or all of the
following policies and measures that could lessen the impact
on oil exporters:
* policies and measures for non-CO2 GHGs or non-energy
sources of all GHGs;
* offsets from sinks;
* industry restructuring (e.g., from energy producer to supplier
of energy services);
* the use of OPEC's market power; and

Table TS-6: Costs of Kyoto Protocol implementation for oil exporting region/countries.a
Modelb

Without tradingc

With Annex I trading

With "global trading"

G-Cubed
GREEN
GTEM
MS-MRT
OPEC Model
CLIMOX

-25% oil revenue
-3% real income
0.2% GDP loss
1.39% welfare loss
-17% OPEC revenue
n.a.

-13% oil revenue
"Substantially reduced loss"
<0.05% GDP loss
1.15% welfare loss
-10% OPEC revenue
-10% some oil exporters' revenues

-7% oil revenue
n.a.
n.a.
0.36% welfare loss
-8% OPEC revenue
n.a.

a

The definition of oil exporting country varies: for G-Cubed and the OPEC model it is the OPEC countries, for GREEN it is a group of oil
exporting countries, for GTEM it is Mexico and Indonesia, for MS-MRT it is OPEC + Mexico, and for CLIMOX it is West Asian and North
African oil exporters.
b
The models all considere the global economy to 2010 with mitigation according to the Kyoto Protocol targets (usually in the models, applied to CO2
mitigation by 2010 rather than GHG emissions for 2008 to 2012) achieved by imposing a carbon tax or auctioned emission permits with revenues recycled
through lump-sum payments to consumers; no co-benefits, such as reductions in local air pollution damages, are taken into account in the results.
c
"Trading" denotes trading in emission permits between countries.

347

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

70
year 2000 estimated price

Real oil price $(1990) per barrel

60

G-Cubed: Kyoto Annex I trading
G-Cubed: Kyoto no trading

50

IEA Projection

40

30

20

10

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Note: The oil price shown is that of UK Brent deflated by the US GDP deflator. The year 2000 estimated price is based on actual prices January to August and
futures prices September to December.

Figure TS-9: Real oil prices and the effects of Kyoto implementation.

* actions (e.g., of Annex B Parties) related to funding, insurance,
and the transfer of technology.
In addition, the studies typically do not include the following
policies and effects that can reduce the total cost of mitigation:
* the use of tax revenues to reduce tax burdens or finance
other mitigation measures;
* environmental co- or ancillary benefits of reductions in
fossil fuel use; and
* induced technical change from mitigation policies.
As a result, the studies may tend to overstate both the costs to
oil exporting countries and overall costs.
9.2.3. Gas
Modelling studies suggest that mitigation policies may have
the least impact on oil, the most impact on coal, with the impact
on gas somewhere between; these findings are established but
incomplete. The high variation across studies for the effects of
mitigation on gas demand is associated with the importance of
its availability in different locations, its specific demand patterns,
and the potential for gas to replace coal in power generation.
These results are different from recent trends, which show natural
gas usage growing faster than the use of either coal or oil.
They can be explained as follows. In the transport sector, the
largest user of oil, current technology and infrastructure will
not allow much switching from oil to non-fossil fuel alternatives
in Annex I countries before about 2020. Annex B countries
can only meet their Kyoto Protocol commitments by reducing
overall energy use and this will result in a reduction in natural

348

IPCC Third Assessment Report

gas demand, unless this is offset by a switch towards natural
gas for power generation. The modelling of such a switch
remains limited in these models.
9.2.4. Electricity
In general as regards the effects on the electricity sector,
mitigation policies either mandate or directly provide incentives
for increased use of zero-emitting technologies (such as nuclear,
hydro, and other renewables) and lower-GHG-emitting
generation technologies (such as combined cycle natural gas).
Or, second, they drive their increased use indirectly by more
flexible approaches that place a tax on or require a permit for
emission of GHGs. Either way, the result will be a shift in the
mix of fuels used to generate electricity towards increased
use of the zero- and lower-emitting generation technologies,
and away from the higher-emitting fossil fuels.
Nuclear power would have substantial advantages as a result
of GHG mitigation policies, because power from nuclear fuel
produces negligible GHGs. In spite of this advantage, nuclear
power is not seen as the solution to the global warming problem
in many countries. The main issues are (1) the high costs compared
to alternative CCGTs, (2) public acceptance involving operating
safety and waste, (3) safety of radioactive waste management
and recycling of nuclear fuel, (4) the risks of nuclear fuel
transportation, and (5) nuclear weapons proliferation.
9.2.5. Transport
Unless highly efficient vehicles (such as fuel cell vehicles) become
rapidly available, there are few options available to reduce

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

transport energy use in the short term, which do not involve
significant economic, social, or political costs. No government
has yet demonstrated policies that can reduce the overall demand
for mobility, and all governments find it politically difficult to
contemplate such measures. Substantial additional improvements
in aircraft energy efficiency are most likely to be accomplished
by policies that increase the price of, and therefore reduce the
amount of, air travel. Estimated price elasticities of demand are
in the range of -0.8 to -2.7. Raising the price of air travel by
taxes faces a number of political hurdles. Many of the bilateral
treaties that currently govern the operation of the air transport
system contain provisions for exemptions of taxes and charges,
other than for the cost of operating and improving the system.

9.5. Why the Results of Studies Differ

9.3. Sectoral Ancillary Benefits of Greenhouse Gas
Mitigation

As regards the costs of mitigation, these differences appear to
be largely caused by different approaches and assumptions, with
the most important being the type of model adopted. Bottom-up
engineering models assuming new technological opportunities
tend to show benefits from mitigation. Top-down general
equilibrium models appear to show lower costs than top-down
time-series econometric models. The main assumptions leading
to lower costs in the models are that:
* new flexible instruments, such as emission trading and joint
implementation, are adopted;
* revenues from taxes or permit sales are returned to the
economy by reducing burdensome taxes; and
* ancillary benefits, especially from reduced air pollution,
are included in the results.

The direct costs for fossil fuel consumption are accompanied
by environmental and public health benefits associated with a
reduction in the extraction and burning of the fuels. These
benefits come from a reduction in the damages caused by these
activities, especially a reduction in the emissions of pollutants
that are associated with combustion, such as SO2, NOx, CO
and other chemicals, and particulate matter. This will improve
local and regional air and water quality, and thereby lessen
damage to human, animal, and plant health, and to ecosystems.
If all the pollutants associated with GHG emissions are removed
by new technologies or end-of-pipe abatement (for example,
flue gas desulphurization on a power station combined with
removal of all other non-GHG pollutants), then this ancillary
benefit will no longer exist. But such abatement is limited at
present and it is expensive, especially for small-scale emissions
from dwellings and cars (See also Section 8.6).
9.4. The Effects of Mitigation on Sectoral
Competitiveness
Mitigation policies are less effective if they lead to loss of
international competitiveness or the migration of GHG-emitting
industries from the region implementing the policy (so-called
carbon leakage). The estimated effects, reported in the literature,
on international price competitiveness are small while those on
carbon leakage appear to beat the stage of competing explanations,
with large differences depending on the models and the assumptions
used. There are several reasons for expecting that such effects
will not be substantial. First, mitigation policies actually adopted
use a range of instruments and usually include special treatment
to minimize adverse industrial effects, such as exemptions for
energy-intensive industries. Second, the models assume that
any migrating industries will use the average technology of
the area to which they will move; however, instead they may
adopt newer, lower CO2-emitting technologies. Third, the
mitigation policies also encourage low-emission technologies
and these also may migrate, reducing emissions in industries
in other countries (see also Section 8.7).

The results in the studies assessed come from different approaches
and models. A proper interpretation of the results requires an
understanding of the methods adopted and the underlying
assumptions of the models and studies. Large differences in results
can arise from the use of different reference scenarios or baselines.
And the characteristics of the baseline can markedly affect the
quantitative results of modelling mitigation policy. For example,
if air quality is assumed to be satisfactory in the baseline, then the
potential for air-quality ancillary benefits in any GHG mitigation
scenario is ruled out by assumption. Even with similar or the
same baseline assumptions, the studies yield different results.

Finally, long-term technological progress and diffusion are largely
given in the top-down models; different assumptions or a more
integrated, dynamic treatment could have major effects on the
results.

10. Decision Analytical Frameworks
10.1. Scope for and New Developments in
Analyses for Climate Change Decisions
Decision making frameworks (DMFs) related to climate change
involve multiple levels ranging from global negotiations to
individual choices and a diversity of actors with different
resource endowments, and diverging values and aspirations.
This explains why it is difficult to arrive at a management strategy
that is acceptable for all. The dynamic interplay among economic
sectors and related social interest groups makes it difficult to
arrive at a national position to be represented at international
fora in the first place. The intricacies of international climate
negotiations result from the manifold often-ambiguous national
positions as well as from the linkages of climate change policy
with other socio-economic objectives.
No DMF can reproduce the above diversity in its full richness.
Yet analysts have made significant progress in several directions

349

since SAR. First, they integrate an increasing number of issues
into a single analytical framework in order to provide an internally
consistent assessment of closely related components, processes,
and subsystems. The resulting integrated assessment models
(IAMs) cited in Chapter 9, and indeed throughout the whole
report, provide useful insights into a number of climate policy
issues for policymakers. Second, scientists pay increasing attention
to the broader context of climate related issues that have been
ignored or paid marginal attention previously. Among other
factors, this has fostered the integration of development,
sustainability and equity issues into the present report.
Climate change is profoundly different from most other
environmental problems with which humanity has grappled.
A combination of several features lends the climate problem
its uniqueness. They include public good issues raising from
the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere that requires
collective global action, the multiplicity of decision makers
ranging from global down to the micro level of firms and
individuals, and the heterogeneity of emissions and their
consequences around the world. Moreover, the long-term
nature of climate change originates from the fact that it is the
concentration of GHGs that matters rather than their annual
emissions and this feature raises the thorny issues of
intergenerational transfers of wealth and environmental goods
and bads. Next, human activities associated with climate change
are widespread, which makes narrowly defined technological
solutions impossible, and the interactions of climate policy with
other broad socio-economic policies are strong. Finally, large
uncertainties or in some areas even ignorance characterize many
aspects of the problem and require a risk management approach
to be adopted in all DMFs that deal with climate change.

Synthesis Report

revealed) must be met at all costs. Other experiments, such as
those with cost-benefit models framed as a Bayesian decision
analysis problem show that optimal near-term (next two
decades) emission paths diverge only modestly under perfect
foresight, and hedging even for low-probability, high-consequence
scenarios (see Figure TS-10b). However, decisions about nearterm climate policies may have to be made while the
stabilization target is still being debated. Decision-making
therefore should consider appropriate hedging against future
resolution of that target and possible revision of the scientific
insights in the risks of climate change. There are significant
differences in the two approaches. With a cost-effectiveness
analysis, the target must be made regardless of costs. With a
cost-benefit analysis, costs and benefits are balanced at the
margin. Nevertheless, the basic message is quite similar and
involves the explicit incorporation of uncertainty and its
sequential resolution over time. The desirable amount of
hedging depends upon one's assessment of the stakes, the odds,
and the costs of policy measures. The risk premium - the
amount that society is willing to pay to reduce risk - ultimately
is a political decision that differs among countries.

14
13

550A
550

11
10
9
8

Policymakers therefore have to grapple with great uncertainties
in choosing the appropriate responses. A wide variety of tools
have been applied to help them make fundamental choices.
Each of those decision analysis frameworks (DAFs) has its
own merits and shortcoming through its ability to address some
of the above features well, but other facets less adequately.
Recent analyses with well-established tools such as cost-
benefit analysis as well as newly developed frameworks like
the tolerable windows or safe landing approach provide fresh
insights into the problem.

650

Reference

12

GtC

Climate Change 2001

Decide target
in 2020 only

7

450
2000

2020

2040

Figure TS-10a: Optimal carbon dioxide emissions strategy, using
a cost-effectiveness approach.
18
Perfect Foresight
Uncertainty Resolved in 2020

16
14

Reference Case
Scenario

350

IPCC Third Assessment Report

GtC

12

Figure TS-10a shows the results of a cost-effectiveness analysis
exploring the optimal hedging strategy when uncertainty with
respect to the long-term stabilization target is not resolved
until 2020, suggesting that abatement over the next few years
would be economically valuable if there is a significant
probability of having to stay below ceilings that would be
otherwise reached within the characteristic time scales of the
systems producing greenhouse gases. The degree of near-term
hedging in the above analysis is sensitive to the date of
resolution of uncertainty, the inertia in the energy system, and
the fact that the ultimate concentration target (once it has been

10

Hedging Strategy

8
6
4
Low Probability,
High Consequence Scenario

2
0
1990

2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

Figure TS-10b: Optimal hedging strategy for low probability, high
consequence scenario using a cost-benefits optimization approach.

Mitigation

Cost-effectiveness analyses seek the lowest cost of achieving
an environmental target by equalizing the marginal costs of
mitigation across space and time. Long-term cost-effectiveness
studies estimate the costs of stabilizing atmospheric CO2
concentrations at different levels and find that the costs of the
450ppmv ceiling are substantially greater than those of the
750ppmv limit. Rather than seeking a single optimal path, the
tolerable windows/safe landing approach seeks to delineate
the complete array of possible emission paths that satisfy
externally defined climate impact and emission cost constraints.
Results indicate that delaying near-term effective emission
reductions can drastically reduce the future range of options
for relatively tight climate change targets, while less tight
targets offer more near-term flexibility.
10.2. International Regimes and Policy Options
The structure and characteristics of international agreements
on climate change will have a significant influence on the
effectiveness and costs and benefits of mitigation. The
effectiveness and the costs and benefits of an international
climate change regime (such as the Kyoto Protocol or other
possible future agreements) depend on the number of signatories
to the agreement and their abatement targets and/or policy
commitment. At the same time, the number of signatories depends
on the question of how equitably the commitments of participants
are shared. Economic efficiency (minimizing costs by maximizing
participation) and equity (the allocation of emissions limitation
commitments) are therefore strongly linked.
There is a three-way relationship between the design of the
international regime, the cost-effectiveness/efficiency of
climate policies, and the equity of the consequent economic
outcomes. As a consequence, it is crucial to design the international
regime in a way that is considered both efficient and equitable.
The literature presents different theoretical strategies to optimize
an international regime. For example, it can be made attractive
for countries to join the group that commits to specific targets
for limitation and reduction of emissions by increasing the equity
of a larger agreement - and therefore its efficiency - through
measures like an appropriate distribution of targets over time,
the linkage of the climate debate with other issues ("issue
linkage"), the use of financial transfers to affected countries
("side payments"), or technology transfer agreements.
Two other important concerns shape the design of an
international regime: "implementation" and "compliance". The
effectiveness of the regime, which is a function of both
implementation and compliance, is related to actual changes of
behaviour that promote the goals of the accord. Implementation
refers to the translation of international accords into domestic
law, policy, and regulations by national governments. Compliance
is related to whether and to what extent countries do in fact
adhere to provisions of an accord. Monitoring, reporting, and
verification are essential for the effectiveness of international

WGIII Technical Summary

environmental regimes, as the systematic monitoring,
assessment, and handling of implementation failures have been
so far relatively rare. Nonetheless, efforts to provide "systems
of implementation review" are growing, and are already
incorporated into the UNFCCC structure. The challenge for
the future is to make them more effective, especially by
improving data on national emissions, policies, and measures.
10.3. Linkages to National and Local Sustainable
Development Choices
Much of the ambiguity related to sustainable development and
climate change arises from the lack of measurements that could
provide policymakers with essential information on the
alternative choices at stake, how those choices affect clear and
recognizable social, economic, and environmental critical issues,
and also provide a basis for evaluating their performance in
achieving goals and targets. Therefore, indicators are
indispensable to make the concept of sustainable development
operational. At the national level important steps in the
direction of defining and designing different sets of indicators
have been undertaken; however, much work remains to be
done to translate sustainability objectives into practical terms.
It is difficult to generalize about sustainable development
policies and choices. Sustainability implies and requires
diversity, flexibility, and innovation. Policy choices are meant
to introduce changes in technological patterns of natural
resource use, production and consumption, structural changes
in the production systems, spatial distribution of population
and economic activities, and behavioural patterns. Climate
change literature has by and large addressed the first three
topics, while the relevance of choices and decisions related to
behavioural patterns and lifestyles has been paid scant
attention. Consumption patterns in the industrialized countries
are an important reason for climate change. If people changed
their preferences this could alleviate climate change considerably.
To change consumption patterns, however, people must not
only change their behaviour but also change themselves
because these patterns are an essential element of lifestyles
and, therefore, of self-esteem. Yet, apart from climate change
there are other reasons to do so as well as indications that this
change can be fostered politically.
A critical requirement of sustainable development is a capacity
to design policy measures that, without hindering development
and consistent with national strategies, could exploit potential
synergies between national economic growth objectives and
environmentally focused policies. Climate change mitigation
strategies offer a clear example of how co-ordinated and
harmonized policies can take advantage of the synergies
between the implementation of mitigation options and broader
objectives. Energy efficiency improvements, including energy
conservation, switch to low carbon content fuels, use of
renewable energy sources and the introduction of more advanced

351

Climate Change 2001

non conventional energy technologies, are expected to have
significant impacts on curbing actual GHG emission tendencies.
Similarly, the adoption of new technologies and practices in
agriculture and forestry activities as well as the adoption of clean
production processes could make substantial contributions to
the GHG mitigation effort. Depending on the specific context
in which they are applied, these options may entail positive
side effects or double dividends, which in some cases are worth
undertaking whether or not there are climate-related reasons
for doing so.
Sustainable development requires radical technological and
related changes in both developed and developing countries.
Technological innovation and the rapid and widespread transfer
and implementation of individual technological options and
choices, as well as overall technological systems, constitute major
elements of global strategies to achieve both climate stabilization
and sustainable development. However, technology transfer
requires more than technology itself. An enabling environment
for the successful transfer and implementation of technology
plays a crucial role, particularly in developing countries. If
technology transfer is to bring about economic and social
benefits it must take into account the local cultural traditions
and capacities as well as the institutional and organizational
circumstances required to handle, operate, replicate, and
improve the technology on a continuous basis.
The process of integrating and internalizing climate change and
sustainable development policies into national development
agendas requires new problem solving strategies and decisionmaking approaches. This task implies a twofold effort. On
one hand, sustainable development discourse needs greater
analytical and intellectual rigor (methods, indicators, etc.) to
make this concept advance from theory to practice. On the
other hand, climate change discourse needs to be aware of
both the restrictive set of assumptions underlying the tools
and methods applied in the analysis, and the social and political
implications of scientific constructions of climate change. Over
recent years a good deal of analytical work has addressed the
problem in both directions. Various approaches have been
explored to transcend the limits of the standard views and
decision frameworks in dealing with issues of uncertainty,
complexity, and the contextual influences of human valuation
and decision making. A common theme emerges: the emphasis
on participatory decision making frameworks for articulating
new institutional arrangements.
10.4. Key Policy-relevant Scientific Questions
Different levels of globally agreed limits for climate change
(or for corresponding atmospheric GHG concentrations), entail
different balances of mitigation costs and net damages for
individual nations. Considering the uncertainties involved and
future learning, climate stabilization will inevitably be an
iterative process: nation states determine their own national

352

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

targets based on their own exposure and their sensitivity to other
countries' exposure to climate change. The global target emerges
from consolidating national targets, possibly involving side
payments, in global negotiations. Simultaneously, agreement on
burden sharing and the agreed global target determines national
costs. Compared to the expected net damages associated with the
global target, nation states might reconsider their own national
targets, especially as new information becomes available on global
and regional patterns and impacts of climate change. This is then
the starting point for the next round of negotiations. It follows
from the above that establishing the "magic number" (i.e., the
upper limit for global climate change or GHG concentration in
the atmosphere) will be a long process and its source will primarily
be the policy process, hopefully helped by improving science.
Looking at the key dilemmas in climate change decision making,
the following conclusions emerge (see also Table TS-7):
* a carefully crafted portfolio of mitigation, adaptation, and
learning activities appears to be appropriate over the next
few decades to hedge against the risk of intolerable magnitudes
and/or rates of climate change (impact side) and against
the need to undertake painfully drastic emission reductions
if the resolution of uncertainties reveals that climate change
and its impacts might imply high risks;
* emission reduction is an important form of mitigation, but
the mitigation portfolio includes a broad range of other
activities, including investments to develop low-cost noncarbon, energy efficient and carbon management technologies
that will make future CO2 mitigation less expensive;
* timing and composition of mitigation measures (investment
into technological development or immediate emission
reductions) is highly controversial because of the technological
features of energy systems, and the range of uncertainties
involved in the impacts of different emission paths;
* international flexibility instruments help reduce the costs of
emission reductions, but they raise a series of implementation
and verification issues that need to be balanced against
the cost savings;
* while there is a broad consensus to use the Pareto optimality30
as the efficiency principle, there is no agreement on the best
equity principle on wich to build an equitable international
regime. Efficiency and equity are important concerns in
negotiating emission limitation schemes, and they are not
mutually exclusive. Therefore, equity will play an important
role in determining the distribution of emissions allowances
and/or within compensation schemes following emission
trading that could lead to a disproportionately high level of
burden on certain countries. Finally, it could be more important
to build a regime on the combined implications of the various
equity principles rather than to select any one particular
equity principle. Diffusing non-carbon, energy-efficient, as

30

Pareto optimum is a requirement or status that an individual's welfare could
not be further improved without making others in the society worse off.

Mitigation

WGIII Technical Summary

Table TS-7: Balancing the near-term mitigation portfolio.
Issue

Favouring modest early abatement

Favouring stringent early abatement

Technology
development

* Energy technologies are changing and improved
versions of existing technologies are becoming
available, even without policy intervention.
* Modest early deployment of rapidly improving
technologies allows learning-curve cost
reductions, without premature lock-in to
existing, low-productivity technology.
* The development of radically advanced technologies
will require investment in basic research.

* Availability of low-cost measures may have
substantial impact on emissions trajectories.
* Endogenous (market-induced) change could
accelerate development of low-cost solutions
(learning-by-doing).
* Clustering effects highlight the importance of
moving to lower emission trajectories.
* Induces early switch of corporate energy R&D
from fossil frontier developments to low carbon
technologies.

Capital stock and * Beginning with initially modest emissions limits
inertia
avoids premature retirement of existing capital
stocks and takes advantage of the natural rate of
capital stock turnover.
* It also reduces the switching cost of existing
capital and prevents rising prices of investments
caused by crowding out effects.

* Exploit more fully natural stock turnover by
influencing new investments from the present
onwards.
* By limiting emissions to levels consistent with low
CO2 concentrations, preserves an option to limit
CO2 concentrations to low levels using current
technology.
* Reduces the risks from uncertainties in stabilization
constraints and hence the risk of being forced
into very rapid reductions that would require
premature capital retirement later.

Social effects and * Gradual emission reduction reduces the extent of
inertia
induced sectoral unemployment by giving more
time to retrain the workforce and for structural
shifts in the labour market and education.
* Reduces welfare losses associated with the need
for fast changes in people's lifestyles and living
arrangements.

* Especially if lower stabilization targets would be
required ultimately, stronger early action reduces
the maximum rate of emissions abatement required
subsequently and reduces associated transitional
problems, disruption, and the welfare losses
associated with the need for faster later changes
in people's lifestyles and living arrangements.

Discounting and
intergenerational
equity

* Reduces the present value of future abatement
costs (ceteris paribus), but possibly reduces future
relative costs by furnishing cheap technologies
and increasing future income levels.

Carbon cycle and * Small increase in near-term, transient CO2
concentration.
radiative change
* More early emissions absorbed, thus enabling
higher total carbon emissions this century under
a given stabilization constraint (to be compensated
by lower emissions thereafter).
Climate change
impacts

* Little evidence on damages from multi-decade
episodes of relatively rapid change in the past.

well as other GHG reducing technologies worldwide could
make a significant contribution to reducing emissions over
the short term, but many barriers hamper technology
transfer, including market imperfections, political problems,
and the often-neglected transaction costs;
* some obvious linkages exist between current global and
continental environmental problems and attempts of the
international community to resolve them, but the potential
synergies of jointly tackling several of them have not yet
been thoroughly explored, let alone exploited.
Mitigation and adaptation decisions related to anthropogenically
induced climate change differ. Mitigation decisions involve many

* Reduces impacts and (ceteris paribus) reduces
their present value.

* Small decrease in near-term, transient CO2
concentration.
* Reduces peak rates in temperature change.

* Avoids possibly higher damages caused by faster
rates of climate change.

countries, disperse benefits globally over decades to centuries
(with some near-term ancillary benefits), are driven by public
policy action, based on information available today, and the
relevant regulation will require rigorous enforcement. In
contrast, adaptation decisions involve a shorter time span
between outlays and returns, related costs and benefits accrue
locally, and their implementation involves local public policies
and private adaptation of the affected social agents, both based
on improving information. Local mitigation and adaptive
capacities vary significantly across regions and over time. A
portfolio of mitigation and adaptation policies will depend on
local or national priorities and preferred approaches in
combination with international responsibilities.

353

Climate Change 2001

Given the large uncertainties characterizing each component of
the climate change problem, it is difficult for decision makers
to establish a globally acceptable level of stabilizing GHG
concentrations today. Studies appraised in Chapter10 support
the obvious expectations that lower stabilization targets involve
substantially higher mitigation costs and relatively more ambitious
near-term emission reductions on the one hand, but, as reported by
WGII, lower targets induce significantly smaller bio/geophysical
impacts and thus induce smaller damages and adaptation costs.

11 Gaps in Knowledge
Important gaps in own knowledge on which additional research
could be useful to support future assessments include:
* Further exploration of the regional, country, and sector
specific potentials of technological and social innovation
options, including:
- The short, medium, and long-term potential and costs of
both CO2 and non-CO2, non-energy mitigation options;
- Understanding of technology diffusion across different
regions;
- Identifying opportunities in the area of social innovation
leading to decreased greenhouse gas emissions;
- Comprehensive analysis of the impact of mitigation
measures on C flows in and out of the terrestrial system;
and
- Some basic inquiry in the area of geo-engineering.
* Economic, social, and institutional issues related to climate
change mitigation in all countries. Priority areas include:
- Much more analysis of regionally specific mitigation
options, barriers, and policies is recommended as these
are conditioned by the regions' mitigative capacity;
- The implications of mitigation on equity;
- Appropriate methodologies and improved data sources
for climate change mitigation and capacity building in
the area of integrated assessment;
- Strengthening future research and assessments,
especially in developing countries.
* Methodologies for analysis of the potential of mitigation
options and their cost, with special attention to comparability
of results. Examples include:
- Characterizing and measuring barriers that inhibit
greenhouse gas-reducing action;
- Make mitigation modelling techniques more consistent,
reproducible, and accessible;
- Modelling technology learning; improving analytical tools
for evaluating ancillary benefits, e.g. assigning the costs
of abatement to greenhouse gases and to other pollutants;
- Systematically analyzing the dependency of costs on
baseline assumptions for various greenhouse gas
stabilization scenarios;

354

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

- Developing decision analytical frameworks for dealing
with uncertainty as well as socio-economic and ecological
risk in climate policymaking;
- Improving global models and studies, their assumptions,
and their consistency in the treatment and reporting of
non-Annex I countries and regions.
* Evaluating climate mitigation options in the context of
development, sustainability, and equity. Examples include:
- More research is needed on the balance of options in
the areas of mitigation and adaptation and of the
mitigative and adaptive capacity in the context of DES;
- Exploration of alternative development paths including
sustainable consumption patterns in all sectors, including
the transportation sector, and integrated analysis of
mitigation and adaptation;
- Identifying opportunities for synergy between explicit
climate policies and general policies promoting
sustainable development;
- Integration of inter- and intragenerational equity in
climate change mitigation studies;
Implications of equity assessments;
- Analysis of scientific, technical, and economic aspects
of implications of options under a wide variety of
stabilization regimes;
- Determining what kinds of policies interact with what
sorts of socio-economic conditions to result in futures
characterized by low CO2 emissions;
- Investigation on how changes in societal values may be
encouraged to promote sustainable development; and
- Evaluating climate mitigation options in the context of
and for synergy with potential or actual adaptive
measures.
* Development of engineering-economic, end-use, and sectoral
studies of GHG emissions mitigation potentials for specific
regions and/or countries of the world, focusing on:
- Identification and assessment of mitigation technologies
and measures that are required to deviate from "businessas-usual" in the short term (2010, 2020);
Development of standardized methodologies for
- quantifying emissions reductions and costs of mitigation
technologies and measures;
- Identification of barriers to the implementation of the
mitigation technologies and measures;
- Identification of opportunities to increase adoption of
GHG emissions mitigation technologies and measures
through connections with ancillary benefits as well as
furtherance of the DES goals; and
- Linking the results of the assessments to specific policies
and programmes that can overcome the identified
barriers as well as leverage the identified ancillary
benefits.

Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report

Annexes

An Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
The glossary and companion annexes were not submitted to the Panel for action, consistent with normal practice within the
IPCC.

A. Authors and Expert Reviewers
B. Glossary of Terms
C. Acronyms, Abbreviations, and Units
D. Scientific, Technical, and Socio-Economic Questions Selected by the Panel
E. List of Major IPCC Reports

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Annex A. Authors and Expert Reviewers

356

Argentina
Daniel Bouille
Marcelo Cabido
Osvaldo F. Canziani
Rodolfo Carcavallo
Jorge O. Codignotto
Martin de Zuviria
Sandra Myrna Diaz
Jorge Frangi
Hector Ginzo
Osvaldo Girardin
Carlos Labraga
Gabriel Soler
Walter Vargas
Ernesto F. Viglizzo

Fundecion Bariloche
IMBIV, University of Cordoba
Co-Chair, WGII
Department of Entomology
Laboratorio Geologia y Dinamica Costera
Aeroterra S.A.
Instituto Multidisciplinario de Biologia Vegetal
Universidad Nacional de la Plata
Instituto de Neurobiologia
Fundacion Bariloche
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientificas y Tecnicas, Centro Nactional Patagonico
Fundacion Instituto Latinoamericano de Politicas Sociales (ILAPS)
University of Buenos Aires - IEIMA
PROCISUR/INTO/CONICET

Australia
Susan Barrell
Bryson Bates
Ian Carruthers
Habiba Gitay
John A. Church
Ove Hoegh-Guldberg
Roger Jones
Bryant McAvaney
Chris Mitchell
Ian Noble
Barrie Pittock
Andy Reisinger
B. Soderbaum
Greg Terrill
Kevin Walsh
John Zillman

Bureau of Meteorology
CSIRO
Australian Greenhouse Office
Australian National University
CSIRO Division of Oceanography
The University of Queensland
CSIRO Atmospheric Research
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre
CSIRO Atmosphere Research
Australian National University
CSIRO (Climate Impact Group)
Ministry for the Environment
Greenhouse Policy Office, Australian Greenhouse Office
Australian Greenhouse Office
Principal Research Scientist CSIRO Atmospheric Research
Vice-Chair, WGI

Austria
Renate Christ
Helmut Hojesky
K. Radunsky

IPCC Secretariat
Federal Ministry for Environment
Federal Environment Agency

Bangladesh
Q.K. Ahmad

Bangladesh Unnayan Parishad

Barbados
Leonard Nurse

Coastal Zone Management Unit

Belgium
Philippe Huybrechts
C. Vinckier
R. Zander

Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Department of Chemistry, KULeuven
University of Liege

Benin
Epiphane Dotou Ahlonsou
Michel Boko

Service Meteorologique National
Universite de Bourgogne

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Annex A

Authors and Expert Reviewers

Bosnia
Permanent Mission of Bosnia & Herzegovina
Botswana
Pauline O. Dube

University of Botswana

Brazil
Gylvan Meira Filho
Jose Roberto Moreira

Vice-Chair, IPCC
Biomass User Network (BUN )

Canada
Brad Bass
James P. Bruce
Margo Burgess
Wenjun Chen
Jing Chen
Stewart J. Cohen
Patti Edwards
David Etkin
Darren Goetze
J. Peter Hall
H. Hengeveld
Pamela Kertland
Abdel Maaroud
Joan Masterton
Chris McDermott
Brian Mills
Linda Mortsch
Tad Murty
Paul Parker
John Robinson
Hans-Holger Rogner
Daniel Scott
Sharon Smith
Barry Smit
John Stone
Tana Lowen Stratton
Roger Street
Eric Taylor
G. Daniel Williams

Environment Canada
Canadian Climate Program Board
Natural Resources Canada
Natural Resources Canada
University of Toronto
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Canadian Forest Service
Environment Canada
Natural Resources Canada
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Environment Canada
Baird and Associates Coastal Engineers
University of Waterloo
University of British Columbia
University of Victoria
Environment Canada
Natural Resources Canada
University of Guelph
Vice-Chair, WGI
Dept. Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Environment Canada
Natural Resources Canada
Environment Canada (retired)

Chile
E. Basso

Independent Consultant

China
Du Bilan
Z. Chen
Liu Chunzhen
Zhou Dadi
Qin Dahe
Xiaosu Dai
Lin Erda
Mingshan Su
Yihui Ding
Guangsheng Zhou
Z.C. Zhao

China Institute for Marine Development Strategy
China Meteorological Administration
Hydrological Forecasting & Water Control Center
Energy Research Institute
China Meteorological Administration
IPCC WGI TSU
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science
Tsinghua University
Co-Chair, WGI
Chinese Academy of Sciences
National Climate Center
357

Climate Change 2001

358

Synthesis Report

Cuba
Ramon Pichs-Madruga
A.G. Suarez

Vice-Chair, WGIII
Cuban Environmental Agency

Czech Republic
Jan Pretel

Vice-Chair, WGII

Denmark
Jesper Gundermann
Kirsten Halsnaes
Erik Rasmussen
Martin Stendel

Danish Energy Agency
Riso International Laboratory
Danish Energy Agency
Danish Meteorological Institute

Finland
Timothy Carter
P. Heikinheimo
Raino Heino
Pekka E. Kauppi
R. Korhonen
A. Lampinen
I. Savolainen

Finnish Environment Institute
Ministry of Environment
Finnish Meteorological Institute
University of Helsinki
VTT Energy
University of Jyvaskyla
VTT Energy

France
Olivier Boucher
Marc Darras
Jane Ellis
Jean-Charles Hourcade
J.C. Morlot
M. Petit

Universite de Lille I
Gaz de France
OECD
CIRED/CNRS
Environment Department
Ecole Polytechnique

Gambia
B.E. Gomez
M. Njie

Department of Water Resources
Department of Water Resources

Germany
Heinz-Jurgen Ahlgrimm
Rosemarie Benndorf
Peter Burschel
Ulrich Cubasch
U. Fuentes
Joanna HouseMax
Jucundus Jacobeit
Eberhard Jochem
Harald Kohl
Petra Mahrenholz
I. Colin Prentice
C. le Quere
Sarah Raper
Ferenc Toth
Manfred Treber
R. Sartorius
Michael Weber
Gerd-Rainer Weber

Institute for Technology & Biosystems
Umweltbundesamt
Technische Universitat Munchen
Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie
German Advisory Council on Global Change
Planck Inst. Biogeochemie
Universitaet Wuerzburg
Vice-Chair, WGIII
Federal Ministry of the Environment
Federal Environmental Agency of Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry
University of East Anglia
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Germanwatch
Umweltbundesamt
Ludwig-Maximilians Universitat Munchen
Gesamtverband des Deutschen Steinkohlenberghaus

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Annex A

Authors and Expert Reviewers

Hungary
G. Koppany
Halldor Thorgeirsson

University of Szeged
Ministry for the Environment

India
Murari Lal
Rajendra K. Pachauri
N.H. Ravindranath
Priyadarshi Shukla
Leena Srivastava

Indian Institute of Technology
Tata Energy Research Institute
Indian Institute of Sciences
Indian Institute of Management
Tata Energy Research Institute

Indonesia
R.T.M. Sutamihardja

Vice-Chair, WGIII

Israel
Simon Krichak

Tel Aviv University

Italy
Filippo Giorgi
Annarita Mariotti

Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP)
ENEA Climate Section

Japan
Kazuo Asakura
Noriyuki Goto
Mariko Handa
Hideo Harasawa
Yasuo Hosoya
Y. Igarashi
Takeshi Imai
M. Inoue
Hisashi Kato
Naoki Matsuo
Hisayoshi Morisugi
Tsuneyuki Morita
Shinichi Nagata
S. Nakagawa
Yoshiaki Nishimura
Ichiro Sadamori
Akihiko Sasaki
Shojiro Sato
A. Takeuchi
Kanako Tanaka
Tomihiro Taniguchi

Central Research Institute (CRIEPI)
University of Tokyo, Komaba
Organization for Landscape and Urban Greenery Technology Development
Social and Environmental Systems Division
Tokyo Electric Power Company
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Kansai Electric Power Co., Inc.
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry
Global Industrial and Social Progress Research Institute (GISPRI)
Tohoku University
National Institute for Environmental Studies
Environment Agency
Japan Meteorological Agency
Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry
Global Industrial and Social Progress Research Institute (GISPRI)
National Institute of Public Health
Chuba Electric Power Co.
Japan Meteorological Agency
Global Industrial and Social Progress
Vice-Chair, IPCC

Kenya
Richard S. Odingo
Kingiri Senelwa

Vice-Chair, WGIII
Moi University

Malawi
Paul Desanker

University of Virginia

Mexico
Gustavo Albin

Permanent Representative Mission of Mexico

359

Climate Change 2001

360

Synthesis Report

Morocco
Abdelkader Allali
Abdalah Mokssit

Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Fishing
Centre National du Climat et de Recherchco Meteorologiques

Netherlands
Alphonsus P.M. Baede
T.A. Buishand
W.L. Hare
Catrinus J. Jepma
E. Koekkoek
Rik Leemans
K. McKullen
Bert Metz
Leo Meyer
Maresa Oosterman
M.B.A.M. Scheffers
Rob Swart
H.M. ten Brink
Aad P. van Ulden
J. Verbeek

Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Greenpeace International
University of Groningen
Ministry of Housing, Spacial Planning and the Environment
National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection
Greenpeace International
Co-Chair, WGIII
Ministry of the Environment
Ministerie van Buitenlandse Zaken
National Institute for Coastal and Marine Management
Head, WGIII TSU
ECN
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management

New Zealand
Jon Barnett
Vincent Gray
Wayne Hennessy
Piers Maclaren
Martin Manning
Helen Plume
A. Reisinger
J. Salinger
Ralph Sims

Macmillan Brown Centre for Pacific Studies, University of Canterbury
Climate Consultant
Coal Research Association of New Zealand, Inc.
NZ Forest Research Institute
Vice-Chair, WGII
Ministry for the Environment
Ministry for the Environment
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd (NIWA)
Massey University

Niger
Garba Goudou Dieudonne

Office of the Prime Minister

Nigeria
Sani Sambo

Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University

Norway
Torgrim Aspjell
Oyvind Christophersen
Eirik J. Forland
S. Gornas
Jarle Inge Holten
Snorre Kverndokk
A. Moene
Audun Rossland
Nils R. Saelthun
Tom Segalstad
S. Sundby
Kristian Tangen

The Norwegian Pollution Control Authorities
Ministry of Environment
Norwegian Meteorological Institute
University of Bergen
Terrestrial Ecology Research
Frischsenteret/Frisch Centre
The Norwegian Meteorological Institute
The Norwegian Pollution Control Authorities
Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Administration
University of Oslom Norway
Institute of Marine Research
The Fridtjof Nansen Institute

Oman
Mohammed bin Ali Al-Hakmani

Ministry of Regional Municipalities, Environment & Water Resources

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Annex A

Authors and Expert Reviewers

Pakistan
Tariq Banuri

Sustainable Development Policy Institute

Peru
Eduardo Calvo
Nadia Gamboa

Vice-Chair, WGIII
Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru

Phillipines
Lewis H. Ziska

International Rice Research Institute

Poland
Jan Dobrowolski
Zbyszek Kundzewicz
Miroslaw Mietus
A. Olecka
M. Sadowski
Wojciech Suchorzewski

Goetel's School of Environmental Protection & Engineering
Polish Academy of Sciences
Institute of Meteorology & Water Management
National Fund for Environmental Protection and Water Management
National Fund for Environmental Protection and Water Management
Warsaw University of Technology

Romania
Vasile Cuculeanu
Adriana Marica

National Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology
National Institute of Meteorology and Hydrology

Russia
Yurij Anokhin
Oleg Anisimov
Igor Bashmakov
Igor Karol
Alla Tsyban
Yuri Izrael

Institute of Global Climate & Ecology
State Hydrological Institute
Centre for Energy Efficiency (CENEF)
Main Geophysical Observatory
Institute of Global Climate and Ecology
Vice-Chair, IPCC

Senegal
Alioune Ndiaye

Vice-Chair, WGII

Sierra Leone
Ogunlade R. Davidson

Co-chair, WGIII

Slovak Republic
Milan Lapin

Comenius University

South Africa
Gerrie Coetzee
Bruce Hewitson
Steve Lennon
Robert J. Scholes

Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
University of Capetown
Eskom
CSIR

Spain
Sergio Alonso
Francisco Ayala-Carcedo
Luis Balairon
Felix Hernandez
Don Antonio Labajo Salazar
Maria-Carmen Llasat
Josep Penuelas
Ana Yaber

University of the Balearic Islands
Geomining Technological Institute of Spain
National Meteorological Institute
CSIC
Government of Spain
Botija University of Barcelona
Center for Ecological Research & Forestry Applications
University, Complutense of Madrid

361

Climate Change 2001

Sri Lanka
Mohan Munasinghe
B. Punyawardena

Vice-Chair, WGIII
Department of Agriculture

Sudan
Nagmeldin Elhassan

Higher Coucil for Environment & Natural Resources

Sweden
Marianne Lillieskold
Ulf Molau
Nils-Axel Morner
Markku Rummukainen

Swedish Environmental Protection Agency
University of Gothenburg
Paleogeophysics & Geodynamics Stockholm University
Swedish Meterorological and Hydrological Institute

Switzerland
Christof Appenzeller
Fortunat Joos
Herbert Lang
Jose Romero
T. Stocker

Federal Office of Meteorology and Climatology (MetroSwiss)
Vice-Chair, WGI
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH)
Office Federal de l'Environnement, des Forets et du Paysage
University of Bern

Tanzania
M.J. Mwandosya
Buruhani S. Nyenzi

Centre for Energy, Environment, Science, and Technology
Vice-Chair, WGI

United Kingdom
Nigel Arnell
C. Baker
Terry Barker
K. G. Begg
S.A. Boehmer-Christiansen
Richard Courtney
K. Deyes
Thomas E. Downing
Caroline Fish
Chris Folland
Jonathan Gregory
Steve Gregory
David Griggs
Joanna Haigh
M. Harley
Susan Haseldine
John Houghton
Mike Hulme
Michael Jefferson
Cathy Johnson
Sari Kovats
David Mansell-Moullin
Anil Markandya
A. McCulloch
Gordon McFadyen
A.J. McMichael
Aubrey Meyer
John Mitchell
Martin Parry

362

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

University of Southampton
Natural Environment Research Council
University of Cambridge
University of Surrey
University of Hull
The Libert
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Environmental Change Institute
University of Oxford
Global Atmosphere Division
Met Office, Hadley Centre
Hadley Climate Research Centre
Forestry Commission
Head, WG-I TSU
Imperial College
English Nature
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA)
Co-Chair, WG-I
University of East Anglia
World Energy Council
IPCC, Working Group I
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA)
University of Bath
ICI Chemicals & Polymers Limited
Global Atmospheric Division Deparment of the Environment, Transport and the Regions
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Global Commons Institute
Hadley Center
Jackson Environment Institute

Annex A

Authors and Expert Reviewers

J.M. Penman
S. Raper
Keith Shine
P. Singleton
Peter Smith
P. Smithson
Peter Thorne
P. van der Linden
David Warrilow
Philip L. Woodworth

Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions
University of East Anglia
Department of Meteorology, University of Reading
Scottish Environment Protection Agency
IACR-Rothamsted
University of Sheffield
School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia
Met Office Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research
Department of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Bidston Observatory

United States
Dilip Ahuja
Dan Albritton
Jeffrey S. Amthor
Peter Backlund
Lee Beck
Leonard Bernstein
Daniel Bodansky
Rick Bradley
James L. Buizer
John Christy
Susan Conard
Curt Covey
Benjamin DeAngelo
Robert Dickinson
David Dokken
Rayola Dougher
William Easterling
Jerry Elwood
Paul R. Epstein
Paul D. Farrar
Howard Feldman
Josh Foster
Laurie Geller
Michael Ghil
Vivien Gornitz
Kenneth Green
David Harrison
David D. Houghton
Malcolm Hughes
Stanley Jacobs
Henry D. Jacoby
Judson Jaffe
Steven M. Japar
Russell O. Jones
Sally Kane
T. Karl
Charles Keller
Haroon Kheshgi
Ann Kinzig
Maureen T. Koetz
Rattan Lal
Chris Landsea
Neil Leary

National Institute of Advanced Studies
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Office of Science and Technology Policy/Environment Division
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
IPIECA
U.S. Department of State
US Department of Energy
National Oceanic & Amtospheric Administration
University of Alabama
Office of Science and Technology Policy/Environment Division
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
University of Arizona
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
American Petroleum Institute
Pennsylvania State University
Department of Enegry
Harvard Medical School
Naval Oceanographic Office
American Petroleum Institute
NOAA Office of Global Programs
National Research Council
University of California, Los Angeles
Columbia University
Reason Public Policy Institute
National Economic Research Associates
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Arizona
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Council of Economic Advisers
Ford Motor Company
American Petroleum Institute
NOAA
NOAA National Climatic Data Center
IGPP.SIO.UCSD
Exxon Research & Engineering Company
Arizona State University
Nuclear Energy Institute
Ohio State Universtiy
NOAA AOML/Hurricane Research Division
Head, WGII TSU

363

Climate Change 2001

364

Synthesis Report

Sven B. Lundstedt
Anthony Lupo
Michael C. MacCracken
James J. McCarthy
Gerald Meehl
Robert Mendelsohn
Patrick Michaels
Evan Mills
William Moomaw
Berrien Moore
James Morison
Jennifer Orme-Zavaleta
Camille Parmesan
J.A. Patz
Joyce Penner
Roger A. Pielke
Michael Prather
Lynn K. Price Lawrence
V. Ramaswamy
Robert L. Randall
Richard Richels
David Rind
Catriona Rogers
Matthias Ruth
Jayant Sathaye
Michael Schlesinger
Stephen Schneider
Michael J. Scott
Roger Sedjo
Walter Short
Joel B. Smith
Robert N. Stavins
Ron Stouffer
T. Talley
Kevin Trenberth
Edward Vine
Henry Walker
Robert Watson
Howard Wesoky
John P. Weyant
Tom Wilbanks

The Ohio State University
University of Missouri - Columbia
U.S. Global Change Research Program
Co-Chair, WGII
NCAR
Yale University
University of Virginia
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University
University of New Hampshire
University of Washington
USEP/NHEERL/WED
University of Texas
Johns Hopkins University
University of Michigan
Colorado State University
University of California Irvine
Berkeley National Laboratory
NOAA
The RainForest ReGeneration Institute
Electric Power Research Institute
National Aeronautics and Space Agency
U.S. Global Change Research Program
University of Maryland
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign
Stanford University
Battelle Pacific Northwest Nat'l Laboratory
Resources for the Future
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Stratus Consulting Inc.
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University
US Dept of Commerce/NOAA
Office of Global Change, U.S. Department of State
NCAR
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Chair, IPCC
Federal Aviation Administration
Energy Modeling Forum, Stanford University
Oak Ridge National Laboratory

Venezuela
Armando Ramirez Rojas

Vice-Chair, WGI

Zimbabwe
Chris Magadza
M.C. Zinyowera

University of Zimbabwe
MSU Zimbabwe Gvt

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Annex B

Annex B. Glossary of Terms
This Glossary is based on the glossaries published in the IPCC
Third Assessment Report (IPCC, 2001a,b,c); however, additional
work has been undertaken on consistency and refinement of
some of the terms. The terms that are independent entries in
this glossary are highlighted in italics.
Acclimatization
The physiological adaptation to climatic variations.
Activities Implemented Jointly (AIJ)
The pilot phase for Joint Implementation, as defined in Article
4.2(a) of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, that allows for project activity among
developed countries (and their companies) and between
developed and developing countries (and their companies).
AIJ is intended to allow Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to gain experience
in jointly implemented project activities. There is no crediting
for AIJ activity during the pilot phase. A decision remains to
be taken on the future of AIJ projects and how they may relate
to the Kyoto Mechanisms. As a simple form of tradable permits,
AIJ and other market-based schemes represent important
potential mechanisms for stimulating additional resource flows
for the global environmental good. See also Clean
Development Mechanism and emissions trading.
Adaptability
See Adaptive capacity.
Adaptation
Adjustment in natural or human systems to a new or changing
environment. Adaptation to climate change refers to
adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual
or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates
harm or exploits beneficial opportunities. Various types of
adaptation can be distinguished, including anticipatory and
reactive adaptation, private and public adaptation, and
autonomous and planned adaptation.
Adaptation assessment
The practice of identifying options to adapt to climate change
and evaluating them in terms of criteria such as availability,
benefits, costs, effectiveness, efficiency, and feasibility.
Adaptation benefits
The avoided damage costs or the accrued benefits following
the adoption and implementation of adaptation measures.
Adaptation costs
Costs of planning, preparing for, facilitating, and implementing
adaptation measures, including transition costs.

Glossary of Terms

Adaptive capacity
The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate
variability and extremes) to moderate potential damages, to take
advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
Additionality
Reduction in emissions by sources or enhancement of removals
by sinks that is additional to any that would occur in the absence
of a Joint Implementation or a Clean Development Mechanism
project activity as defined in the Kyoto Protocol Articles on Joint
Implementation and the Clean Development Mechanism. This
definition may be further broadened to include financial,
investment, and technology additionality. Under "financial
additionality," the project activity funding shall be additional
to existing Global Environmental Facility, other financial
commitments of Parties included in Annex I, Official
Development Assistance, and other systems of cooperation.
Under "investment additionality," the value of the Emissions
Reduction Unit/Certified Emission Reduction Unit shall
significantly improve the financial and/or commercial viability
of the project activity. Under "technology additionality," the
technology used for the project activity shall be the best
available for the circumstances of the host Party.
Adjustment time
See Lifetime; see also Response time.
Aerosols
A collection of airborne solid or liquid particles, with a typical
size between 0.01 and 10 mm that reside in the atmosphere
for at least several hours. Aerosols may be of either natural or
anthropogenic origin. Aerosols may influence climate in two
ways: directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and
indirectly through acting as condensation nuclei for cloud
formation or modifying the optical properties and lifetime of
clouds. See indirect aerosol effect.
Afforestation
Planting of new forests on lands that historically have not
contained forests. For a discussion of the term forest and related
terms such as afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation,
see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change,
and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Aggregate impacts
Total impacts summed up across sectors and/or regions. The
aggregation of impacts requires knowledge of (or assumptions
about) the relative importance of impacts in different sectors and
regions. Measures of aggregate impacts include, for example, the
total number of people affected, change in net primary productivity,
number of systems undergoing change, or total economic costs.
Albedo
The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or object,
often expressed as a percentage. Snow covered surfaces have

365

Climate Change 2001

a high albedo; the albedo of soils ranges from high to low;
vegetation covered surfaces and oceans have a low albedo.
The Earth's albedo varies mainly through varying cloudiness,
snow, ice, leaf area, and land cover changes.
Algal blooms
A reproductive explosion of algae in a lake, river, or ocean.
Alpine
The biogeographic zone made up of slopes above timberline
and characterized by the presence of rosette-forming
herbaceous plants and low shrubby slow-growing woody
plants.
Alternative development paths
Refer to a variety of possible scenarios for societal values
and consumption and production patterns in all countries,
including, but not limited to, a continuation of today's trends.
In this report, these paths do not include additional climate
initiatives which means that no scenarios are included that
explicitly assume implementation of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change or the emission
targets of the Kyoto Protocol, but do include assumptions about
other policies that influence greenhouse gas emissions
indirectly.
Alternative energy
Energy derived from non-fossil-fuel sources.
Ancillary benefits
The ancillary, or side effects, of policies aimed exclusively at
climate change mitigation. Such policies have an impact not
only on greenhouse gas emissions, but also on resource use
efficiency, like reduction in emissions of local and regional
air pollutants associated with fossil-fuel use, and on issues
such as transportation, agriculture, land-use practices,
employment, and fuel security. Sometimes these benefits are
referred to as "ancillary impacts" to reflect that in some cases
the benefits may be negative. From the perspective of policies
directed at abating local air pollution, greenhouse gas
mitigation may also be considered an ancillary benefit, but
these relationships are not considered in this assessment.
Annex I countries/Parties
Group of countries included in Annex I (as amended in 1998)
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, including all the developed countries in the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
and economies in transition. By default, the other countries
are referred to as non-Annex I countries. Under Articles 4.2(a)
and 4.2(b) of the Convention, Annex I countries commit
themselves specifically to the aim of returning individually or
jointly to their 1990 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by
the year 2000. See also Annex II, Annex B, and non-Annex B
countries.

366

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Annex II countries
Group of countries included in Annex II to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, including all
developed countries in the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development. Under Article 4.2(g) of the
Convention, these countries are expected to provide financial
resources to assist developing countries to comply with their
obligations, such as preparing national reports. Annex II
countries are also expected to promote the transfer of
environmentally sound technologies to developing countries.
See also Annex I, Annex B, non-Annex I, and non-Annex B
countries/Parties.
Annex B countries/Parties
Group of countries included in Annex B in the Kyoto Protocol
that have agreed to a target for their greenhouse gas emissions,
including all the Annex I countries (as amended in 1998) but
Turkey and Belarus. See also Annex II, non-Annex I, and nonAnnex B countries/Parties.
Anthropogenic
Resulting from or produced by human beings.
Anthropogenic emissions
Emissions of greenhouse gases, greenhouse gas precursors,
and aerosols associated with human activities. These include
burning of fossil fuels for energy, deforestation, and land-use
changes that result in net increase in emissions.
Aquaculture
Breeding and rearing fish, shellfish, etc., or growing plants
for food in special ponds.
Aquifer
A stratum of permeable rock that bears water. An unconfined
aquifer is recharged directly by local rainfall, rivers, and lakes,
and the rate of recharge will be influenced by the permeability
of the overlying rocks and soils. A confined aquifer is
characterized by an overlying bed that is impermeable and
the local rainfall does not influence the aquifer.
Arid regions
Ecosystems with less than 250 mm precipitation per year.
Assigned amounts (AAs)
Under the Kyoto Protocol, the total amount of greenhouse
gas emissions that each Annex B country has agreed that its
emissions will not exceed in the first commitment period (2008
to 2012) is the assigned amount. This is calculated by
multiplying the country's total greenhouse gas emissions in
1990 by five (for the 5-year commitment period) and then by
the percentage it agreed to as listed in Annex B of the Kyoto
Protocol (e.g., 92% for the European Union, 93% for the USA).

Annex B

Assigned amount unit (AAU)
Equal to 1 tonne (metric ton) of CO2-equivalent emissions
calculated using the Global Warming Potential.
Atmosphere
The gaseous envelop surrounding the Earth. The dry atmosphere
consists almost entirely of nitrogen (78.1% volume mixing
ratio) and oxygen (20.9% volume mixing ratio), together with
a number of trace gases, such as argon (0.93% volume mixing
ratio), helium, and radiatively active greenhouse gases such
as carbon dioxide (0.035% volume mixing ratio) and ozone.
In addition, the atmosphere contains water vapor, whose
amount is highly variable but typically 1% volume mixing
ratio. The atmosphere also contains clouds and aerosols.
Attribution
See detection and attribution.
Banking
According to the Kyoto Protocol [Article 3(13)], Parties
included in Annex I to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change may save excess emissions
allowances or credits from the first commitment period for
use in subsequent commitment periods (post-2012).
Barrier
A barrier is any obstacle to reaching a potential that can be
overcome by a policy, program, or measure.
Baseline
The baseline (or reference) is any datum against which change
is measured. It might be a "current baseline," in which case it
represents observable, present-day conditions. It might also
be a "future baseline," which is a projected future set of
conditions excluding the driving factor of interest. Alternative
interpretations of the reference conditions can give rise to
multiple baselines.
Basin
The drainage area of a stream, river, or lake.
Biodiversity
The numbers and relative abundances of different genes
(genetic diversity), species, and ecosystems (communities) in
a particular area.
Biofuel
A fuel produced from dry organic matter or combustible oils
produced by plants. Examples of biofuel include alcohol (from
fermented sugar), black liquor from the paper manufacturing
process, wood, and soybean oil.
Biomass
The total mass of living organisms in a given area or volume;
recently dead plant material is often included as dead biomass.

Glossary of Terms

Biome
A grouping of similar plant and animal communities into broad
landscape units that occur under similar environmental
conditions.
Biosphere (terrestrial and marine)
The part of the Earth system comprising all ecosystems and
living organisms in the atmosphere, on land (terrestrial
biosphere), or in the oceans (marine biosphere), including
derived dead organic matter such as litter, soil organic matter,
and oceanic detritus.
Biota
All living organisms of an area; the flora and fauna considered
as a unit.
Black carbon
Operationally defined species based on measurement of light
absorption and chemical reactivity and/or thermal stability;
consists of soot, charcoal, and/or possible light-absorbing
refractory organic matter (Charlson and Heintzenberg, 1995).
Bog
A poorly drained area rich in accumulated plant material,
frequently surrounding a body of open water and having a
characteristic flora (such as sedges, heaths, and sphagnum).
Boreal forest
Forests of pine, spruce, fir, and larch stretching from the east
coast of Canada westward to Alaska and continuing from
Siberia westward across the entire extent of Russia to the
European Plain.
Bottom-up models
A modeling approach that includes technological and
engineering details in the analysis. See also top-down models.
Burden
The total mass of a gaseous substance of concern in the
atmosphere.
Capacity building
In the context of climate change, capacity building is a process
of developing the technical skills and institutional capability
in developing countries and economies in transition to enable
them to participate in all aspects of adaptation to, mitigation
of, and research on climate change, and the implementation
of the Kyoto Mechanisms, etc.
Carbonaceous aerosol
Aerosol consisting predominantly of organic substances and
various forms of black carbon (Charlson and Heintzenberg,
1995).

367

Climate Change 2001

Carbon cycle
The term used to describe the flow of carbon (in various forms
such as as carbon dioxide) through the atmosphere, ocean,
terrestrial biosphere, and lithosphere.
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
A naturally occurring gas, and also a by-product of burning
fossil fuels and biomass, as well as land-use changes and other
industrial processes. It is the principal anthropogenic
greenhouse gas that affects the Earth's radiative balance. It
is the reference gas against which other greenhouse gases are
measured and therefore has a Global Warming Potential of 1.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization
The enhancement of the growth of plants as a result of increased
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. Depending on their
mechanism of photosynthesis, certain types of plants are more
sensitive to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration.
In particular, plants that produce a three-carbon compound (C3)
during photosynthesis--including most trees and agricultural
crops such as rice, wheat, soybeans, potatoes, and vegetables--
generally show a larger response than plants that produce a
four-carbon compound (C4) during photosynthesis--mainly
of tropical origin, including grasses and the agriculturally
important crops maize, sugar cane, millet, and sorghum.
Carbon leakage
See leakage.
Carbon taxes
See emissions tax.
Catchment
An area that collects and drains rainwater.
Certified Emission Reduction (CER) Unit
Equal to 1 tonne (metric ton) of CO2-equivalent emissions
reduced or sequestered through a Clean Development
Mechanism project, calculated using Global Warming
Potentials. See also Emissions Reduction Unit.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
Greenhouse gases covered under the 1987 Montreal Protocol
and used for refrigeration, air conditioning, packaging,
insulation, solvents, or aerosol propellants. Since they are not
destroyed in the lower atmosphere, CFCs drift into the upper
atmosphere where, given suitable conditions, they break down
ozone. These gases are being replaced by other compounds,
including hydrochlorofluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons,
which are greenhouse gases covered under the Kyoto Protocol.
Cholera
An intestinal infection that results in frequent watery stools,
cramping abdominal pain, and eventual collapse from dehydration.

368

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
Defined in Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol, the Clean
Development Mechanism is intended to meet two objectives:
(1) to assist Parties not included in Annex I in achieving
sustainable development and in contributing to the ultimate
objective of the convention; and (2) to assist Parties included
in Annex I in achieving compliance with their quantified
emission limitation and reduction commitments. Certified
Emission Reduction Units from Clean Development
Mechanism projects undertaken in non-Annex I countries that
limit or reduce greenhouse gas emissions, when certified by
operational entities designated by Conference of the Parties/
Meeting of the Parties, can be accrued to the investor
(government or industry) from Parties in Annex B. A share of
the proceeds from the certified project activities is used to
cover administrative expenses as well as to assist developing
country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse
effects of climate change to meet the costs of adaptation.
Climate
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the "average
weather" or more rigorously as the statistical description in
terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a
period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions
of years. The classical period is 30 years, as defined by the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). These relevant
quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature,
precipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state,
including a statistical description, of the climate system.
Climate change
Climate change refers to a statistically significant variation in
either the mean state of the climate or in its variability,
persisting for an extended period (typically decades or longer).
Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or
external forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in
the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 1, defines "climate change"
as: "a change of climate which is attributed directly or
indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the
global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate
variability observed over comparable time periods." The
UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between "climate change"
attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric
composition, and "climate variability" attributable to natural
causes. See also climate variability.
Climate feedback
An interaction mechanism between processes in the climate
system is called a climate feedback, when the result of an initial
process triggers changes in a second process that in turn
influences the initial one. A positive feedback intensifies the
original process, and a negative feedback reduces it.

Annex B

Glossary of Terms

Climate model (hierarchy)
A numerical representation of the climate system based on the
physical, chemical, and biological properties of its components,
their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for
all or some of its known properties. The climate system can be
represented by models of varying complexity--that is, for any
one component or combination of components a "hierarchy"
of models can be identified, differing in such aspects as the
number of spatial dimensions, the extent to which physical,
chemical or biological processes are explicitly represented,
or the level at which empirical parametrizations are involved.
Coupled atmosphere/ocean/sea-ice general circulation models
(AOGCMs) provide a comprehensive representation of the
climate system. There is an evolution towards more complex
models with active chemistry and biology. Climate models
are applied, as a research tool, to study and simulate the
climate, but also for operational purposes, including monthly,
seasonal, and interannual climate predictions.

following a unit change in radiative forcing (C/Wm-2). In
practice, the evaluation of the equilibrium climate sensitivity
requires very long simulations with coupled general circulation
models. The "effective climate sensitivity" is a related measure
that circumvents this requirement. It is evaluated from model
output for evolving non-equilibrium conditions. It is a measure
of the strengths of the feedbacks at a particular time and may
vary with forcing history and climate state. See climate model.

Climate prediction
A climate prediction or climate forecast is the result of an
attempt to produce a most likely description or estimate of the
actual evolution of the climate in the future (e.g., at seasonal,
interannual, or long-term time-scales). See also climate
projection and climate (change) scenario.

Climate variability
Climate variability refers to variations in the mean state and other
statistics (such as standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes,
etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond
that of individual weather events. Variability may be due to
natural internal processes within the climate system (internal
variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic
external forcing (external variability). See also climate change.

Climate projection
A projection of the response of the climate system to emission or
concentration scenarios of greenhouse gases and aerosols, or
radiative forcing scenarios, often based upon simulations by
climate models. Climate projections are distinguished from climate
predictions in order to emphasize that climate projections depend
upon the emission/concentration/radiative forcing scenario used,
which are based on assumptions, concerning, for example, future
socio-economic and technological developments that may or may
not be realized, and are therefore subject to substantial uncertainty.
Climate scenario
A plausible and often simplified representation of the future
climate, based on an internally consistent set of climatological
relationships, that has been constructed for explicit use in
investigating the potential consequences of anthropogenic
climate change, often serving as input to impact models.
Climate projections often serve as the raw material for
constructing climate scenarios, but climate scenarios usually
require additional information such as about the observed
current climate. A "climate change scenario" is the difference
between a climate scenario and the current climate.
Climate sensitivity
In IPCC assessments, "equilibrium climate sensitivity" refers
to the equilibrium change in global mean surface temperature
following a doubling of the atmospheric (equivalent) CO2
concentration. More generally, equilibrium climate sensitivity
refers to the equilibrium change in surface air temperature

Climate system
The climate system is the highly complex system consisting
of five major components: the atmosphere, the hydrosphere,
the cryosphere, the land surface and the biosphere, and the
interactions between them. The climate system evolves in time
under the influence of its own internal dynamics and because
of external forcings such as volcanic eruptions, solar variations,
and human-induced forcings such as the changing composition
of the atmosphere and land-use change.

CO2-equivalent
See equivalent CO2.
CO2 fertilization
See carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization.
Co-benefits
The benefits of policies that are implemented for various reasons
at the same time--including climate change mitigation--
acknowledging that most policies designed to address
greenhouse gas mitigation also have other, often at least
equally important, rationales (e.g., related to objectives of
development, sustainability, and equity). The term co-impact
is also used in a more generic sense to cover both the positive
and negative sides of the benefits. See also ancillary benefits.
Co-generation
The use of waste heat from electric generation, such as exhaust
from gas turbines, for either industrial purposes or district heating.
Compliance
See implementation.
Conference of the Parties (COP)
The supreme body of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising countries that have
ratified or acceded to the UNFCCC. The first session of the

369

Climate Change 2001

Conference of the Parties (COP-1) was held in Berlin in 1995,
followed by COP-2 in Geneva 1996, COP-3 in Kyoto 1997,
COP-4 in Buenos Aires 1998, COP-5 in Bonn 1999, COP-6
Part 1 in The Hague 2000, and COP-6 Part 2 in Bonn 2001.
COP-7 is scheduled for November 2001 in Marrakech. See
also Meeting of the Parties (MOP).
Cooling degree days
The integral over a day of the temperature above 18C (e.g., a
day with an average temperature of 20C counts as 2 cooling
degree days). See also heating degree days.
Coping range
The variation in climatic stimuli that a system can absorb
without producing significant impacts.
Coral bleaching
The paling in color of corals resulting from a loss of symbiotic
algae. Bleaching occurs in response to physiological shock in
response to abrupt changes in temperature, salinity, and turbidity.
Cost-effective
A criterion that specifies that a technology or measure delivers
a good or service at equal or lower cost than current practice, or
the least-cost alternative for the achievement of a given target.
Cryosphere
The component of the climate system consisting of all snow,
ice, and permafrost on and beneath the surface of the earth
and ocean. See also glacier and ice sheet.
Deepwater formation
Occurs when seawater freezes to form sea ice. The local release
of salt and consequent increase in water density leads to the
formation of saline coldwater that sinks to the ocean floor.
Deforestation
Conversion of forest to non-forest. For a discussion of the
term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation, and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report
on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Demand-side management
Policies and programs designed for a specific purpose to
influence consumer demand for goods and/or services. In the
energy sector, for instance, it refers to policies and programs
designed to reduce consumer demand for electricity and other
energy sources. It helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Dengue Fever
An infectious viral disease spread by mosquitoes often called
breakbone fever because it is characterized by severe pain in
joints and back. Subsequent infections of the virus may lead
to dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock
syndrome (DSS), which may be fatal.

370

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Deposit-refund system
Combines a deposit or fee (tax) on a commodity with a refund
or rebate (subsidy) for implementation of a specified action.
Se also emissions tax.
Desert
An ecosystem with less than 100 mm precipitation per year.
Desertification
Land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas
resulting from various factors, including climatic variations
and human activities. Further, the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification defines land degradation as a
reduction or loss in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas
of the biological or economic productivity and complexity of
rain-fed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest,
and woodlands resulting from land uses or from a process or
combination of processes, including processes arising from
human activities and habitation patterns, such as: (i) soil
erosion caused by wind and/or water; (ii) deterioration of the
physical, chemical, and biological or economic properties of
soil; and (iii) long-term loss of natural vegetation.
Detection and attribution
Climate varies continually on all time scales. Detection of climate
change is the process of demonstrating that climate has
changed in some defined statistical sense, without providing
a reason for that change. Attribution of causes of climate
change is the process of establishing the most likely causes
for the detected change with some defined level of confidence.
Disturbance regime
Frequency, intensity, and types of disturbances, such as fires,
inspect or pest outbreaks, floods, and droughts.
Diurnal temperature range
The difference between the maximum and minimum
temperature during a day.
Double dividend
The effect that revenue-generating instruments, such as carbon
taxes or auctioned (tradable) carbon emission permits, can (i)
limit or reduce greenhouse gas emissions and (ii) offset at
least part of the potential welfare losses of climate policies
through recycling the revenue in the economy to reduce other
taxes likely to be distortionary. In a world with involuntary
unemployment, the climate change policy adopted may have an
effect (a positive or negative "third dividend") on employment.
Weak double dividend occurs as long as there is a revenue
recycling effect--that is, as long as revenues are recycled
through reductions in the marginal rates of distortionary taxes.
Strong double dividend requires that the (beneficial) revenue
recycling effect more than offset the combination of the
primary cost and, in this case, the net cost of abatement is
negative.

Annex B

Drought
The phenomenon that exists when precipitation has been
significantly below normal recorded levels, causing serious
hydrological imbalances that adversely affect land resource
production systems.
Economic potential
Economic potential is the portion of technological potential
for greenhouse gas emissions reductions or energy efficiency
improvements that could be achieved cost-effectively through
the creation of markets, reduction of market failures, or increased
financial and technological transfers. The achievement of
economic potential requires additional policies and measures
to break down market barriers. See also market potential,
socio-economic potential, and technological potential.
Economies in transition (EITs)
Countries with national economies in the process of changing
from a planned economic system to a market economy.
Ecosystem
A system of interacting living organisms together with their
physical environment. The boundaries of what could be called
an ecosystem are somewhat arbitrary, depending on the focus
of interest or study. Thus, the extent of an ecosystem may range
from very small spatial scales to, ultimately, the entire Earth.
Ecosystem services
Ecological processes or functions that have value to individuals
or society.
El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
El Nino, in its original sense, is a warmwater current that periodically
flows along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the local
fishery. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation of the
intertropical surface pressure pattern and circulation in the Indian
and Pacific Oceans, called the Southern Oscillation. This coupled
atmosphere-ocean phenomenon is collectively known as El Nino
Southern Oscillation, or ENSO. During an El Nino event, the
prevailing trade winds weaken and the equatorial countercurrent
strengthens, causing warm surface waters in the Indonesian area
to flow eastward to overlie the cold waters of the Peru current.
This event has great impact on the wind, sea surface temperature,
and precipitation patterns in the tropical Pacific. It has climatic
effects throughout the Pacific region and in many other parts of
the world. The opposite of an El Nino event is called La Nina.
Emissions
In the climate change context, emissions refer to the release
of greenhouse gases and/or their precursors and aerosols into
the atmosphere over a specified area and period of time.
Emissions permit
An emissions permit is the non-transferable or tradable
allocation of entitlements by an administrative authority

Glossary of Terms

(intergovernmental organization, central or local government
agency) to a regional (country, sub-national) or a sectoral (an
individual firm) entity to emit a specified amount of a substance.
Emissions quota
The portion or share of total allowable emissions assigned to a
country or group of countries within a framework of maximum
total emissions and mandatory allocations of resources.
Emissions Reduction Unit (ERU)
Equal to 1 tonne (metric ton) of carbon dioxide emissions
reduced or sequestered arising from a Joint Implementation
(defined in Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol) project calculated
using Global Warming Potential. See also Certified Emission
Reduction Unit and emissions trading.
Emissions tax
Levy imposed by a government on each unit of CO2-equivalent
emissions by a source subject to the tax. Since virtually all of
the carbon in fossil fuels is ultimately emitted as carbon dioxide,
a levy on the carbon content of fossil fuels--a carbon tax--is
equivalent to an emissions tax for emissions caused by fossilfuel combustion. An energy tax--a levy on the energy content
of fuels--reduces demand for energy and so reduces carbon
dioxide emissions from fossil-fuel use. An ecotax is designated
for the purpose of influencing human behavior (specifically
economic behavior) to follow an ecologically benign path.
International emissions/carbon/energy tax is a tax imposed on
specified sources in participating countries by an international
agency. The revenue is distributed or used as specified by
participating countries or the international agency.
Emissions trading
A market-based approach to achieving environmental objectives
that allows, those reducing greenhouse gas emissions below
what is required, to use or trade the excess reductions to offset
emissions at another source inside or outside the country. In
general, trading can occur at the intracompany, domestic, and
international levels. The IPCC Second Assessment Report
adopted the convention of using "permits" for domestic trading
systems and "quotas" for international trading systems. Emissions
trading under Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol is a tradable
quota system based on the assigned amounts calculated from
the emission reduction and limitation commitments listed in
Annex B of the Protocol. See also Certified Emission Reduction
Unit and Clean Development Mechanism.
Emissions scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of
emissions of substances that are potentially radiatively active
(e.g., greenhouse gases, aerosols), based on a coherent and
internally consistent set of assumptions about driving forces
(such as demographic and socio-economic development,
technological change) and their key relationships. Concentration
scenarios, derived from emissions scenarios, are used as input

371

Climate Change 2001

into a climate model to compute climate projections. In IPCC
(1992), a set of emissions scenarios were used as a basis for
the climate projections in IPCC (1996). These emissions
scenarios are referred to as the IS92 scenarios. In the IPCC
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (Nakicenovic et al.,
2000), new emissions scenarios--the so-called SRES
scenarios--were published. For the meaning of some terms
related to these scenarios, see SRES scenarios.
Endemic
Restricted or peculiar to a locality or region. With regard to human
health, endemic can refer to a disease or agent present or usually
prevalent in a population or geographical area at all times.
Energy balance
Averaged over the globe and over longer time periods, the
energy budget of the climate system must be in balance.
Because the climate system derives all its energy from the
Sun, this balance implies that, globally, the amount of incoming
solar radiation must on average be equal to the sum of the
outgoing reflected solar radiation and the outgoing infrared
radiation emitted by the climate system. A perturbation of
this global radiation balance, be it human-induced or natural,
is called radiative forcing.
Energy conversion
See energy transformation.
Energy efficiency
Ratio of energy output of a conversion process or of a system
to its energy input.
Energy intensity
Energy intensity is the ratio of energy consumption to economic
or physical output. At the national level, energy intensity is the
ratio of total domestic primary energy consumption or final energy
consumption to Gross Domestic Product or physical output.
Energy service
The application of useful energy to tasks desired by the
consumer such as transportation, a warm room, or light.
Energy tax
See emissions tax.
Energy transformation
The change from one form of energy, such as the energy
embodied in fossil fuels, to another, such as electricity.
Environmentally Sound Technologies (ESTs)
Technologies that protect the environment, are less polluting,
use all resources in a more sustainable manner, recycle more
of their wastes and products, and handle residual wastes in a
more acceptable manner than the technologies for which they
were substitutes and are compatible with nationally determined

372

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

socio-economic, cultural, and environmental priorities. ESTs
in this report imply mitigation and adaptation technologies, hard
and soft technologies.
Epidemic
Occurring suddenly in numbers clearly in excess of normal
expectancy, said especially of infectious diseases but applied also
to any disease, injury, or other health-related event occurring in
such outbreaks.
Equilibrium and transient climate experiment
An "equilibrium climate experiment" is an experiment in which
a climate model is allowed to fully adjust to a change in radiative
forcing. Such experiments provide information on the difference
between the initial and final states of the model, but not on the
time-dependent response. If the forcing is allowed to evolve
gradually according to a prescribed emission scenario, the timedependent response of a climate model may be analyzed. Such
an experiment is called a "transient climate experiment." See
also climate projection.
Equivalent CO2 (carbon dioxide)
The concentration of carbon dioxide that would cause the same
amount of radiative forcing as a given mixture of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases.
Erosion
The process of removal and transport of soil and rock by
weathering, mass wasting, and the action of streams, glaciers,
waves, winds, and underground water.
Eustatic sea-level change
A change in global average sea level brought about by an
alteration to the volume of the world ocean. This may be caused
by changes in water density or in the total mass of water. In
discussions of changes on geological time scales, this term
sometimes also includes changes in global average sea level
caused by an alteration to the shape of the ocean basins. In this
report, the term is not used in that sense.
Eutrophication
The process by which a body of water (often shallow) becomes
(either naturally or by pollution) rich in dissolved nutrients with
a seasonal deficiency in dissolved oxygen.
Evaporation
The process by which a liquid becomes a gas.
Evapotranspiration
The combined process of evaporation from the Earth's surface
and transpiration from vegetation.
Exotic species
See introduced species.

Annex B

Exposure
The nature and degree to which a system is exposed to
significant climatic variations.
Externality
See external cost.
External cost
Used to define the costs arising from any human activity, when
the agent responsible for the activity does not take full account
of the impacts on others of his or her actions. Equally, when
the impacts are positive and not accounted for in the actions
of the agent responsible they are referred to as external benefits.
Emissions of particulate pollution from a power station affect
the health of people in the vicinity, but this is not often
considered, or is given inadequate weight, in private decision
making and there is no market for such impacts. Such a
phenomenon is referred to as an "externality," and the costs it
imposes are referred to as the external costs.
External forcing
See climate system.
Extinction
The complete disappearance of an entire species.
Extirpation
The disappearance of a species from part of its range; local
extinction.
Extreme weather event
An extreme weather event is an event that is rare within its
statistical reference distribution at a particular place.
Definitions of "rare" vary, but an extreme weather event would
normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th or 90th percentile.
By definition, the characteristics of what is called extreme
weather may vary from place to place. An extreme climate
event is an average of a number of weather events over a certain
period of time, an average which is itself extreme (e.g., rainfall
over a season).
Feedback
See climate feedback.
Fiber
Wood, fuelwood (either woody or non-woody).
Final energy
Energy supplied that is available to the consumer to be converted
into usable energy (e.g., electricity at the wall outlet).
Flexibility mechanisms
See Kyoto Mechanisms.

Glossary of Terms

Flux adjustment
To avoid the problem of coupled atmosphere-ocean general
circulation models drifting into some unrealistic climate state,
adjustment terms can be applied to the atmosphere-ocean fluxes
of heat and moisture (and sometimes the surface stresses resulting
from the effect of the wind on the ocean surface) before these
fluxes are imposed on the model ocean and atmosphere. Because
these adjustments are pre-computed and therefore independent
of the coupled model integration, they are uncorrelated to the
anomalies that develop during the integration.
Food insecurity
A situation that exists when people lack secure access to sufficient
amounts of safe and nutritious food for normal growth and
development and an active and healthy life. It may be caused
by the unavailability of food, insufficient purchasing power,
inappropriate distribution, or inadequate use of food at the
household level. Food insecurity may be chronic, seasonal, or
transitory.
Forest
A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many definitions of the
term forest are in use throughout the world, reflecting wide
differences in bio-geophysical conditions, social structure, and
economics. For a discussion of the term forest and related
terms such as afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation:
see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change,
and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Fossil CO2 (carbon dioxide) emissions
Emissions of carbon dioxide resulting from the combustion
of fuels from fossil carbon deposits such as oil, natural gas,
and coal.
Fossil fuels
Carbon-based fuels from fossil carbon deposits, including coal,
oil, and natural gas.
Freshwater lens
A lenticular fresh groundwater body that underlies an oceanic
island. It is underlain by saline water.
Fuel switching
Policy designed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by switching
to lower carbon-content fuels, such as from coal to natural gas.
Full-cost pricing
The pricing of commercial goods--such as electric power--
that includes in the final prices faced by the end user not only
the private costs of inputs, but also the costs of externalities
created by their production and use.
Framework Convention on Climate Change
See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

373

Climate Change 2001

General circulation
The large scale motions of the atmosphere and the ocean as a
consequence of differential heating on a rotating Earth, aiming
to restore the energy balance of the system through transport
of heat and momentum.
General Circulation Model (GCM)
See climate model.
Geo-engineering
Efforts to stabilize the climate system by directly managing
the energy balance of the Earth, thereby overcoming the
enhanced greenhouse effect.
Glacier
A mass of land ice flowing downhill (by internal deformation
and sliding at the base) and constrained by the surrounding
topography (e.g., the sides of a valley or surrounding peaks);
the bedrock topography is the major influence on the dynamics
and surface slope of a glacier. A glacier is maintained by
accumulation of snow at high altitudes, balanced by melting
at low altitudes or discharge into the sea.
Global surface temperature
The global surface temperature is the area-weighted global
average of (i) the sea surface temperature over the oceans (i.e.,
the sub-surface bulk temperature in the first few meters of the
ocean), and (ii) the surface air temperature over land at 1.5 m
above the ground.
Global Warming Potential (GWP)
An index, describing the radiative characteristics of well-mixed
greenhouse gases, that represents the combined effect of the
differing times these gases remain in the atmosphere and their
relative effectiveness in absorbing outgoing infrared radiation.
This index approximates the time-integrated warming effect
of a unit mass of a given greenhouse gas in today's atmosphere,
relative to that of carbon dioxide.
Greenhouse effect
Greenhouse gases effectively absorb infrared radiation, emitted
by the Earth's surface, by the atmosphere itself due to the same
gases, and by clouds. Atmospheric radiation is emitted to all sides,
including downward to the Earth's surface. Thus greenhouse
gases trap heat within the surface-troposphere system. This is
called the "natural greenhouse effect." Atmospheric radiation
is strongly coupled to the temperature of the level at which it
is emitted. In the troposphere, the temperature generally decreases
with height. Effectively, infrared radiation emitted to space
originates from an altitude with a temperature of, on average,
-19C, in balance with the net incoming solar radiation, whereas
the Earth's surface is kept at a much higher temperature of, on
average, +14C. An increase in the concentration of greenhouse
gases leads to an increased infrared opacity of the atmosphere,
and therefore to an effective radiation into space from a higher

374

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

altitude at a lower temperature. This causes a radiative forcing,
an imbalance that can only be compensated for by an increase
of the temperature of the surface-troposphere system. This is
the "enhanced greenhouse effect."
Greenhouse gas
Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere,
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation
at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation
emitted by the Earth's surface, the atmosphere, and clouds. This
property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapor (H2O), carbon
dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), and ozone
(O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere.
Moreover there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other
chlorine- and bromine-containing substances, dealt with under
the Montreal Protocol. Besides CO2, N2O, and CH4, the Kyoto
Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulfur hexafluoride (SF6),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Groin
A low, narrow jetty, usually extending roughly perpendicular
to the shoreline, designed to protect the shore from erosion by
currents, tides, or waves, or to trap sand for the purpose of
building up or making a beach.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
The sum of gross value added, at purchasers' prices, by all
resident and non-resident producers in the economy, plus any
taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value of the
products in a country or a geographic region for a given period
of time, normally 1 year. It is calculated without deducting for
depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation
of natural resources. GDP is an often used but incomplete
measure of welfare.
Gross Primary Production (GPP)
The amount of carbon fixed from the atmosphere through
photosynthesis.
Groundwater recharge
The process by which external water is added to the zone of
saturation of an aquifer, either directly into a formation or
indirectly by way of another formation.
Habitat
The particular environment or place where an organism or
species tend to live; a more locally circumscribed portion of
the total environment.
Halocarbons
Compounds containing carbon and either chlorine, bromine,
or fluorine. Such compounds can act as powerful greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere. The chlorine- and bromine-containing
halocarbons are also involved in the depletion of the ozone layer.

Annex B

Harmonized emissions/carbon/energy tax
Commits participating countries to impose a tax at a common
rate on the same sources. Each country can retain the tax
revenue it collects. A harmonized tax would not necessarily
require countries to impose a tax at the same rate, but imposing
different rates across countries would not be cost-effective.
See also emissions tax.
Heat island
An area within an urban area characterized by ambient
temperatures higher than those of the surrounding area because
of the absorption of solar energy by materials like asphalt.
Heating degree days
The integral over a day of the temperature below 18C (e.g., a
day with an average temperature of 16C counts as 2 heating
degree days). See also cooling degree days.
Hedging
In the context of climate change mitigation, hedging is defined
as balancing the risks of acting too slowly against acting too
quickly, and it depends on society's attitude towards risks.
Heterotrophic respiration
The conversion of organic matter to CO2 by organisms other
than plants.
Human settlement
A place or area occupied by settlers.
Human system
Any system in which human organizations play a major role.
Often, but not always, the term is synonymous with "society"
or "social system" (e.g., agricultural system, political system,
technological system, economic system).

Glossary of Terms

determined by its internal dynamics (the flow of the ice as it
deforms internally and slides at its base). An ice sheet flows
outward from a high central plateau with a small average
surface slope. The margins slope steeply, and the ice is
discharged through fast-flowing ice streams or outlet glaciers,
in some cases into the sea or into ice shelves floating on the
sea. There are only two large ice sheets in the modern world,
on Greenland and Antarctica, the Antarctic ice sheet being
divided into East and West by the Transantarctic Mountains;
during glacial periods there were others.
Ice shelf
A floating ice sheet of considerable thickness attached to a
coast (usually of great horizontal extent with a level or gently
undulating surface); often a seaward extension of ice sheets.
(Climate) Impact assessment
The practice of identifying and evaluating the detrimental and
beneficial consequences of climate change on natural and
human systems.
(Climate) Impacts
Consequences of climate change on natural and human
systems. Depending on the consideration of adaptation, one
can distinguish between potential impacts and residual impacts.
* Potential impacts: All impacts that may occur given a
projected change in climate, without considering adaptation.
* Residual impacts: The impacts of climate change that
would occur after adaptation.
See also aggregate impacts, market impacts, and non-market
impacts.

Ice cap
A dome shaped ice mass covering a highland area that is
considerably smaller in extent than an ice sheet.

Implementation
Implementation refers to the actions (legislation or regulations,
judicial decrees, or other actions) that governments take to
translate international accords into domestic law and policy.
It includes those events and activities that occur after the
issuing of authoritative public policy directives, which include
the effort to administer and the substantive impacts on people
and events. It is important to distinguish between the legal
implementation of international commitments (in national law)
and the effective implementation (measures that induce
changes in the behavior of target groups). Compliance is a
matter of whether and to what extent countries do adhere to
the provisions of the accord. Compliance focuses on not only
whether implementing measures are in effect, but also on
whether there is compliance with the implementing actions.
Compliance measures the degree to which the actors whose
behavior is targeted by the agreement, whether they are local
government units, corporations, organizations, or individuals,
conform to the implementing measures and obligations.

Ice sheet
A mass of land ice that is sufficiently deep to cover most of
the underlying bedrock topography, so that its shape is mainly

Implementation costs
Costs involved in the implementation of mitigation options.
These costs are associated with the necessary institutional

Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)
Among the six greenhouse gases to be curbed under the Kyoto
Protocol. They are produced commercially as a substitute for
chlorofluorocarbons. HFCs largely are used in refrigeration
and semiconductor manufacturing. Their Global Warming
Potentials range from 1,300 to 11,700.
Hydrosphere
The component of the climate system composed of liquid
surface and subterranean water, such as oceans, seas, rivers,
freshwater lakes, underground water, etc.

375

Climate Change 2001

changes, information requirements, market size, opportunities
for technology gain and learning, and economic incentives
needed (grants, subsidies, and taxes).
Indigenous peoples
People whose ancestors inhabited a place or a country when
persons from another culture or ethnic background arrived on
the scene and dominated them through conquest, settlement,
or other means and who today live more in conformity with
their own social, economic, and cultural customs and traditions
than those of the country of which they now form a part (also
referred to as "native," "aboriginal," or "tribal" peoples).
Indirect aerosol effect
Aerosols may lead to an indirect radiative forcing of the climate
system through acting as condensation nuclei or modifying
the optical properties and lifetime of clouds. Two indirect
effects are distinguished:
* First indirect effect: A radiative forcing induced by an increase
in anthropogenic aerosols which cause an initial increase
in droplet concentration and a decrease in droplet size for
fixed liquid water content, leading to an increase of cloud
albedo. This effect is also known as the "Twomey effect."
This is sometimes referred to as the cloud albedo effect.
However this is highly misleading since the second indirect
effect also alters cloud albedo.
* Second indirect effect: A radiative forcing induced by an
increase in anthropogenic aerosols which cause a decrease
in droplet size, reducing the precipitation efficiency, thereby
modifying the liquid water content, cloud thickness, and
cloud lifetime. This effect is also known as the "cloud
lifetime effect" or "Albrecht effect."
Industrial Revolution
A period of rapid industrial growth with far-reaching social
and economic consequences, beginning in England during the
second half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe and
later to other countries including the United States. The
invention of the steam engine was an important trigger of this
development. The Industrial Revolution marks the beginning
of a strong increase in the use of fossil fuels and emission of,
in particular, fossil carbon dioxide. In this report, the terms
"pre-industrial" and "industrial" refer, somewhat arbitrarily,
to the periods before and after the year 1750, respectively.
Inertia
Delay, slowness, or resistance in the response of the climate,
biological, or human systems to factors that alter their rate of
change, including continuation of change in the system after
the cause of that change has been removed.
Infectious diseases
Any disease that can be transmitted from one person to another.
This may occur by direct physical contact, by common
handling of an object that has picked up infective organisms,

376

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

through a disease carrier, or by spread of infected droplets
coughed or exhaled into the air.
Infrared radiation
Radiation emitted by the Earth's surface, the atmosphere, and
clouds. It is also known as terrestrial or long-wave radiation.
Infrared radiation has a distinctive range of wavelengths
("spectrum") longer than the wavelength of the red color in
the visible part of the spectrum. The spectrum of infrared
radiation is practically distinct from that of solar or short-wave
radiation because of the difference in temperature between
the Sun and the Earth-atmosphere system.
Infrastructure
The basic equipment, utilities, productive enterprises,
installations, institutions, and services essential for the
development, operation, and growth of an organization, city,
or nation. For example, roads; schools; electric, gas, and water
utilities; transportation; communication; and legal systems
would be all considered as infrastructure.
Integrated assessment
A method of analysis that combines results and models from
the physical, biological, economic, and social sciences, and
the interactions between these components, in a consistent
framework, to evaluate the status and the consequences of
environmental change and the policy responses to it.
Interaction effect
The result or consequence of the interaction of climate change
policy instruments with existing domestic tax systems, including
both cost-increasing tax interaction and cost-reducing revenuerecycling effect. The former reflects the impact that greenhouse
gas policies can have on the functioning of labor and capital markets
through their effects on real wages and the real return to capital.
By restricting the allowable greenhouse gas emissions, permits,
regulations, or a carbon tax raise the costs of production and the
prices of output, thus reducing the real return to labor and capital.
For policies that raise revenue for the government--carbon taxes
and auctioned permits--the revenues can be recycled to reduce
existing distortionary taxes. See also double dividend.
Internal variability
See climate variability.
International emissions/carbon/energy tax
See emissions tax.
International Energy Agency (IEA)
Paris-based energy forum established in 1974. It is linked with
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
to enable member countries to take joint measures to meet oil
supply emergencies, to share energy information, to coordinate
their energy policies, and to cooperate in the development of
rational energy programs.

Annex B

Glossary of Terms

International product and/or technology standards
See standards.

La Nina
See El Nino Southern Oscillation.

Introduced species
A species occurring in an area outside its historically known
natural range as a result of accidental dispersal by humans
(also referred to as "exotic species" or "alien species").

Land use
The total of arrangements, activities, and inputs undertaken
in a certain land cover type (a set of human actions). The social
and economic purposes for which land is managed (e.g.,
grazing, timber extraction, and conservation).

Invasive species
An introduced species that invades natural habitats.
Isostatic land movements
Isostasy refers to the way in which the lithosphere and mantle
respond to changes in surface loads. When the loading of the
lithosphere is changed by alterations in land ice mass, ocean
mass, sedimentation, erosion, or mountain building, vertical
isostatic adjustment results, in order to balance the new load.
Joint Implementation (JI)
A market-based implementation mechanism defined in Article
6 of the Kyoto Protocol, allowing Annex I countries or
companies from these countries to implement projects jointly
that limit or reduce emissions, or enhance sinks, and to share
the Emissions Reduction Units. JI activity is also permitted in
Article 4.2(a) of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. See also Activities Implemented Jointly
and Kyoto Mechanisms.
Known technological options
Refer to technologies that exist in operation or pilot plant stage
today. It does not include any new technologies that will require
drastic technological breakthroughs.
Kyoto Mechanisms
Economic mechanisms based on market principles that Parties
to the Kyoto Protocol can use in an attempt to lessen the
potential economic impacts of greenhouse gas emissionreduction requirements. They include Joint Implementation
(Article 6), the Clean Development Mechanism (Article 12),
and Emissions Trading (Article 17).
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted at the Third Session
of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in 1997 in
Kyoto, Japan. It contains legally binding commitments, in addition
to those included in the UNFCCC. Countries included in Annex
B of the Protocol (most countries in the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, and countries with
economies in transition) agreed to reduce their anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur
hexafluoride) by at least 5% below 1990 levels in the
commitment period 2008 to 2012. The Kyoto Protocol has
not yet entered into force (September 2001).

Land-use change
A change in the use or management of land by humans, which
may lead to a change in land cover. Land cover and land-use
change may have an impact on the albedo, evapotranspiration,
sources, and sinks of greenhouse gases, or other properties of
the climate system, and may thus have an impact on climate,
locally or globally. See also the IPCC Special Report on Land
Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Landslide
A mass of material that has slipped downhill by gravity, often
assisted by water when the material is saturated; rapid
movement of a mass of soil, rock, or debris down a slope.
Leakage
The part of emissions reductions in Annex B countries that
may be offset by an increase of the emission in the nonconstrained countries above their baseline levels. This can
occur through (i) relocation of energy-intensive production in
non-constrained regions; (ii) increased consumption of fossil
fuels in these regions through decline in the international price
of oil and gas triggered by lower demand for these energies;
and (iii) changes in incomes (thus in energy demand) because
of better terms of trade. Leakage also refers to the situation in
which a carbon sequestration activity (e.g., tree planting) on
one piece of land inadvertently, directly or indirectly, triggers
an activity, which in whole or part, counteracts the carbon
effects of the initial activity.
Lifetime
Lifetime is a general term used for various time scales
characterizing the rate of processes affecting the concentration
of trace gases. In general, lifetime denotes the average length
of time that an atom or molecule spends in a given reservoir,
such as the atmosphere or oceans. The following lifetimes
may be distinguished:
* "Turnover time" (T) or "atmospheric lifetime" is the ratio
of the mass M of a reservoir (e.g., a gaseous compound in
the atmosphere) and the total rate of removal S from the
reservoir: T = M/S. For each removal process separate
turnover times can be defined. In soil carbon biology, this
is referred to as Mean Residence Time.
* "Adjustment time," "response time," or "perturbation
lifetime" (Ta) is the time scale characterizing the decay of
an instantaneous pulse input into the reservoir. The term
adjustment time is also used to characterize the adjustment

377

Climate Change 2001

of the mass of a reservoir following a step change in the
source strength. Half-life or decay constant is used to quantify
a first-order exponential decay process. See response time
for a different definition pertinent to climate variations.
The term "lifetime" is sometimes used, for simplicity, as a
surrogate for "adjustment time."
In simple cases, where the global removal of the compound is
directly proportional to the total mass of the reservoir, the
adjustment time equals the turnover time: T = Ta. An example
is CFC-11 which is removed from the atmosphere only by
photochemical processes in the stratosphere. In more complicated
cases, where several reservoirs are involved or where the removal
is not proportional to the total mass, the equality T = Ta no
longer holds. Carbon dioxide is an extreme example. Its turnover
time is only about 4 years because of the rapid exchange between
atmosphere and the ocean and terrestrial biota. However, a
large part of that CO2 is returned to the atmosphere within a
few years. Thus, the adjustment time of CO2 in the atmosphere
is actually determined by the rate of removal of carbon from
the surface layer of the oceans into its deeper layers. Although
an approximate value of 100 years may be given for the
adjustment time of CO 2 in the atmosphere, the actual
adjustment is faster initially and slower later on. In the case of
methane, the adjustment time is different from the turnover
time, because the removal is mainly through a chemical
reaction with the hydroxyl radical OH, the concentration of
which itself depends on the CH4 concentration. Therefore the
CH4 removal S is not proportional to its total mass M.
Lithosphere
The upper layer of the solid Earth, both continental and
oceanic, which is composed of all crustal rocks and the cold,
mainly elastic, part of the uppermost mantle. Volcanic activity,
although part of the lithosphere, is not considered as part of
the climate system, but acts as an external forcing factor.
Leapfrogging
Leapfrogging (or technological leapfrogging) refers to the
opportunities in developing countries to bypass several stages
of technology development, historically observed in industrialized
countries, and apply the most advanced presently available
technologies in the energy and other economic sectors, through
investments in technological development and capacity
building.
Level of scientific understanding
This is an index on a 4-step scale (High, Medium, Low, and
Very Low) designed to characterize the degree of scientific
understanding of the radiative forcing agents that affect climate
change. For each agent, the index represents a subjective
judgement about the reliability of the estimate of its forcing,
involving such factors as the assumptions necessary to evaluate
the forcing, the degree of knowledge of the physical/chemical
mechanisms determining the forcing, and the uncertainties
surrounding the quantitative estimate.

378

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Local Agenda 21
Local Agenda 21s are the local plans for environment and
development that each local authority is meant to develop
through a consultative process with their populations, with
particular attention paid to involving women and youth. Many
local authorities have developed Local Agenda 21s through
consultative processes as a means of reorienting their policies,
plans, and operations towards the achievement of sustainable
development goals. The term comes from Chapter 28 of
Agenda 21--the document formally endorsed by all
government representatives attending the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development (also known
as the Earth Summit) in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
Lock-in technologies and practices
Technologies and practices that have market advantages arising
from existing institutions, services, infrastructure, and available
resources; they are very difficult to change because of their
widespread use and the presence of associated infrastructure
and socio-cultural patterns.
Maladaptation
Any changes in natural or human systems that inadvertently
increase vulnerability to climatic stimuli; an adaptation that
does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases it
instead.
Malaria
Endemic or epidemic parasitic disease caused by species of
the genus Plasmodium (protozoa) and transmitted by mosquitoes
of the genus Anopheles; produces high fever attacks and
systemic disorders, and kills approximately 2 million people
every year.
Marginal cost pricing
The pricing of commercial goods and services such that the
price equals the additional cost that arises from the expansion
of production by one additional unit.
Market barriers
In the context of mitigation of climate change, conditions that
prevent or impede the diffusion of cost-effective technologies
or practices that would mitigate greenhouse gas emissions.
Market-based incentives
Measures intended to use price mechanisms (e.g., taxes and
tradable permits) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Market impacts
Impacts that are linked to market transactions and directly
affect Gross Domestic Product (a country's national
accounts)--for example, changes in the supply and price of
agricultural goods. See also non-market impacts.

Annex B

Market penetration
Market penetration is the share of a given market that is
provided by a particular good or service at a given time.
Market potential
The portion of the economic potential for greenhouse gas
emissions reductions or energy-efficiency improvements that
could be achieved under forecast market conditions, assuming
no new policies and measures. See also economic potential,
socio-economic potential, and technological potential.
Mass movement
Applies to all unit movements of land material propelled and
controlled by gravity.
Mean Sea Level (MSL)
Mean Sea Level is normally defined as the average relative
sea level over a period, such as a month or a year, long enough
to average out transients such as waves. See also sea-level
rise.
Methane (CH4)
A hydrocarbon that is a greenhouse gas produced through
anaerobic (without oxygen) decomposition of waste in
landfills, animal digestion, decomposition of animal wastes,
production and distribution of natural gas and oil, coal
production, and incomplete fossil-fuel combustion. Methane
is one of the six greenhouse gases to be mitigated under the
Kyoto Protocol.
Methane recovery
Method by which methane emissions (e.g., from coal mines
or waste sites) are captured and then reused either as a fuel or
for some other economic purpose (e.g., reinjection in oil or
gas reserves).
Meeting of the Parties (to the Kyoto Protocol) (MOP)
The Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change will serve as the Meeting of
the Parties (MOP), the supreme body of the Kyoto Protocol,
but only Parties to the Kyoto Protocol may participate in
deliberations and make decisions. Until the Protocol enters
into force, MOP cannot meet.
Mitigation
An anthropogenic intervention to reduce the sources or
enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.
Mitigative capacity
The social, political, and economic structures and conditions
that are required for effective mitigation.
Mixed layer
The upper region of the ocean well-mixed by interaction with
the overlying atmosphere.

Glossary of Terms

Mixing ratio
See mole fraction.
Model hierarchy
See climate model.
Mole fraction
Mole fraction, or mixing ratio, is the ratio of the number of
moles of a constituent in a given volume to the total number
of moles of all constituents in that volume. It is usually reported
for dry air. Typical values for long-lived greenhouse gases are
in the order of mmol/mol (parts per million: ppm), nmol/mol
(parts per billion: ppb), and fmol/mol (parts per trillion: ppt).
Mole fraction differs from volume mixing ratio, often expressed
in ppmv, etc., by the corrections for non-ideality of gases. This
correction is significant relative to measurement precision for
many greenhouse gases (Schwartz and Warneck, 1995).
Monsoon
Wind in the general atmospheric circulation typified by a
seasonal persistent wind direction and by a pronounced change
in direction from one season to the next.
Montane
The biogeographic zone made up of relatively moist, cool
upland slopes below timberline and characterized by the
presence of large evergreen trees as a dominant life form.
Montreal Protocol
The Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone
layer was adopted in Montreal in 1987, and subsequently
adjusted and amended in London (1990), Copenhagen (1992),
Vienna (1995), Montreal (1997), and Beijing (1999). It
controls the consumption and production of chlorine- and
bromine-containing chemicals that destroy stratospheric ozone,
such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), methyl chloroform,
carbon tetrachloride, and many others.
Morbidity
Rate of occurrence of disease or other health disorder within a
population, taking account of the age-specific morbidity rates.
Health outcomes include chronic disease incidence/prevalence,
rates of hospitalization, primary care consultations, disability-days
(i.e., days when absent from work), and prevalence of symptoms.
Mortality
Rate of occurrence of death within a population within a
specified time period; calculation of mortality takes account
of age-specific death rates, and can thus yield measures of life
expectancy and the extent of premature death.
Net Biome Production (NBP)
Net gain or loss of carbon from a region. NBP is equal to the
Net Ecosystem Production minus the carbon lost due to a
disturbance (e.g., a forest fire or a forest harvest).

379

Climate Change 2001

Net carbon dioxide emissions
Difference between sources and sinks of carbon dioxide in a
given period and specific area or region.

Non-Annex B countries/Parties
The countries that are not included in Annex B in the Kyoto
Protocol. See also Annex B countries.

Net Ecosystem Production (NEP)
Net gain or loss of carbon from an ecosystem. NEP is equal to
the Net Primary Production minus the carbon lost through
heterotrophic respiration.

Non-Annex I countries/Parties
The countries that have ratified or acceded to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change that are
not included in Annex I of the Climate Convention. See also
Annex I countries.

Net Primary Production (NPP)
The increase in plant biomass or carbon of a unit of a landscape.
NPP is equal to the Gross Primary Production minus carbon
lost through autotrophic respiration.
Nitrogen fertilization
Enhancement of plant growth through the addition of nitrogen
compounds. In IPCC assessments, this typically refers to
fertilization from anthropogenic sources of nitrogen such as
human-made fertilizers and nitrogen oxides released from
burning fossil fuels.
Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
Any of several oxides of nitrogen.
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
A powerful greenhouse gas emitted through soil cultivation
practices, especially the use of commercial and organic
fertilizers, fossil-fuel combustion, nitric acid production, and
biomass burning. One of the six greenhouse gases to be curbed
under the Kyoto Protocol.
Non-point-source pollution
Pollution from sources that cannot be defined as discrete
points, such as areas of crop production, timber, surface
mining, disposal of refuse, and construction. See also pointsource pollution.
No-regrets opportunities
See no-regrets policy.
No-regret options
See no-regrets policy.
No-regrets policy
One that would generate net social benefits whether or not
there is climate change. No-regrets opportunities for
greenhouse gas emissions reduction are defined as those
options whose benefits such as reduced energy costs and
reduced emissions of local/regional pollutants equal or exceed
their costs to society, excluding the benefits of avoided climate
change. No-regrets potential is defined as the gap between
the market potential and the socio-economic potential.
No-regrets potential
See no-regrets policy.

380

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Non-linearity
A process is called "non-linear" when there is no simple
proportional relation between cause and effect. The climate
system contains many such non-linear processes, resulting in
a system with a potentially very complex behavior. Such
complexity may lead to rapid climate change.
Non-market impacts
Impacts that affect ecosystems or human welfare, but that are
not directly linked to market transactions--for example, an
increased risk of premature death. See also market impacts.
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
The North Atlantic Oscillation consists of opposing variations
of barometric pressure near Iceland and near the Azores. On
average, a westerly current, between the Icelandic low pressure
area and the Azores high pressure area, carries cyclones with
their associated frontal systems towards Europe. However,
the pressure difference between Iceland and the Azores fluctuates
on time scales of days to decades, and can be reversed at times.
It is the dominant mode of winter climate variability in the North
Atlantic region, ranging from central North America to Europe.
Ocean conveyor belt
The theoretical route by which water circulates around the entire
global ocean, driven by wind and the thermohaline circulation.
Opportunity
An opportunity is a situation or circumstance to decrease the
gap between the market potential of any technology or practice
and the economic potential, socio-economic potential, or
technological potential.
Opportunity costs
The cost of an economic activity forgone by the choice of
another activity.
Optimal policy
A policy is assumed to be "optimal" if marginal abatement costs
are equalized across countries, thereby minimizing total costs.
Organic aerosol
Aerosol particles consisting predominantly of organic compounds,
mainly C, H, and O, and lesser amounts of other elements
(Charlson and Heintzenberg, 1995). See carbonaceous aerosol.

Annex B

Ozone (O3)
Ozone, the triatomic form of oxygen (O3), is a gaseous atmospheric
constituent. In the troposphere it is created both naturally and by
photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human
activities (photochemical "smog"). In high concentrations,
tropospheric ozone can be harmful to a wide-range of living
organisms. Tropospheric ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the
stratosphere, ozone is created by the interaction between solar
ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric
ozone plays a decisive role in the stratospheric radiative balance.
Its concentration is highest in the ozone layer. Depletion of
stratospheric ozone, due to chemical reactions that may be enhanced
by climate change, results in an increased ground-level flux of
ultraviolet-B radiation. See also Montreal Protocol and ozone layer.
Ozone hole
See ozone layer.
Ozone layer
The stratosphere contains a layer in which the concentration
of ozone is greatest, the so-called ozone layer. The layer
extends from about 12 to 40 km. The ozone concentration
reaches a maximum between about 20 and 25 km. This layer
is being depleted by human emissions of chlorine and bromine
compounds. Every year, during the Southern Hemisphere
spring, a very strong depletion of the ozone layer takes place
over the Antarctic region, also caused by human-made chlorine
and bromine compounds in combination with the specific
meteorological conditions of that region. This phenomenon is
called the ozone hole.
Parameterization
In climate models, this term refers to the technique of representing
processes, that cannot be explicitly resolved at the spatial or
temporal resolution of the model (sub-grid scale processes),
by relationships between the area- or time-averaged effect of
such sub-grid-scale processes and the larger scale flow.
Pareto criterion/Pareto optimum
A requirement or status that an individual's welfare could not be
further improved without making others in the society worse off.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs)
Among the six greenhouse gases to be abated under the Kyoto
Protocol. These are by-products of aluminum smelting and
uranium enrichment. They also replace chlorofluorocarbons
in manufacturing semiconductors. The Global Warming
Potential of PFCs is 6,500-9,200 times that of carbon dioxide.

Glossary of Terms

Photosynthesis
The process by which plants take carbon dioxide (CO2) from
the air (or bicarbonate in water) to build carbohydrates, releasing
oxygen (O2) in the process. There are several pathways of
photosynthesis with different responses to atmospheric CO2
concentrations. See also carbon dioxide fertilization.
Phytoplankton
The plant forms of plankton (e.g., diatoms). Phytoplankton
are the dominant plants in the sea, and are the bast of the entire
marine food web. These single-celled organisms are the
principal agents for photosynthetic carbon fixation in the
ocean. See also zooplankton.
Plankton
Aquatic organisms that drift or swim weakly. See also
phytoplankton and zooplankton.
Point-source pollution
Pollution resulting from any confined, discrete source, such
as a pipe, ditch, tunnel, well, container, concentrated animalfeeding operation, or floating craft. See also non-point-source
pollution.
Policies and measures
In United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
parlance, "policies" are actions that can be taken and/or mandated
by a government--often in conjunction with business and industry
within its own country, as well as with other countries--to
accelerate the application and use of measures to curb
greenhouse gas emissions. "Measures" are technologies,
processes, and practices used to implement policies, which, if
employed, would reduce greenhouse gas emissions below
anticipated future levels. Examples might include carbon or
other energy taxes, standardized fuel-efficiency standards for
automobiles, etc. "Common and coordinated" or "harmonized"
policies refer to those adopted jointly by Parties.
Pool
See reservoir.
Post-glacial rebound
The vertical movement of the continents and sea floor
following the disappearance and shrinking of ice sheets--for
example, since the Last Glacial Maximum (21 ky BP). The
rebound is an isostatic land movement.

Permafrost
Perennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature
remains below 0C for several years.

Precursors
Atmospheric compounds which themselves are not greenhouse
gases or aerosols, but which have an effect on greenhouse gas
or aerosol concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical
processes regulating their production or destruction rates.

Perturbation lifetime
See lifetime.

Pre-industrial
See Industrial Revolution.

381

Climate Change 2001

Present value cost
The sum of all costs over all time periods, with future costs
discounted.

after allowing for stratospheric temperatures to readjust to
radiative equilibrium, but with all tropospheric properties held
fixed at their unperturbed values.

Primary energy
Energy embodied in natural resources (e.g., coal, crude oil,
sunlight, uranium) that has not undergone any anthropogenic
conversion or transformation.

Radiative forcing scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of
radiative forcing associated, for example, with changes in
atmospheric composition or land-use change, or with external
factors such as variations in solar activity. Radiative forcing
scenarios can be used as input into simplified climate models
to compute climate projections.

Private cost
Categories of costs influencing an individual's decision making
are referred to as private costs. See also social cost and total cost.
Profile
A smoothly changing set of concentrations representing a
possible pathway towards stabilization. The word "profile"is
used to distinguish such pathways from emissions pathways,
which are usually referred to as "scenarios."
Projection (generic)
A projection is a potential future evolution of a quantity or set
of quantities, often computed with the aid of a model.
Projections are distinguished from "predictions" in order to
emphasize that projections involve assumptions concerning,
for example, future socio-economic and technological
developments that may or may not be realized, and are
therefore subject to substantial uncertainty. See also climate
projection and climate prediction.
Proxy
A proxy climate indicator is a local record that is interpreted,
using physical and biophysical principles, to represent some
combination of climate-related variations back in time.
Climate-related data derived in this way are referred to as proxy
data. Examples of proxies are tree ring records, characteristics
of corals, and various data derived from ice cores.
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
Estimates of Gross Domestic Product based on the purchasing
power of currencies rather than on current exchange rates. Such
estimates are a blend of extrapolated and regression-based
numbers, using the results of the International Comparison
Program. PPP estimates tend to lower per capita GDPs in
industrialized countries and raise per capita GDPs in developing
countries. PPP is also an acronym for polluter-pays-principle.
Radiative balance
See energy balance.
Radiative forcing
Radiative forcing is the change in the net vertical irradiance
(expressed in Wm-2) at the tropopause due to an internal change
or a change in the external forcing of the climate system, such as,
for example, a change in the concentration of carbon dioxide
or the output of the Sun. Usually radiative forcing is computed

382

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Rangeland
Unimproved grasslands, shrublands, savannahs, and tundra.
Regeneration
The renewal of a stand of trees through either natural means
(seeded onsite or adjacent stands or deposited by wind, birds,
or animals) or artificial means (by planting seedlings or direct
seeding).
Rapid climate change
The non-linearity of the climate system may lead to rapid
climate change, sometimes called abrupt events or even
surprises. Some such abrupt events may be imaginable, such
as a dramatic reorganization of the thermohaline circulation,
rapid deglaciation, or massive melting of permafrost leading
to fast changes in the carbon cycle. Others may be truly
unexpected, as a consequence of a strong, rapidly changing,
forcing of a non-linear system.
Rebound effect
Occurs because, for example, an improvement in motor
efficiency lowers the cost per kilometer driven; it has the
perverse effect of encouraging more trips.
Reference scenario
See baseline.
Reforestation
Planting of forests on lands that have previously contained
forests but that have been converted to some other use. For a
discussion of the term forest and related terms such as
afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation, see the IPCC
Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry
(IPCC, 2000b).
Regulatory measures
Rules or codes enacted by governments that mandate product
specifications or process performance characteristics. See also
standards.
Reinsurance
The transfer of a portion of primary insurance risks to a secondary
tier of insurers (reinsurers); essentially "insurance for insurers."

Annex B

Glossary of Terms

Relative sea level
Sea level measured by a tide gauge with respect to the land
upon which it is situated. See also Mean Sea Level.

Respiration
The process whereby living organisms converts organic matter
to carbon dioxide, releasing energy and consuming oxygen.

(Relative) Sea level secular change
Long-term changes in relative sea level caused by either
eustatic changes (e.g., brought about by thermal expansion)
or changes in vertical land movements.

Response time
The response time or adjustment time is the time needed for
the climate system or its components to re-equilibrate to a new
state, following a forcing resulting from external and internal
processes or feedbacks. It is very different for various components
of the climate system. The response time of the troposphere is
relatively short, from days to weeks, whereas the stratosphere comes
into equilibrium on a time scale of typically a few months. Due
to their large heat capacity, the oceans have a much longer response
time, typically decades, but up to centuries or millennia. The
response time of the strongly coupled surface-troposphere system
is, therefore, slow compared to that of the stratosphere, and
mainly determined by the oceans. The biosphere may respond
fast (e.g., to droughts), but also very slowly to imposed changes.
See lifetime for a different definition of response time pertinent
to the rate of processes affecting the concentration of trace gases.

Renewables
Energy sources that are, within a short time frame relative to
the Earth's natural cycles, sustainable, and include non-carbon
technologies such as solar energy, hydropower, and wind, as
well as carbon-neutral technologies such as biomass.
Research, development, and demonstration
Scientific and/or technical research and development of new
production processes or products, coupled with analysis and
measures that provide information to potential users regarding
the application of the new product or process; demonstration
tests; and feasibility of applying these products processes via
pilot plants and other pre-commercial applications.
Reserves
Refer to those occurrences that are identified and measured
as economically and technically recoverable with current
technologies and prices. See also resources.

Revenue recycling
See interaction effect.
Runoff
That part of precipitation that does not evaporate. In some
countries, runoff implies surface runoff only.

Reservoir
A component of the climate system, other than the atmosphere,
which has the capacity to store, accumulate, or release a
substance of concern (e.g., carbon, a greenhouse gas, or a
precursor). Oceans, soils, and forests are examples of
reservoirs of carbon. Pool is an equivalent term (note that the
definition of pool often includes the atmosphere). The absolute
quantity of substance of concerns, held within a reservoir at a
specified time, is called the stock. The term also means an
artificial or natural storage place for water, such as a lake,
pond, or aquifer, from which the water may be withdrawn for
such purposes as irrigation, water supply, or irrigation.

S profiles
The carbon dioxide concentration profiles leading to stabilization
defined in the IPCC 1994 assessment (Enting et al., 1994;
Schimel et al., 1995). For any given stabilization level, these
profiles span a wide range of possibilities. The S stands for
"Stabilization." See also WRE profiles.

Resilience
Amount of change a system can undergo without changing
state.

Saltwater intrusion/encroachment
Displacement of fresh surfacewater or groundwater by the
advance of saltwater due to its greater density, usually in coastal
and estuarine areas.

Resource base
Resource base includes both reserves and resources.
Resources
Resources are those occurrences with less certain geological
and/or economic characteristics, but which are considered
potentially recoverable with foreseeable technological and
economic developments.

Safe-landing approach
See tolerable windows approach.
Salinization
The accumulation of salts in soils.

Scenario (generic)
A plausible and often simplified description of how the future
may develop, based on a coherent and internally consistent set
of assumptions about key driving forces (e.g., rate of technology
change, prices) and relationships. Scenarios are neither predictions
nor forecasts and sometimes may be based on a "narrative
storyline." Scenarios may be derived from projections, but are
often based on additional information from other sources. See
also SRES scenarios, climate scenario, and emission scenarios.

383

Climate Change 2001

Sea-level rise
An increase in the mean level of the ocean. Eustatic sea-level
rise is a change in global average sea level brought about by
an alteration to the volume of the world ocean. Relative sealevel rise occurs where there is a net increase in the level of
the ocean relative to local land movements. Climate modelers
largely concentrate on estimating eustatic sea-level change.
Impact researchers focus on relative sea-level change.
Seawall
A human-made wall or embankment along a shore to prevent
wave erosion.
Semi-arid regions
Ecosystems that have more than 250 mm precipitation per year
but are not highly productive; usually classified as rangelands.
Sensitivity
Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either
adversely or beneficially, by climate-related stimuli. The effect
may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response to a change
in the mean, range, or variability of temperature) or indirect
(e.g., damages caused by an increase in the frequency of coastal
flooding due to sea-level rise). See also climate sensitivity.
Sequential decision making
Stepwise decision making aiming to identify short-term strategies
in the face of long-term uncertainties, by incorporating additional
information over time and making mid-course corrections.
Sequestration
The process of increasing the carbon content of a carbon
reservoir other than the atmosphere. Biological approaches
to sequestration include direct removal of carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere through land-use change, afforestation,
reforestation, and practices that enhance soil carbon in agriculture.
Physical approaches include separation and disposal of carbon
dioxide from flue gases or from processing fossil fuels to
produce hydrogen- and carbon dioxide-rich fractions and longterm storage in underground in depleted oil and gas reservoirs,
coal seams, and saline aquifers. See also uptake.
Silt
Unconsolidated or loose sedimentary material whose constituent
rock particles are finer than grains of sand and larger than
clay particles.
Silviculture
Development and care of forests.
Sink
Any process, activity or mechanism that removes a greenhouse
gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol
from the atmosphere.

384

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Snowpacks
A seasonal accumulation of slow-melting snow.
Social cost
The social cost of an activity includes the value of all the resources
used in its provision. Some of these are priced and others are not.
Non-priced resources are referred to as externalities. It is the
sum of the costs of these externalities and the priced resources
that makes up the social cost. See also private cost and total cost.
Socio-economic potential
The socio-economic potential represents the level of greenhouse
gas mitigation that would be approached by overcoming social
and cultural obstacles to the use of technologies that are costeffective. See also economic potential, market potential, and
technology potential.
Soil moisture
Water stored in or at the land surface and available for evaporation.
Solar activity
The Sun exhibits periods of high activity observed in numbers
of sunspots, as well as radiative output, magnetic activity, and
emission of high energy particles. These variations take place
on a range of time scales from millions of years to minutes.
See also solar cycle.
Solar ("11 year") cycle
A quasi-regular modulation of solar activity with varying
amplitude and a period of between 9 and 13 years.
Solar radiation
Radiation emitted by the Sun. It is also referred to as shortwave radiation. Solar radiation has a distinctive range of
wavelengths (spectrum) determined by the temperature of the
Sun. See also infrared radiation.
Soot particles
Particles formed during the quenching of gases at the outer edge
of flames of organic vapors, consisting predominantly of carbon,
with lesser amounts of oxygen and hydrogen present as carboxyl
and phenolic groups and exhibiting an imperfect graphitic structure
(Charlson and Heintzenberg, 1995). See also black carbon.
Source
Any process, activity, or mechanism that releases a greenhouse
gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol
into the atmosphere.
Southern Oscillation
See El Nino Southern Oscillation.
Spatial and temporal scales
Climate may vary on a large range of spatial and temporal scales.
Spatial scales may range from local (less than 100,000 km2),

Annex B

through regional (100,000 to 10 million km2) to continental
(10 to 100 million km2). Temporal scales may range from
seasonal to geological (up to hundreds of millions of years).
Spill-over effect
The economic effects of domestic or sectoral mitigation measures
on other countries or sectors. In this report, no assessment is made
on environmental spillover effects. Spillover effects can be positive
or negative and include effects on trade, carbon leakage, transfer,
and diffusion of environmentally sound technology and other issues.
SRES scenarios
SRES scenarios are emissions scenarios developed by
Nakicenovic et al. (2000) and used, among others, as a basis
for the climate projections in the IPCC WGI contribution to
the Third Assessment Report (IPCC, 2001a). The following
terms are relevant for a better understanding of the structure
and use of the set of SRES scenarios:
* (Scenario) Family: Scenarios that have a similar demographic,
societal, economic, and technical-change storyline. Four
scenario families comprise the SRES scenario set: A1, A2,
B1, and B2.
* (Scenario) Group: Scenarios within a family that reflect a
consistent variation of the storyline. The A1 scenario family
includes four groups designated as A1T, A1C, A1G, and A1B
that explore alternative structures of future energy systems.
In the Summary for Policymakers of Nakicenovic et al.
(2000), the A1C and A1G groups have been combined into
one "Fossil-Intensive" A1FI scenario group. The other three
scenario families consist of one group each. The SRES scenario
set reflected in the Summary for Policymakers of Nakicenovic
et al. (2000) thus consist of six distinct scenario groups, all
of which are equally sound and together capture the range of
uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions.
* Illustrative Scenario: A scenario that is illustrative for each
of the six scenario groups reflected in the Summary for
Policymakers of Nakicenovic et al. (2000). They include
four revised scenario markers for the scenario groups A1B,
A2, B1, B2, and two additional scenarios for the A1FI and
A1T groups. All scenario groups are equally sound.
* (Scenario) Marker: A scenario that was originally posted in
draft form on the SRES website to represent a given scenario
family. The choice of markers was based on which of the initial
quantifications best reflected the storyline, and the features
of specific models. Markers are no more likely than other
scenarios, but are considered by the SRES writing team as
illustrative of a particular storyline. They are included in
revised form in Nakicenovic et al. (2000). These scenarios
have received the closest scrutiny of the entire writing team
and via the SRES open process. Scenarios have also been
selected to illustrate the other two scenario groups.
* (Scenario) Storyline: A narrative description of a scenario
(or family of scenarios) highlighting the main scenario
characteristics, relationships between key driving forces,
and the dynamics of their evolution.

Glossary of Terms

Stabilization
The achievement of stabilization of atmospheric concentrations
of one or more greenhouse gases (e.g., carbon dioxide or a
CO2-equivalent basket of greenhouse gases).
Stabilization analysis
In this report, this refers to analyses or scenarios that address
the stabilization of the concentration of greenhouse gases.
Stabilization scenarios
See stabilization analysis.
Stakeholders
Person or entity holding grants, concessions, or any other type
of value that would be affected by a particular action or policy.
Standards
Set of rules or codes mandating or defining product performance
(e.g., grades, dimensions, characteristics, test methods, and
rules for use). International product and/or technology or
performance standards establish minimum requirements for
affected products and/or technologies in countries where they
are adopted. The standards reduce greenhouse gas emissions
associated with the manufacture or use of the products and/or
application of the technology. See also regulatory measures.
Stimuli (climate-related)
All the elements of climate change, including mean climate
characteristics, climate variability, and the frequency and
magnitude of extremes.
Stock
See reservoir.
Storm surge
The temporary increase, at a particular locality, in the height
of the sea due to extreme meteorological conditions (low
atmospheric pressure and/or strong winds). The storm surge
is defined as being the excess above the level expected from
the tidal variation alone at that time and place.
Storyline
See SRES scenarios.
Streamflow
Water within a river channel, usually expressed in m3 sec-1.
Stratosphere
The highly stratified region of the atmosphere above the
troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9 km in
high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50 km.
Structural change
Changes, for example, in the relative share of Gross Domestic
Product produced by the industrial, agricultural, or services sectors

385

Climate Change 2001

of an economy; or more generally, systems transformations
whereby some components are either replaced or potentially
substituted by other ones.

Tax-interaction effect
See interaction effect.

Submergence
A rise in the water level in relation to the land, so that areas of
formerly dry land become inundated; it results either from a
sinking of the land or from a rise of the water level.

Technological potential
The amount by which it is possible to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions or improve energy efficiency by implementing a technology
or practice that has already been demonstrated. See also economic
potential, market potential, and socio-economic potential.

Subsidence
The sudden sinking or gradual downward settling of the Earth's
surface with little or no horizontal motion.

Technology
A piece of equipment or a technique for performing a particular
activity.

Subsidy
Direct payment from the government to an entity, or a tax reduction
to that entity, for implementing a practice the government wishes
to encourage. Greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by
lowering existing subsidies that have the effect of raising
emissions, such as subsidies to fossil-fuel use, or by providing
subsidies for practices that reduce emissions or enhance sinks
(e.g., for insulation of buildings or planting trees).

Technology or performance standard
See standards.

Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)
One of the six greenhouse gases to be curbed under the Kyoto
Protocol. It is largely used in heavy industry to insulate highvoltage equipment and to assist in the manufacturing of cablecooling systems. Its Global Warming Potential is 23,900.
Sunspots
Small dark areas on the Sun. The number of sunspots is higher
during periods of high solar activity, and varies in particular
with the solar cycle.
Surface runoff
The water that travels over the soil surface to the nearest surface
stream; runoff of a drainage basin that has not passed beneath
the surface since precipitation.
Sustainable development
Development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs.
Targets and time tables
A target is the reduction of a specific percentage of greenhouse
gas emissions from a baseline date (e.g., "below 1990 levels")
to be achieved by a set date or time table (e.g., 2008 to 2012).
For example, under the Kyoto Protocol's formula, the European
Union has agreed to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
8% below 1990 levels by the 2008 to 2012 commitment period.
These targets and time tables are, in effect, an emissions cap
on the total amount of greenhouse gas emissions that can be
emitted by a country or region in a given time period.

386

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Technology transfer
The broad set of processes that cover the exchange of knowledge,
money, and goods among different stakeholders that lead to the
spreading of technology for adapting to or mitigating climate
change. As a generic concept, the term is used to encompass
both diffusion of technologies and technological cooperation
across and within countries.
Thermal erosion
The erosion of ice-rich permafrost by the combined thermal
and mechanical action of moving water.
Thermal expansion
In connection with sea level, this refers to the increase in volume
(and decrease in density) that results from warming water. A
warming of the ocean leads to an expansion of the ocean
volume and hence an increase in sea level.
Thermohaline circulation
Large-scale density-driven circulation in the ocean, caused by
differences in temperature and salinity. In the North Atlantic, the
thermohaline circulation consists of warm surface water flowing
northward and cold deepwater flowing southward, resulting
in a net poleward transport of heat. The surface water sinks in
highly restricted sinking regions located in high latitudes.
Thermokarst
Irregular, hummocky topography in frozen ground caused by
melting of ice.
Tide gauge
A device at a coastal location (and some deep sea locations)
which continuously measures the level of the sea with respect
to the adjacent land. Time-averaging of the sea level so
recorded gives the observed relative sea level secular changes.
Time scale
Characteristic time for a process to be expressed. Since many
processes exibit most of their effects early, and then have a long

Annex B

period during which they gradually approach full expression,
for the purpose of this report the time scale is numerically defined
as the time required for a perturbation in a process to show at
least half of its final effect.
Tolerable-windows approach
These approaches analyze greenhouse gas emissions as they
would be constrained by adopting a long-term climate--rather
than greenhouse gas concentration stabilization--target (e.g.,
expressed in terms of temperature or sea level changes or the
rate of such changes). The main objective of these approaches
is to evaluate the implications of such long-term targets for shortor medium-term "tolerable" ranges of global greenhouse gas
emissions. Also referred to as safe-landing approaches.
Top-down models
The terms "top" and "bottom" are shorthand for aggregate
and disaggregated models. The top-down label derives from
how modelers applied macro-economic theory and
econometric techniques to historical data on consumption,
prices, incomes, and factor costs to model final demand for
goods and services, and supply from main sectors, like the
energy sector, transportation, agriculture, and industry.
Therefore, top-down models evaluate the system from
aggregate economic variables, as compared to bottom-up
models that consider technological options or project specific
climate change mitigation policies. Some technology data
were, however, integrated into top-down analysis and so the
distinction is not that clear-cut.
Total cost
All items of cost added together. The total cost to society is
made up of both the external cost and the private cost, which
together are defined as social cost.
Trade effects
Economic impacts of changes in the purchasing power of a
bundle of exported goods of a country for bundles of goods
imported from its trade partners. Climate policies change the
relative production costs and may change terms of trade
substantially enough to change the ultimate economic balance.
Transient climate response
The globally averaged surface air temperature increase, averaged
over a 20-year period, centered at the time of CO2 doubling
(i.e., at year 70 in a 1% per year compound CO2 increase
experiment with a global coupled climate model).
Tropopause
The boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere.
Troposphere
The lowest part of the atmosphere from the surface to about
10 km in altitude in mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km in high
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) where clouds and

Glossary of Terms

"weather" phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures
generally decrease with height.
Tundra
A treeless, level, or gently undulating plain characteristic of
arctic and subarctic regions.
Turnover time
See lifetime.
Ultraviolet (UV)-B radiation
Solar radiation within a wavelength range of 280-320 nm,
the greater part of which is absorbed by stratospheric ozone.
Enhanced UV-B radiation suppresses the immune system and
can have other adverse effects on living organisms.
Uncertainty
An expression of the degree to which a value (e.g., the future
state of the climate system) is unknown. Uncertainty can result
from lack of information or from disagreement about what is
known or even knowable. It may have many types of sources,
from quantifiable errors in the data to ambiguously defined
concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human
behavior. Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative
measures (e.g., a range of values calculated by various models)
or by qualitative statements (e.g., reflecting the judgment of a
team of experts). See Moss and Schneider (2000).
Undernutrition
The result of food intake that is insufficient to meet dietary
energy requirements continuously, poor absorption, and/or
poor biological use of nutrients consumed.
Unique and threatened systems
Entities that are confined to a relatively narrow geographical
range but can affect other, often larger entities beyond their
range; narrow geographical range points to sensitivity to
environmental variables, including climate, and therefore
attests to potential vulnerability to climate change.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC)
The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 in New York
and signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by
more than 150 countries and the European Community. Its
ultimate objective is the "stabilization of greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system." It contains commitments for all Parties. Under the
Convention, Parties included in Annex I aim to return
greenhouse gas emissions not controlled by the Montreal
Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000. The Convention
entered into force in March 1994. See also Kyoto Protocol
and Conference of the Parties (COP).

387

Climate Change 2001

Uptake
The addition of a substance of concern to a reservoir. The
uptake of carbon-containing substances, in particular carbon
dioxide, is often called (carbon) sequestration. See also
sequestration.
Upwelling
Transport of deeper water to the surface, usually caused by
horizontal movements of surface water.
Urbanization
The conversion of land from a natural state or managed natural
state (such as agriculture) to cities; a process driven by net
rural-to-urban migration through which an increasing percentage
of the population in any nation or region come to live in
settlements that are defined as "urban centres."
Value added
The net output of a sector after adding up all outputs and
subtracting intermediate inputs.
Values
Worth, desirability, or utility based on individual preferences.
The total value of any resource is the sum of the values of the
different individuals involved in the use of the resource. The
values, which are the foundation of the estimation of costs,
are measured in terms of the willingness to pay (WTP) by
individuals to receive the resource or by the willingness of
individuals to accept payment (WTA) to part with the resource.
Vector
An organism, such as an insect, that transmits a pathogen from
one host to another. See also vector-borne diseases.
Vector-borne diseases
Disease that is transmitted between hosts by a vector organism
such as a mosquito or tick (e.g., malaria, dengue fever, and
leishmaniasis).
Volume mixing ratio
See mole fraction.

388

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Synthesis Report

Voluntary agreement
An agreement between a government authority and one or more
private parties, as well as a unilateral commitment that is
recognized by the public authority, to achieve environmental
objectives or to improve environmental performance beyond
compliance.
Vulnerability
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to
cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate
variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the
character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a
system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.
Water stress
A country is water-stressed if the available freshwater supply
relative to water withdrawals acts as an important constraint
on development. Withdrawals exceeding 20% of renewable
water supply has been used as an indicator of water stress.
Water-use efficiency
Carbon gain in photosynthesis per unit water lost in
evapotranspiration. It can be expressed on a short-term basis
as the ratio of photosynthetic carbon gain per unit transpirational
water loss, or on a seasonal basis as the ratio of net primary
production or agricultural yield to the amount of available water.
Water withdrawal
Amount of water extracted from water bodies.
WRE profiles
The carbon dioxide concentration profiles leading to stabilization
defined by Wigley, Richels, and Edmonds (1996) whose initials
provide the acronym. For any given stabilization level, these
profiles span a wide range of possibilities. See also S profiles.
Zooplankton
The animal forms of plankton. They consume phytoplankton
or other zooplankton. See also phytoplankton.

Annex B

Sources
Charlson, R.J., and J. Heintzenberg (eds.), 1995: Aerosol Forcing
of Climate. John Wiley and Sons Limited, Chichester, United
Kingdom, pp. 91-108 (reproduced with permission).
Enting, I.G., T.M.L. Wigley, and M. Heimann, 1994: Future
emissions and concentrations of carbon dioxide: key ocean/
atmosphere/land analyses. CSIRO Division of Atmospheric
Research Technical Paper 31, Mordialloc, Australia, 120 pp.
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment [Houghton, J.T., B.A.
Callander, and S.K. Varney (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, xi + 116 pp.
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92
Emission Scenarios, [Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, J.
Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris,
and K. Maskell (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 339 pp.
IPCC, 1996: Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group I to the Second
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Houghton., J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A.
Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
IPCC, 1997a: IPCC Technical Paper 2: An Introduction to Simple
Climate Models used in the IPCC Second Assessment Report
[Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, D.J. Griggs, and K. Maskell
(eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, World
Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 51 pp.
IPCC, 1997b: Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories (3 volumes) [Houghton, J.T.,
L.G. Meira Filho, B. Lim, K. Treanton, I. Mamaty, Y.
Bonduki, D.J. Griggs, and B.A. Callander (eds.)].
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, World
Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
IPCC, 1997c: IPCC Technical Paper 4: Implications of
Proposed CO2 Emissions Limitations. [Houghton, J.T.,
L.G. Meira Filho, D.J. Griggs, and M. Noguer (eds.)].
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, World
Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 41 pp.
IPCC, 1998: The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: An
Assessment of Vulnerability. A Special Report of IPCC
Working Group II [Watson, R.T., M.C. Zinyowera, and
R.H. Moss (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 517 pp.
IPCC, 2000a: Methodological and Technical Issues in
Technology Transfer. A Special Report of IPCC Working
Group III [Metz, B., O.R. Davidson, J.-W. Martens, S.N.M.
van Rooijen, and L. van Wie McGrory (eds.)] Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, 466 pp.
IPCC, 2000b: Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry. A
Special Report of the IPCC [Watson, R.T., I.R. Noble, B.

Glossary of Terms

Bolin, N.H. Ravindranath, D.J. Verardo, and D.J. Dokken
(eds.)] Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 377 pp.
IPCC, 2001a: Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Houghton, J.T., Y. Ding, D.G. Griggs, M. Noguer, P.J.
van der Linden, X. Dai, K. Maskell, and C.A. Johnson
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 881 pp.
IPCC, 2001b: Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to
the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [McCarthy, J.J., O.F. Canziani,
N.A. Leary, D.J. Dokken, and K.S. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, 1031 pp.
IPCC, 2001c: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation. Contribution
of Working Group III to the Third Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Metz,
B., O.R. Davidson, R. Swart, and J. Pan (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, 752 pp.
Jackson, J. (ed.), 1997: Glossary of Geology. American
Geological Institute, Alexandria, Virginia.
Maunder, W.J., 1992: Dictionary of Global Climate Change,
UCL Press Ltd.
Moss, R. and S. Schneider, 2000:Uncertainties in the IPCC
TAR: recommendations to Lead Authors for more
consistent assessment and reporting. In: Guidance Papers
on the Cross-Cutting Issues of the Third Assessment Report
of the IPCC [Pachauri, R., T. Taniguchi, and K. Tanaka
(eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, World
Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, pp.
33-51. Available online at http://www.gispri.or.jp.
Nakicenovic, N., J. Alcamo, G. Davis, B. de Vries, J. Fenhann,
S. Gaffin, K. Gregory, A. Grubler, T.Y. Jung, T. Kram, E.L.
La Rovere, L. Michaelis, S. Mori, T. Morita, W. Pepper,
H. Pitcher, L. Price, K. Raihi, A. Roehrl, H.-H. Rogner, A.
Sankovski, M. Schlesinger, P. Shukla, S. Smith, R. Swart,
S. van Rooijen, N. Victor, and Z. Dadi, 2000: Emissions
Scenarios. A Special Report of Working Group III of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, 599 pp.
Schwartz, S. E. and P. Warneck, 1995: Units for use in
atmospheric chemistry, Pure & Appl. Chem., 67, 1377-
1406.
UNEP, 1995: Global Biodiversity Assessment [Heywood, V.H.
and R.T. Watson (eds.)]. Cambridge Unive rsity Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
1140 pp.
Wigley, T.M.L., R. Richels, and J.A. Edmonds, 1996:
Economic and environmental choices in the stabilization
of atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Nature, 379, 242-245.

389

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Annex C. Acronyms, Abbreviations, and Units
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AA
Assigned Amount
AAU
Assigned Amount Unit
AD
Anno Domini
AIJ
Activities Implemented Jointly
A-O
Atmosphere-Ocean
AO
Arctic Oscillation
AOGCM
Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Model
Bern-CC
Bern Carbon Cycle
BP
Before Present
Perfluoroethane / Hexafluoroethane
C2F6
C3
Three-Carbon Compound
C4
Four-Carbon Compound
CANZ
Canada, Australia, and New Zealand
CBA
Cost-Benefit Analysis
CCC(ma)
Canadian Centre for Climate (Modeling and Analysis) (Canada)
CCGT
Combined Cycle Gas Turbine
CDM
Clean Development Mechanism
CEA
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
CER
Certified Emission Reduction
CF4
Perfluoromethane / Tetrafluoromethane
CFC
Chlorofluorocarbon
CGCM
Coupled GCM from CCC(ma)
CGE
Computable General Equilibrium
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CH4
Methane
CHP
Combined Heat and Power
CMIP
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
COP
Conference of the Parties
DAF
Decision Analysis Framework
DES
Development, Equity, and Sustainability
DES GP
Guidance Paper on Development, Equity, and Sustainability
DHF
Dengue Haemorrhagic Fever
DMF
Decision Making Framework
DSS
Dengue Shock Syndrome
ECE
Economic Commission for Europe
EIT
Economy in Transition
ENSO
El Nino Southern Oscillation
ERU
Emissions Reduction Unit
ES
Executive Summary
ESCO
Energy Service Company
EST
Environmentally Sound Technology
FCCC
Framework Convention on Climate Change
FSU
Former Soviet Union
GCM
General Circulation Model
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GFDL
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (USA)
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GNP
Gross National Product
GP
Guidance Paper
GPP
Gross Primary Production
GWP
Global Warming Potential

390

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Annex C

H2O
HadCM
HFC
IAM
ICSU
IEA
IET
IGCC S
IPCC
IPCC TP3
IPCC TP4
ISAM
JI
LCC
LSG
LUC
MAC
MOP
MSL
MSU
N2O
NAO
NBP
NEP
NGOs
NOx
NPP
NSI
O2
O3
ODS
OECD
OPEC
OPYC
PFC
PMIP
PPM
PPP
R&D
RCM
SAR
SF6
SME
SO2
SPM
SRAGA
SRES
SRLULUCF
SRTT
SST
TAR
TCR
THC
TP
TS

Acronyms, Abbreviations, and Units

Water Vapor
Hadley Centre Coupled Model
Hydrofluorocarbon
Integrated Assessment Model
International Council of Scientific Unions
International Energy Agency
International Emissions Trading
Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle or Supercritical
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Technical Paper on Stabilization of Atmospheric Greehouse Gases: Physical, Biological, and Socio-Economic Implications
Technical Paper on Implications of Proposed CO2 Emissions Limitations
Integrated Science Assessment Model
Joint Implementation
Land-Cover Change
Large-Scale Geostrophic Ocean Model
Land-Use Change
Marginal Abatement Cost
Meeting of the Parties
Mean Sea Level
Microwave Sounding Unit
Nitrous Oxide
North Atlantic Oscillation
Net Biome Production
Net Ecosystem Production
Non-Governmental Organization
Nitrogen Oxides
Net Primary Production
National Systems of Innovation
Molecular Oxygen
Ozone
Ozone-Depleting Substance
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries
Ocean Isopycnal GCM
Perfluorocarbon
Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project
Processes and Production Method
Purchasing Power Parity
Research and Development
Regional Climate Model
Second Assessment Report
Sulfur Hexafluoride
Small and Medium Sized Enterprise
Sulfur Dioxide
Summary for Policymakers
Special Report on Aviation and the Global Atmosphere
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry
Special Report on the Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer
Sea Surface Temperature
Third Assessment Report
Transient Climate Response
Thermohaline Circulation
Technical Paper
Technical Summary

391

Climate Change 2001

TSI
UNEP
UNESCO
UNFCCC
UV
VA
VOC
WAIS
WGI TAR
WGII SAR
WGII TAR
WGIII TAR
WMO
WRE
WTA
WTP
WUE

392

Synthesis Report

Total Solar Irradiance
United Nations Environment Programme
United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
Ultraviolet
Voluntary Agreement or Value-Added
Volatile Organic Compounds
West Antarctic Ice Sheet
Working Group I Contribution to the Third Assessment Report
Working Group II Contribution to the Second Assessment Report
Working Group II Contribution to the Third Assessment Report
Working Group III Contribution to the Third Assessment Report
World Meteorological Organization
Wigley, Richels, and Edmonds
Willingness to Accept
Willingness to Pay
Water-Use Efficiency

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Annex C

Acronyms, Abbreviations, and Units

Units
SI (Systeme Internationale) Units
Physical Quantity
length
mass
time
thermodynamic temperature
amount of substance

Name of Unit
meter
kilogram
second
kelvin
mole

Fraction
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-6
10-9
10-12
10-15

Symbol
d
c
m

n
p
t

Prefix
deci
centi
milli
micro
nano
pico
femto

Symbol
m
kg
s
K
mol
Multiple
10
102
103
106
109
1012
1015

Prefix
deca
hecto
kilo
mega
giga
tera
peta

Symbol
da
h
k
M
G
T
P

Special Names and Symbols for Certain SI-Derived Units
Physical Quantity
force
pressure
energy
power
frequency

Name of SI Unit
newton
pascal
joule
watt
hertz

Symbol for SI Unit
N
Pa
J
W
Hz

Definition of Unit
kg m s-2
kg m-1 s-2 (=N m-2)
kg m2 s-2
kg m2 s-3 (=J s-1)
s-1 (cycles per second)

Decimal Fractions and Multiples of SI Units having Special Names
Physical Quantity
length
length
area
force
pressure
pressure
mass
mass
column density
streamfunction

Name of SI Unit
Angstrom
micron
hectare
dyne
bar
millibar
tonne
gram
Dobson units
Sverdrup

Symbol for SI Unit
A
m
ha
dyn
bar
mb
t
g
DU
Sv

Definition of Unit
10-10 m = 10-8 cm
10-6 m
104 m2
10-5 N
105 N m-2 = 105 Pa
102 N m-2 = 1 hPa
103 kg
10-3 kg
2.687x1016 molecules cm-2
106 m3 s-1

Non-SI Units
C
ppmv
ppbv
pptv
yr
ky
bp

degree Celsius (0C = 273 K approximately)
Temperature differences are also given in C (=K) rather than the more correct form of "Celsius degrees"
parts per million (106) by volume
parts per billion (109) by volume
parts per trillion (1012) by volume
year
thousands of years
before present

393

Climate Change 2001

Synthesis Report

Annex D. Scientific, Technical, and Socio-Economic Questions Selected by the Panel
Question 1
What can scientific, technical, and socio-economic analyses
contribute to the determination of what constitutes dangerous
anthropogenic interference with the climate system as referred
to in Article 2 of the Framework Convention on Climate
Change?
Question 2
What is the evidence for, causes of, and consequences of
changes in the Earth's climate since the pre-industrial era?
a) Has the Earth's climate changed since the pre-industrial
era at the regional and/or global scale? If so, what part, if
any, of the observed changes can be attributed to human
influence and what part, if any, can be attributed to natural
phenomena? What is the basis for that attribution?
b) What is known about the environmental, social, and
economic consequences of climate changes since the preindustrial era with an emphasis on the last 50 years?
Question 3
What is known about the regional and global climatic,
environmental, and socio-economic consequences in the next
25, 50, and 100 years associated with a range of greenhouse
gas emissions arising from scenarios used in the TAR
(projections which involve no climate policy intervention)?
To the extent possible evaluate the:
* Projected changes in atmospheric concentrations, climate,
and sea level
* Impacts and economic costs and benefits of changes in
climate and atmospheric composition on human health,
diversity and productivity of ecological systems, and socioeconomic sectors (particularly agriculture and water)
* The range of options for adaptation, including the costs,
benefits, and challenges
* Development, sustainability, and equity issues associated
with impacts and adaptation at a regional and global level.
Question 4
What is known about the influence of the increasing atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and the
projected human-induced change in climate regionally and
globally on:
a. The frequency and magnitude of climate fluctuations,
including daily, seasonal, inter-annual, and decadal
variability, such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation cycles
and others?
b. The duration, location, frequency, and intensity of extreme
events such as heat waves, droughts, floods, heavy
precipitation, avalanches, storms, tornadoes, and tropical
cyclones?

394

IPCC Third Assessment Report

c. The risk of abrupt/non-linear changes in, among others,
the sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, ocean
circulation, and the extent of polar ice and permafrost? If
so, can the risk be quantified?
d. The risk of abrupt or non-linear changes in ecological systems?
Question 5
What is known about the inertia and time scales associated
with the changes in the climate system, ecological systems,
and socio-economic sectors and their interactions?
Question 6
a) How does the extent and timing of the introduction of a
range of emissions reduction actions determine and affect
the rate, magnitude, and impacts of climate change, and
affect the global and regional economy, taking into account
the historical and current emissions?
b) What is known from sensitivity studies about regional and
global climatic, environmental, and socio-economic
consequences of stabilizing the atmospheric concentrations
of greenhouse gases (in carbon dioxide equivalents), at a
range of levels from today's to double that level or more,
taking into account to the extent possible the effects of
aerosols? For each stabilization scenario, including different
pathways to stabilization, evaluate the range of costs and
benefits, relative to the range of scenarios considered in
Question 3, in terms of:
* Projected changes in atmospheric concentrations, climate,
and sea level, including changes beyond 100 years
* Impacts and economic costs and benefits of changes
in climate and atmospheric composition on human
health, diversity and productivity of ecological systems,
and socio-economic sectors (particularly agriculture
and water)
* The range of options for adaptation, including the costs,
benefits, and challenges
* The range of technologies, policies, and practices that
could be used to achieve each of the stabilization levels,
with an evaluation of the national and global costs and
benefits, and an assessment of how these costs and benefits
would compare, either qualitatively or quantitatively,
to the avoided environmental harm that would be
achieved by the emissions reductions
* Development, sustainability, and equity issues associated
with impacts, adaptation, and mitigation at a regional
and global level.
Question 7
What is known about the potential for, and costs and benefits
of, and time frame for reducing greenhouse gas emissions?
* What would be the economic and social costs and benefits
and equity implications of options for policies and measures,

Annex D

*

*

*
*

Questions Selected by the Panel

and the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol, that might be
considered to address climate change regionally and globally?
What portfolios of options of research and development,
investments, and other policies might be considered that
would be most effective to enhance the development and
deployment of technologies that address climate change?
What kind of economic and other policy options might be
considered to remove existing and potential barriers and
to stimulate private- and public-sector technology transfer
and deployment among countries, and what effect might
these have on projected emissions?
How does the timing of the options contained in the above
affect associated economic costs and benefits, and the
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases over the
next century and beyond?

Question 8
What is known about the interactions between projected
human-induced changes in climate and other environmental
issues (e.g., urban air pollution, regional acid deposition, loss
of biological diversity, stratospheric ozone depletion, and
desertification and land degradation)? What is known about
environmental, social, and economic costs and benefits and
implications of these interactions for integrating climate change
response strategies in an equitable manner into broad sustainable
development strategies at the local, regional, and global scales?
Question 9
What are the most robust findings and key uncertainties
regarding attribution of climate change and regarding model
projections of:
* Future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols?
* Future concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols?
* Future changes in regional and global climate?
* Regional and global impacts of climate change?
* Costs and benefits of mitigation and adaptation options?

395

Climate Change 2001

Annex E. List of Major IPCC Reports
Climate Change--The IPCC Scientific Assessment
The 1990 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working
Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Climate Change--The IPCC Impacts Assessment
The 1990 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working
Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Climate Change--The IPCC Response Strategies
The 1990 Report of the IPCC Response Strategies Working
Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Emissions Scenarios
Prepared for the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group, 1990
Assessment of the Vulnerability of Coastal Areas to Sea
Level Rise-A Common Methodology
1991 (also in Arabic and French)
Climate Change 1992--The Supplementary Report to the
IPCC Scientific Assessment
The 1992 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working
Group
Climate Change 1992--The Supplementary Report to the
IPCC Impacts Assessment
The 1992 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group

Climate Change 1995--The Science of Climate Change -
Contribution of Working Group I to the IPCC Second
Assessment Report
1996
Climate Change 1995--Impacts, Adaptations, and
Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical
Analyses - Contribution of Working Group II to the IPCC
Second Assessment Report
1996
Climate Change 1995--Economic and Social Dimensions
of Climate Change - Contribution of Working Group III
to the IPCC Second Assessment Report
1996
Climate Change 1995--IPCC Second Assessment Synthesis
of Scientific-Technical Information Relevant to Interpreting
Article 2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
1996 (also in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Technologies, Policies, and Measures for Mitigating
Climate Change - IPCC Technical Paper I
1996 (also in French and Spanish)
An Introduction to Simple Climate Models used in the IPCC
Second Assessment Report - IPCC Technical Paper II
1997 (also in French and Spanish)

Climate Change: The IPCC 1990 and 1992 Assessments
IPCC First Assessment Report Overview and Policymaker
Summaries, and 1992 IPCC Supplement

Stabilization of Atmospheric Greenhouse Gases: Physical,
Biological and Socio-economic Implications - IPCC
Technical Paper III
1997 (also in French and Spanish)

Global Climate Change and the Rising Challenge of the Sea
Coastal Zone Management Subgroup of the IPCC Response
Strategies Working Group, 1992

Implications of Proposed CO2 Emissions Limitations -
IPCC Technical Paper IV
1997 (also in French and Spanish)

Report of the IPCC Country Studies Workshop
1992

The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: An Assessment
of Vulnerability - IPCC Special Report
1998

Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate
Change
1992
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
Three volumes, 1994 (also in French, Russian, and Spanish)
IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate Change
Impacts and Adaptations
1995 (also in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Climate Change 1994--Radiative Forcing of Climate Change
and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios
1995

396

Synthesis Report

IPCC Third Assessment Report

Aviation and the Global Atmosphere - IPCC Special Report
1999
Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology
Transfer - IPCC Special Report
2000
Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry - IPCC Special
Report
2000
Emission Scenarios - IPCC Special Report
2000

Annex E

List of Major IPCC Reports

Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management
in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
2000
Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis - Contribution
of Working Group I to the IPCC Third Assessment Report
2001
Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability - Contribution of Working Group II to the
IPCC Third Assessment Report
2001
Climate Change 2001: Mitigation - Contribution of
Working Group III to the IPCC Third Assessment Report
2001

Enquiries: IPCC Secretariat, c/o World Meteorological
Organization, 7 bis, Avenue de la Paix, Case Postale 2300,
1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland

397

