10 years after the Countdown to 2015 for Maternal,Newborn, and Child Survival (Countdown) waslaunched, the world has become a healthier place forchildren and women. The Millennium DevelopmentGoals (MDGs) sparked those involved in the 2003 LancetChild Survival Series to propose the Countdowninitiative, who pledged to hold regular conferences for"ensuring that there is an overall mechanism forimproving accountability, re-energising commitment,and recognising accomplishments in child survival".1In response to this call to action, Countdown launchedits first report in 2005,2 which was followed by five others(2008,3 2010,4 2012,5 2013,6 and 20147). The final report isbeing released this week, on October 19, in Mexico City,Mexico. From its original focus on child survival,Countdown has expanded to track progress onreproductive, maternal, newborn, and child healthindicators relevant to MDGs 4 (reduce child mortality) and5 (improve maternal health). The heart of the Countdownreports are the two-page country profiles that summarisethe most recent data for intervention coverage, maternaland child mortality, and nutrition. The country profilesalso highlight socioeconomic inequalities in interventioncoverage, and two of the main drivers of coverage: healthsystems and policies, and financing.Countdown has evolved in many ways during the pastdecade. The partnership has grown from 11 to43 institutional stakeholders, and the number of countriesmonitored from 60 to 75, comprising more than 95% ofglobal deaths of mothers and children. As the scopeshifted beyond child survival, and in response to newevidence, the number of indicators tracked expandedfrom 35 to 73. By including new, proven interventions inits profiles even before data were available for manycountries, Countdown has contributed to the identificationof data gaps and had arguably helped to raise the visibilityof such new interventions. Countdown recognised theimportance of engaging at country level, and from 2012embarked on a set of case studies aimed at understandinghow countries have achieved progress (appendix pp 1-2).Countdown is also the primary source of coverageinformation for the Commission on Information andAccountability for Women's and Children's Health andthe Independent Expert Review Group8 reports.In the decade since Countdown's inception, thenumber of reports on specific reproductive, maternal,newborn, and child (RMNCH) health issues has grownrapidly. Countdown's particular niche has been itsaction-oriented focus on intervention coverage, and theuser-friendly synthesis of information in the countryprofiles. Our principles have not changed over thisperiod:1 to focus on monitoring the coverage of evidencebased, cost-effective interventions; to maintain a countryorientation; and to build on existing goals and monitoringefforts. Countdown's commitment to these principlesand its products have helped to increase the globalvisibility of RMNCH, and has plausibly contributed toreversing the slow rate of progress in reducing child,newborn, and maternal mortality in the 1990s that wasdocumented in early public health series in The Lancet.


